GARDEN CITY, MICHIGAN
CHARTER AND CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-20 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through October 20, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE #02-005
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF GARDEN CITY,
MICHIGAN, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF GARDEN CITY DEALING WITH SUBJECTS
EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of Garden
City are inadequately arranged and classified, and are insufficient in form and
substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of its affairs;
and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Michigan empower and
authorize a political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile
any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or
published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form;
and
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Garden City has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of a
general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form;
and
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GARDEN CITY:
SECTION 1. The general ordinances of the City of Garden City as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Garden City."
SECTION 2. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following Titles:
            TITLE I:      GENERAL PROVISIONS
            TITLE III:      ADMINISTRATION
            TITLE V:      PUBLIC WORKS
            TITLE VII:      TRAFFIC CODE
            TITLE IX:      GENERAL REGULATIONS
            TITLE XI:      BUSINESS REGULATIONS
            TITLE XIII:      GENERAL OFFENSES
            TITLE XV:      LAND USAGE
SECTION 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code
of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part
in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or
penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing
franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places, zoning; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
SECTION 4. Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the City Council and the Clerk of the City of Garden City is
hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the
Office of the Clerk.
SECTION 5. Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section 4
and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and as the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Garden City on this  8th
day of April, 2002.
WILLIAM KALEDAS                   ALLYSON M. BETTIS
Mayor                           Treasurer/City Clerk
Published:      March 24, 2002
Public Hearing:      April 8, 2002
Adopted:      April 8, 2002
Resolution # 02-04-095
ORDINANCE NO. 03-007
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF GARDEN CITY, MICHIGAN, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2002 S-1 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Garden City, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Garden City; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Michigan code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Michigan; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GARDEN CITY:
Section 1. That the 2002 S-1 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City
of Garden City as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
Section 2. Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the City Council and the Clerk of the City of Garden
City is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the Code
of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.
Section 3. This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for
the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare of
the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Garden City on the 6th
day of January, 2003.
WILLIAM KALEDAS                ALLYSON M. BETTIS
Mayor                         Treasurer/City Clerk
Published:      January 17, 2003
Public Hearing:   January 6, 2003
Adopted:      January 6, 2003
Resolution:      03-01-004
CHARTER
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF GARDEN CITY, MICHIGAN ADOPTED 1975
Section
Article I: Incorporation, Boundaries, and Powers
   
1.01   Incorporation
   
1.02   Boundaries
   
1.03   Powers of the city
   
1.04   Intergovernmental relations
Article II: City Council
   
2.01   General powers and duties
   
2.02   The Council
   
2.03   The Mayor
   
2.04   Qualifications
   
2.05   Term of office
   
2.06   Compensation and expenses
   
2.07   Procedure
   
2.08   Prohibitions
   
2.09   Vacancies, removal from office, and filling of vacancies
   
2.10   Judge of qualifications
   
2.11   Audits
Article III: City Manager
   
3.01   Appointment, qualifications, compensation
   
3.02   Acting City Manager
   
3.03   Powers and duties of the City Manager
   
3.04   Removal from office
Article IV: Administrative Departments and Appointments
   
4.01   Administrative departments
   
4.02   Department directors; appointment, removal, powers, and duties
   
4.03   Department of Police
   
4.04   Department of Fire
   
4.051   Department of the City Clerk
   
4.052   Department of the City Treasurer
   
4.06   Department of Public Services
   
4.07   Department of Parks and Recreation
   
4.08   Department of the Library
   
4.09   City Attorney
   
4.10   Boards, commissions, and advisory committees
   
4.11   Personnel rules and regulations
Article V: Legislation
   
5.01   Legislative power
   
5.02   Action requiring an ordinance
   
5.03   Ordinance enactment
   
5.04   Ordinance record
   
5.05   Compilation or codification
   
5.06   Penalties
   
5.07   Time limit for prosecution
Article VI: General Finance
   
6.01   Fiscal year
   
6.02   Submission of budget
   
6.03   Budget message
   
6.04   Budget
   
6.05   Capital program
   
6.06   Council action on budget
   
6.07   Council action on capital program
   
6.08   Public records
   
6.09   Amendments after adoption
   
6.10   Lapse of appropriations
   
6.11   Administration of budget
Article VII: Taxation
   
7.01   Power to tax and secure revenue
   
7.02   Subjects of taxation
   
7.03   Tax rate limit
   
7.04   Tax day
   
7.05   Preparation of assessment roll
   
7.06   Board of Review
   
7.07   Endorsement of roll; validity
   
7.08   Certification of tax levy
   
7.09   City tax roll
   
7.10   Certification for collection
   
7.11   Tax liens
   
7.12   Notification of taxes due
   
7.13   Collection of city taxes
   
7.14   Collection of delinquent taxes
   
7.15   Protection of city lien
Article VIII: Special Assessments
   
8.01   General power
   
8.02   Procedure
   
8.03   Objection to improvement
   
8.04   Installment payments
   
8.05   Modification of assessment
   
8.06   Special assessment accounts
   
8.07   Limitation on suits and actions
   
8.08   All real property liable for special assessments
   
8.09   Collection of special assessments
   
8.10   Postponement of payments
   
8.11   Lien not destroyed by judgment
Article IX: Municipal Borrowing Power
   
9.01   General power
   
9.02   Borrowing limit
   
9.03   Special assessment bonds
   
9.04   Bond issuance and records
Article X: Public Improvements, Contracts, and Franchises
   
10.01   Public utility franchises
   
10.02   Utility charges, collections, and liens
   
10.03   Public works
   
10.04   Purchasing and contracts
Article XI: Nominations and Elections
   
11.01   Qualified voters
   
11.02   Election procedure
   
11.03   Primary elections
   
11.04   Regular elections
   
11.05   Special elections
   
11.06   Election code
   
11.07   Election Commission
   
11.08   Late candidate withdrawals
   
11.09   Nominating petitions
   
11.10   Eligibility
   
11.11   Procedure after filing
   
11.12   Board of Canvassers
   
11.13   Voting hours
   
11.14   Challengers
   
11.15   Ballots for ordinances
   
11.16   Recall
Article XII: Ordinance Initiative and Referendum
   
12.01   Initiative
   
12.02   Referendum
   
12.03   Commencement of proceedings; petitioners' committee; affidavit
   
12.04   Suspension of an enacted ordinance
   
12.05   Petitions
   
12.06   Procedure after filing
   
12.07   Referendum petitions; suspension of effect of ordinance
   
12.08   Action on petitions
   
12.09   Results of election
   
12.10   Limitations on amendment or repeal of initiatory or referendum
ordinances
Article XIII: General Provisions
   
13.01   Governmental ethics
   
13.02   Prohibitions
   
13.03   Amendment of Charter
   
13.04   Separability
   
13.05   Surety bonds
   
13.06   City records
   
13.07   Tense and headings
   
13.08   Penalties
   
13.09   Definitions and interpretations
Article XIV: Retirement System
   
14.01   Establishment
   
14.02   Board of Trustees
   
14.03   Duties of Board
   
14.04   Officers of retirement system
   
14.05   Membership of retirement system
   
14.06   Credited service
   
14.07   Age and service retirement
   
14.08   Service pension
   
14.09   Average final compensation defined
   
14.10   Deferred retirement pension
   
14.11   Pension options
   
14.12   Total and permanent disability
   
14.13   Funds of retirement system
   
14.14   Management of funds
   
14.15   Benefits unassignable
   
14.16   Repeal provision
Article XV: Transitional Provisions
   
15.01   Purpose of transition article
   
15.02   Submission to electors
   
15.03   Form of ballot
   
15.04   Canvass and adoption
   
15.05   Effective date
   
15.06   Election of Council
   
15.07   City Manager
   
15.08   Existing legislation and obligations
   
15.09   Constable
   
15.10   Boards and commissions
   
15.11   Retirement system
   
15.12   Supplemental transition legislation
ARTICLE I: INCORPORATION, BOUNDARIES, AND POWERS
SECTION 1.01 INCORPORATION.
   The municipal corporation, now existing and known as the “City of Garden
City,” shall be and continue a municipal corporation under the laws of the
State of Michigan.
SECTION 1.02 BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries of the city shall be those presently on file with the office
of the Secretary of State of Michigan, together with such territory or
territories as may from time to time be annexed thereto and less such territory
as may from time to time be detached therefrom in the manner prescribed by law.
SECTION 1.03 POWERS OF THE CITY.
   The city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the
constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were
specifically enumerated in this Charter. The specific mention of particular
powers in the Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general
power stated in this article.
SECTION 1.04 INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS.
   The city may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and
may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by
contract or otherwise, with any one or more states or civil divisions or
agencies thereof, or the United States or any agency thereof, as provided by
law.
       ARTICLE II: CITY COUNCIL
SECTION 2.01 GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   All powers of the city shall be vested in a Council, except as otherwise
provided by law or this Charter, and the Council shall provide for the exercise
thereof and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the
city by law.
SECTION 2.02 THE COUNCIL.
   The Council shall consist of seven members, one of whom shall be the Mayor,
nominated and elected at large in a nonpartisan election. All persons elected
shall take office at the first regularly scheduled Council meeting following
the certification of election results by the Board of Canvassers.
(Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-4-14)
SECTION 2.03 THE MAYOR.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be elected every four years. At each regular election
commencing at an election scheduled for November 2017 and every four years
thereafter, a Mayor, who shall be the chief executive officer of the city,
shall be elected for a term of four years. He shall have an equal voice in the
proceedings of the Council, but shall have no veto power. The Mayor shall
preside at meetings of the Council, shall be recognized as head of the city
government for all ceremonial purposes, and by the governor for purposes of
military law, but shall have no administrative duties. The Council member
receiving the highest number of votes in each general election shall act as
Mayor Pro-Tem during the absence or disability of the Mayor and, if a vacancy
occurs, shall hold the office of Mayor until the next regular general City
election when the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired
term (if any). If the Council member receiving the highest number of votes in
the last general election is unable or unwilling to act as Mayor Pro-Tem during
the absence or disability of the Mayor, or the Mayor Pro-Tem is unable or
unwilling to hold the office of Mayor during the vacancy of the office of
Mayor, the Council member who received the second highest number of votes in
the last general election shall act as Mayor Pro-Tem during the absence or
disability of the Mayor or, if a vacancy occurs, shall become Mayor and hold
office until the next regular general City election when the vacancy shall be
filled for the remainder of the unexpired term (if any).
   (B)   Once the mayoral vacancy is filled at the next regular general City
election as described in Section
2.03(A), the Mayor Pro-Tem shall resume his or her Council seat and serve out
the remainder of his or her unexpired term (if any).
(Amendment adopted by electorate, 7-11-16; Am. adopted by electorate, 11-6-18)
SECTION 2.04 QUALIFICATIONS.
   Only qualified voters (Section
11.01) of the city shall be eligible to hold the office of Council member or
Mayor.
SECTION 2.05 TERM OF OFFICE.
   Commencing at an election scheduled for November 2019, all Council members
shall be elected for four-year terms. Council member elections shall take place
every two years. Council member election cycles shall be staggered. The two
candidates receiving the largest number of votes in an election scheduled for
November 2017 shall be elected to four-year terms. The remaining candidates in
the November 2017 election shall be elected to two-year terms. Thereafter,
commencing at an election scheduled for November 2019 terms for all Council
members shall be four years.
(Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-8-83; Am. adopted by electorate, 7-11-16)
SECTION 2.06 COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES.
   (A)   The Council. Each member of the Council shall receive as compensation
an amount equal to $60 per regular meeting attended not to exceed $2,880 in any
one fiscal year. Council members shall be compensated for up to four absences
per year. Compensation shall be paid monthly. Council members shall also
receive $10,000 of group term life insurance during their term of office.
(Effective 7-1-85)
   (B)   The Mayor. The Mayor shall receive compensation in the amount of
$4,000 per fiscal year. Compensation shall be paid monthly. The Mayor shall
also receive $10,000 of group term life insurance during his or her term of
office.
(Effective 7-1-85)
   (C)   Expenses. The Mayor and Council members shall receive actual and
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office.
Expenditures in excess of $100 must have prior approval by a majority of the
Council. A public report of all expenditures detailing items of expense,
stating the purpose of the expense, and, when appropriate, the value received
by the city, shall be presented at the next regular Council meeting for
approval by a majority of the Council.
SECTION 2.07 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Meetings.
      (1)   The Council shall meet regularly at least twice in every month at
such times and places as the Council may prescribe by rule.
      (2)   All meetings shall be public.
      (3)   Special meetings shall be called by the Clerk upon the written
request of the Mayor or of five or more members of Council. No less than 24
hours, or as required by state law, written notice designating the time and
purpose of such special meeting shall be delivered personally to each member or
left at his usual place of residence by the Clerk or his designate. No business
shall be transacted at any special meeting of the Council unless the agenda has
been stated in the notice of such meeting and visibly posted in the city hall.
      (4)   The public shall have the right to be heard, following Council
discussion on agenda items, and prior to a vote by the Council.
   (B)   Notice of meetings. Notice of all meetings shall be given in
accordance with law (Act 261 of Public Acts of 1968).
   (C)   Rules and journal. The Council shall determine its own rules and order
of business and shall provide for keeping in the English language a journal of
every meeting of the Council. This journal shall be a public record.
   (D)   Voting. Voting, except on procedural motions, shall be by roll call
and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal. Four members of the
Council shall constitute a quorum.
   (E)   Publication of proceedings. Within ten days after each meeting of the
Council, a synopsis of the proceedings showing the substance of each separate
proceeding of the Council, prepared by the City Clerk, shall be published on
the official website or other official form of electronic communication of the
City and shall be available in the office of the City Clerk.
(Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-4-14)
SECTION 2.08 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Holding other city employment. Except where authorized by law, no
Council member shall be employed by the city or hold any other city office
during the term for which he was elected to the Council, and no former Council
member shall be employed by the city until one year after the expiration of the
term for which he was elected to the Council.
   (B)   Appointments and removals. Neither the Council nor any of its members
shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any city
administrative officers or employees whom the City Manager or any of his
subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the Council may express its views
and fully and freely discuss with the City Manager anything pertaining to
appointment and removal of such officers and employees.
   (C)   Interference with administration. The Council or its members shall
deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and
supervision of the City Manager solely through the City Manager, and neither
the Council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee,
either publicly or privately.
SECTION 2.09 VACANCIES, REMOVAL FROM OFFICE, AND FILLING OF VACANCIES.
   (A)   Vacancies. The office of a Council member shall become vacant upon his
death, resignation, or removal from office in any manner authorized by law.
   (B)   Removal from office. A Council member shall be subject to removal from
office if he: (1) Lacks at any time during his term of office any
qualifications for the office prescribed by this Charter or by law; (2)
Violates any express prohibition of this Charter; (3) Is convicted of a crime
involving moral turpitude; or (4) Fails to attend all regularly scheduled
consecutive meetings of the Council during a two-month calendar period.
   (C)   Filling of vacancies. Except in the case of recall, a vacancy in the
Council shall be filled by the appointment of the non-elected Council candidate
who at the last previous general city election received the highest number of
votes and is otherwise qualified and willing to serve. Should this person not
be available, those persons successively receiving the next highest number of
votes at such election shall be offered appointment until the vacancy is
filled. If it is impossible to fill the vacancy from this group of candidates,
the Council shall fill the vacancy by a special election. A person appointed or
elected to fill a vacancy on the Council shall file an acceptance of office,
and shall hold office until the next regular general City election when the
vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term (if any).
However, in the event of a Council vacancy created by Mayor Pro-Tem serving as
Mayor during a mayoral vacancy in the circumstances described in Section
2.03(A), the person selected to fill that Council vacancy shall only hold
office until the Mayor Pro-Tem resumes office as described in Section
2.03(B).
(Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-4-14; Am. adopted by electorate, 11-6-18)
SECTION 2.10 JUDGE OF QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its
members and of the grounds for removal from office, and for that purpose shall
have power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and require the production
of evidence. A member charged with conduct consisting of grounds for removal
from office shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand, and notice of such
hearing shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation in
the city at least one week in advance of the hearing. Decisions made by the
Council under this section shall be subject to review by the courts.
SECTION 2.11 AUDITS.
   The Council shall provide for the following audits:
   (A)   Independent financial audit. The Council shall select an independent
certified public accountant, who has no personal interest, direct or indirect,
in the fiscal affairs of the city government or any of its officers, to make an
annual certified audit of all funds.
   (B)   Managerial audit. Between the third and fourth year after the
effective date of this Charter, the Council shall provide for a managerial
audit of the functions of city government other than finances. Thereafter, but
not less than once in each five years, the Council shall provide for a
managerial audit of the functions of city government other than finances. Such
audits shall be conducted by an independent consultant or consultants chosen by
the Council. The Council shall determine the scope of the audit and the nature
of the report to be presented to the Council.
ARTICLE III: CITY MANAGER
SECTION 3.01 APPOINTMENT, QUALIFICATIONS, COMPENSATION.
   The Council shall appoint a City Manager for an indefinite term and fix his
compensation. The Manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his
executive and administrative qualifications. The Manager need not be a resident
of the city or state at the time of his appointment. The City Manager must
become and remain a resident of the city within three months following his
appointment. A 90-day extension to this rule may be granted by Council
approval.
SECTION 3.02 ACTING CITY MANAGER.
   The City Manager shall designate, by a letter filed with the City Clerk,
subject to approval of the Council, a qualified city administrative officer to
exercise the powers and perform the duties of Manager during his temporary
absence or disability. During an unexpected absence or extended disability, the
Council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of
the city to serve until the Manager shall return or his disability shall cease.
SECTION 3.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY MANAGER.
   The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. The
Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the administration of all city
affairs placed in his charge by or under this Charter. The City Manager shall
have the following powers and duties.
   1.   The City Manager shall be in overall charge of all municipal employees,
except as otherwise provided in this Charter. He shall have such appointive and
other authority over city administrative officers and employees as is provided
by law, by this Charter, or by personnel rules adopted pursuant to this
Charter.
   2.   The City Manager shall direct and supervise the administration of all
departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by
this Charter or by law. The City Manager, with the approval of Council, may
serve as head of any department, except when forbidden by this Charter or by
law.
   3.   The City Manager shall attend all Council meetings and shall have the
right to take part in the discussion, but may not vote.
   4.   The City Manager shall see that all laws, provisions of this Charter,
and acts of the Council, subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject
to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.
   5.   The City Manager shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital
program to the Council.
   6.   The City Manager shall submit to the Council and make available to the
public a complete report of the finances and administrative activities of the
city as of the end of each fiscal year.
   7.   The City Manager shall make such other reports as the Council may
require concerning the operations of city departments, officers, and agencies
subject to his direction and supervision.
   8.   The City Manager shall keep the Council fully advised, each month, as
to the status of the current budget, the overall financial condition and the
future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the Council
concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable.
   9.   The City Manager shall provide that accounts payable in itemized form,
when presented to the Council, are also to be made available for public review
at his office.
   10.   The City Manager shall administer the personnel and employee relations
functions of the city, subject to the provisions of this Charter, and shall
maintain all personnel records of city employees.
   11.   The City Manager, or his designate, shall administer the purchasing
function, subject to the provisions of this Charter and rules and regulations
adopted by Council.
   12.   The City Manager shall perform such other duties, including acting as
a department head, as are specified in this Charter or may be required by the
Council.
SECTION 3.04 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
   The Council may remove the Manager from office in accordance with the
following procedures.
   1.   The Council shall adopt, by affirmative vote of a majority of all its
members, a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal, and
may suspend the Manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of
the resolution shall be delivered within 24 hours to the Manager.
   2.   Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the
Manager, he may file with the Council a written request for a public hearing.
This hearing shall be held at a Council meeting not earlier than 15 days nor
later than 30 days after the request is filed. The Manager may file with the
Council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing.
   3.   The Council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made
effective immediately, by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members, at
any time after five days from the date when a copy of the preliminary
resolution was delivered to the Manager, if he has not requested a public
hearing or at any time after the public hearing if he has requested one.
   The Manager shall continue to receive his salary until the effective date of
a final resolution or removal. The action of the Council in suspending or
removing the Manager shall not be subject to review by any court or agency.
ARTICLE IV: ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS AND APPOINTMENTS
SECTION 4.01 ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS.
   All executive and administrative offices, agencies, and instrumentalities of
the city and their respective powers and duties, except as otherwise provided
by law or this Charter, shall be allocated among and within the following six
principal departments. The Council, based on recommendations of the City
Manager, to the extent permitted by law, may create or abolish other
departments, make changes in the assignment of functions among the six
principal departments, or add to, or subtract from the functions allocated to
any one department when it considers such change necessary for the efficient
administration of city government.
SECTION 4.02 DEPARTMENT DIRECTORS; APPOINTMENT, REMOVAL, POWERS, AND DUTIES.
   Subject to approval of the Council, the City Manager shall appoint and may
remove all department directors. The department director shall be the head of
his respective department and shall have direct supervision over all personnel
within his department. Subject to such general rules and regulations or
contractual obligations, as may be established by the Council and the City
Manager, the department director shall appoint and may remove employees within
his department, and he shall assign the duties and responsibilities of all
personnel under his jurisdiction. Department directors shall be appointed
solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special
emphasis upon the specialized training and background necessary for the proper
functioning and administration of each particular department. The Council shall
establish salaries of the officers of the city by ordinance.
SECTION 4.03 DEPARTMENT OF POLICE.
   There shall be a Department of Police organized of such ranks and grades as
the Council may determine. The Department of Police shall be responsible for
the preservation of the public peace, prevention of crime, apprehension and
detention of criminals, regulation of traffic, protection of rights of person
and property, and enforcement of the laws of the state and the ordinances of
the city and all rules and regulations made in accordance therewith.
SECTION 4.04 DEPARTMENT OF FIRE.
   There shall be a Department of Fire organized of such ranks and grades as
the Council may determine. The Department of Fire shall be responsible for the
extinguishment and prevention of fire within the city, and for the preservation
of life, safety, and welfare in emergency situations or natural catastrophes.
SECTION 4.051 DEPARTMENT OF THE CITY CLERK.
   There shall be a Department of the City Clerk organized of such ranks and
grades as the Council may determine. The Clerk shall be responsible for the
administration of elections, shall act as Clerk for Council, shall be custodian
of all documents of the City, shall keep a record of all ordinances and
resolutions of the Council and shall keep and affix the corporate seal to all
necessary documents.
(Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-5-19)
SECTION 4.052 DEPARTMENT OF THE CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   There shall be a Department of the City Treasurer organized of such
ranks and grades as the Council may determine. The Treasurer shall be the
general accountant of the City and shall have custody of City funds. The City
Treasurer shall be the collector of taxes and keep the books of account of the
receipts and expenditures of the city. The system of accounts of the city shall
conform to such uniform system as may be required by law.
   (B)   Office of the Assessor. An Assessor shall be appointed by the City
Manager with the approval of Council. The Assessor shall serve in the
Department of City Treasurer, but shall be responsible to the City Manager. The
Assessor shall prepare all regular and special assessment rolls, and shall
perform such other duties as shall be granted by law, by this Charter, or by
City Council. At no time shall the City Treasurer serve in the capacity of
Assessor.
(Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-5-19)
SECTION 4.06 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICES.
   There shall be a Department of Public Services that shall be charged with
the responsibility for the maintenance and lighting of streets and alleys, and
the construction and maintenance of public buildings, parks, sewers, sewage,
disposal facilities, motor transportation, construction and maintenance of
water, sewer and drain systems, and such other duties and responsibilities as
may be designated by this Charter, the City Manager, ordinance, or state law.
SECTION 4.07 DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION.
   There shall be a Department of Parks and Recreation that shall be charged
with the development and administration of public programs, maintenance of
program-related facilities, and other such duties as may be designated by this
Charter, the City Manager, ordinance, or state law.
SECTION 4.08 DEPARTMENT OF THE LIBRARY.
   There shall be a Department of the Library that shall be charged with the
development and administration of public programs, and such other duties as may
be designated by this Charter, the City Manager, ordinance, or state law.
SECTION 4.09 CITY ATTORNEY.
   There shall be a legal officer of the city, appointed by the Council, who
shall serve as chief legal adviser to the Council, the Manager and all city
departments, offices, and agencies, and shall represent the city in all legal
proceedings, and shall perform any other duties prescribed by this Charter or
by ordinance.
SECTION 4.10 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND ADVISORY COMMITTEES.
   (A)   Boards and commissions may be created by the Council as permitted by
this Charter or as permitted and/or required by state law. The members shall
possess the qualifications required by this Charter for elected officials and
shall be appointed and removed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the
Council or as otherwise provided by state law. The Council shall define the
functions, duties, compensation, and terms of office for all members of such
boards and commissions.
   (B)   No such commission or board shall be created or established which
invades or supplants the duties or functions of the various departments,
boards, and commissions existing at that time.
   (C)   The Council may create citizen advisory committees for the purpose of
studying and investigating specific problems or needs of any department,
function, or interest of the city when no other officer or board exists or has
been created. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of the
Council. The reasonable scope of the duties would include the making of such
studies and/or investigations.
   (D)   No citizen shall serve on more than one board, commission, or advisory
committee concurrently.
   (E)   No elected or appointed official shall serve on any board, commission,
or advisory committee, except as required by this Charter or the state laws.
SECTION 4.11 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The city manager shall, within six months from the date this Charter becomes
effective, prepare personnel rules and submit such proposed rules to the
Council. Council shall by ordinance adopt such rules with or without amendment.
The rules shall govern conditions of city employment. They shall incorporate
modern personnel and employee relations practices, and shall seek to achieve
equity and fairness between the city and its employees.
ARTICLE V: LEGISLATION
SECTION 5.01 LEGISLATIVE POWER.
   The legislative power of the city is exclusively vested in the Council,
except as otherwise provided by law. All official action of the Council shall
be by ordinance, resolution, or motion. The Council shall provide for the
public peace and health and for the safety of persons and property within the
city.
SECTION 5.02 ACTION REQUIRING AN ORDINANCE.
   In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provision of this
Charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of the Council shall be by
ordinance which:
   l.   Adopt or amend an administrative code, establish or abolish any city
department, office, agency, board, or commission, except those established by
this Charter;
   2.   Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation
for violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed;
   3.   Levy taxes;
   4.   Grant, renew, or extend a franchise;
   5.   Regulate the rate charged by a public utility for its services;
   6.   Authorize the borrowing of money;
   7.   Convey or lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands of
the city;
   8.   Adopt ordinances proposed under the initiative power;
   9.   Establish salaries of officials and employees of the city; except when
fixed by this Charter; and
   10.    Amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted, except as otherwise
provided in Article XII of this Charter.
   Acts other than those referred to in the preceding sentence may be done
either by ordinance or in the case of minor municipal matters, by resolution.
SECTION 5.03 ORDINANCE ENACTMENT.
   The requirements of this section shall apply to all ordinances other than
ordinances dealing with the budget, with appropriations, and with the levy of
taxes.
   (A)   Form. Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in
the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain more than one
subject which shall be clearly expressed in its title. The enacting clause
shall be "The City of Garden City hereby ordains..."
   (B)   Enactment. An ordinance may be introduced by any member at any regular
meeting of the Council. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the City Clerk
shall distribute a copy to each Council member and to the Manager, shall file a
reasonable number of copies in the office of the City Clerk and such other
public places as the Council may designate, and shall publish the ordinance
together with a notice setting the time and place for a public hearing thereon
and for its consideration by the Council. The public hearing shall follow the
publication by at least seven days, may be held separately or in connection
with a regular or special Council meeting and may be adjourned from time to
time. All interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. After the
hearing, the Council may adopt the ordinance with or without amendment or
reject it, but if it is amended as to any matter of substance, the Council may
not adopt it until the ordinance or its amended sections have been subjected to
all the procedures required above in the case of a newly introduced ordinance.
Ordinances may be enacted by the affirmative vote of not less than five members
of the Council. Following enactment, ordinances shall again be published within
ten days together with a notice of adoption.
   (C)   Effective date. All ordinances shall take effect ten days after their
enactment, or on such date thereafter as the Council shall declare, but in no
event prior to publication.
   (D)   Publication of ordinances. As used in this section, the term “publish”
shall mean to print the ordinance approved by Council in one or more newspapers
of general circulation in the City, or on the City’s official website or other
official form of electronic communication and shall be available in the office
of the City Clerk. All ordinances shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City at least once during its consideration.
   (E)   Emergency ordinances. To meet a public emergency affecting life,
health, property, or the public peace, the Council may adopt one or more
emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew or
extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its
services, or authorize the borrowing of money except as provided in Article IX.
An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed
for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an
emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration
stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms.
An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at
the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least
four members shall be required for adoption. After its adoption the ordinance
shall be published and printed as prescribed for other adopted ordinances. It
shall become operative upon publication or at such later time as it may
specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed as of the
thirty-fifth day following the date on which it was adopted, but this shall not
prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if
the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by
adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section
for adoption of emergency ordinances.
   (F)   Amendments. An ordinance may be amended only by an ordinance passed in
the manner provided in this section, and no such ordinance shall be amended by
reference to its title only, but the section or subsection amended shall be
reenacted in full.
   (G)   Traffic and parking regulations. Any ordinance regulating traffic or
parking of vehicles may delegate, subject to adequate standards to be set forth
therein, to a traffic engineer, who may be the City Manager, authority to adopt
or establish rules and regulations. Such rules and regulations shall be set
forth in traffic control orders which shall be subject to the prior approval of
the Council.
   (H)   Repeal of ordinances. An ordinance may be repealed only by an
ordinance passed in the manner provided in this article, except that the
ordinance to be repealed may be referred to by its number and title only.
   (I)   Enactment by reference. Ordinances and codes may be enacted by
reference to the extent and in the manner provided by law.
(Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-4-14)
SECTION 5.04 ORDINANCE RECORD.
   All ordinances and resolutions shall be recorded by the City Clerk in a book
to be called “The Ordinance Book,” and it shall be the duty of the City Clerk
to authenticate such record by official signature, but the failure of the City
Clerk to do so shall not invalidate or suspend its operation.
SECTION 5.05 COMPILATION OR CODIFICATION.
   Within three years after adoption of this Chapter and at least every ten
years thereafter, the Council shall provide for the preparation of a general
codification of all city ordinances and resolutions having the force and effect
of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the Council by ordinance
and shall be published promptly in bound or looseleaf form, together with this
Charter and any amendments thereto, pertinent provisions of the constitution
and other laws of the State of Michigan, and such codes of technical
regulations and other rules and regulations as the Council may specify. This
compilation shall be known and cited officially as the Garden City Code. Copies
of the code shall be placed at City Hall, in the Garden City Public Library,
and in public offices for free public reference, and made available for
purchase by the public at a reasonable rate fixed by the Council.
SECTION 5.06 PENALTIES.
   The Council may provide for the punishment of violations of city ordinances.
Such punishment may be a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or both, at the discretion of the court. These maximum limitations
shall automatically increase as permitted by law. The court may suspend
sentences or establish probation.
SECTION 5.07 TIME LIMIT FOR PROSECUTION.
   No prosecution for the violation of an ordinance shall be commenced after
the expiration of two years after the alleged commission of the offense.
ARTICLE VI: GENERAL FINANCE
SECTION 6.01 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of July and end on
the last day of June.
SECTION 6.02 SUBMISSION OF BUDGET.
   On or before the first day of April of each year, the Manager shall submit
to the Council at a regular Council meeting, a budget for the ensuing fiscal
year and an accompanying message.
SECTION 6.03 BUDGET MESSAGE.
   The Manager's message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in
terms of the work programs. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of
the city for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the important features of the
budget, indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies,
expenditures, and revenues together with the reasons for such changes,
summarize the city's debt position and include such other material as the
Manager deems desirable.
SECTION 6.04 BUDGET.
   The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all city funds and
activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by law or this
Charter, shall be in such form as the Manager deems desirable or the Council
may require. In organizing the budget the Manager shall utilize the most
feasible combination of expenditure classification by fund, organization unit,
program, purpose or activity, and object. It shall begin with a clear general
summary of its contents; shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating
the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures, including debt
service, for the ensuing fiscal year; and shall be so arranged as to show
comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures of the
preceding fiscal year. It shall estimate and take into account any anticipated
surplus or deficit as of the end of the current fiscal year, and provide for
elimination of any anticipated deficit. It shall indicate in separate sections:
   (1)   Proposed expenditures for current operations during the ensuing fiscal
year, detailed by offices, departments, and agencies in terms of their
respective work programs, and the method of financing such expenditures;
   (2)   Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed
by offices, departments, and agencies when practicable, and the proposed method
of financing such capital expenditure; and
   (3)   Anticipated net surplus or deficit for the ensuing fiscal year of each
utility owned or operated by the city and the proposed method of its
disposition; subsidiary budgets for each such utility giving detailed income
and expenditure information shall be attached as appendices to the budget.
   The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated
income.
SECTION 6.05 CAPITAL PROGRAM.
   (A)   Submission to Council. The Manager shall prepare and submit to the
Council a five-year capital program at least three months prior to the final
date for submission of the budget.
   (B)   Contents. The capital program shall include:
      (1)   A clear general summary of its contents;
      (2)   A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be
undertaken during the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate
supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements;
      (3)   Cost estimates, method of financing, and recommended time schedules
for each such improvement; and
      (4)   The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the
facilities to be constructed or acquired.
   The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to
capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or
acquisition.
SECTION 6.06 COUNCIL ACTION ON BUDGET.
   (A)   Notice. The Council shall publish in one or more newspapers of general
circulation in the city the general summary of the budget and a notice stating:
      (1)   The times and places where copies of the message and budget are
available for inspection by the public, and
      (2)   The time and place, not less than two weeks after such publication,
for a public hearing on the budget.
   (B)   Hearing; amendment before adoption. At the public hearing Council
shall give all interested citizens the opportunity to express their views on
the proposed budget. After the hearing Council may make such amendments as will
add or increase programs or amounts or delete or decrease programs or amounts,
except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash
deficit. However, no amendment to the budget shall ever increase the authorized
expenditures to an amount greater than the total of estimated income; nor shall
any amendment increase the property tax levy proposed in the budget without a
second hearing held thereon following published notice of the proposed change
in tax levy and reason therefor one week prior to the second hearing. Following
the making of amendments Council may adopt the budget.
   (C)   Adoption. The Council shall by ordinance adopt the budget on or before
the twentieth day of the May month of the fiscal year currently ending. If it
fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for current
operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing
fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items in it prorated
accordingly, until such time as the Council adopts a budget for the ensuing
fiscal year. Adoption of the budget ordinance shall constitute an appropriation
of the amounts specified therein for the municipal purposes indicated, and
shall constitute a levy of the property tax therein specified, which levy shall
not exceed the tax rate limit stated in this Charter.
SECTION 6.07 COUNCIL ACTION ON CAPITAL PROGRAM.
   (A)   Notice and hearing. The Council shall publish in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the city the general summary of the
capital program and a notice stating:
      (1)   The times and places where copies of the capital program are
available for inspection by the public; and
      (2)   The time and place, not less than two weeks after such publication,
for a public hearing on the capital program.
   (B)   Adoption. The Council by resolution shall adopt the capital program
with or without amendment after the public hearing and on or before the
fifteenth day of the May month of the current fiscal year.
SECTION 6.08 PUBLIC RECORDS.
   Copies of the budget and the capital program as adopted shall be public
records, and shall be made available to the public at the city library, city
hall, or other locations designated by Council.
SECTION 6.09 AMENDMENTS AFTER ADOPTION.
   (A)   Supplemental appropriations. If during the fiscal year the Manager
certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of
those estimated in the budget, the Council by ordinance may make supplemental
appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess.
   (B)   Emergency appropriations. To meet the public emergency affecting life,
health, property, or the public peace, the Council may make emergency
appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency ordinance in
accordance with the provisions of Sec. 5.03 (E). To the extent that there are
no available unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the Council
may by such emergency ordinance authorize the issuance of emergency notes,
which may be renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes and renewals of
any fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year
next succeeding that in which the emergency appropriation was made.
   (C)   Reduction of appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year it
appears probable to the Manager that the revenues available will be
insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to the Council
without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial
action taken by him, and his recommendations as to any other steps to be taken.
The Council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to
prevent or minimize any deficit, and for that purpose it may by ordinance
reduce one or more appropriations.
   (D)   Transfer of appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year the
Manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance
among the programs within a department, office, or agency and, upon written
request by the Manager, the Council may by ordinance transfer part or all of
any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office, or agency
to another.
   (E)   Limitations; effective date. No appropriation for debt service may be
reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount
required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the
unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental and emergency appropriations and
reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made
effective immediately upon adoption.
SECTION 6.10 LAPSE OF APPROPRIATIONS.
   Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure,
shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been
expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall
continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished
or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned
if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the
appropriation.
SECTION 6.11 ADMINISTRATION OF BUDGET.
   (A)   Work programs and allotments. At such time as the Manager shall
specify, each department, office, or agency shall submit work programs for the
ensuing fiscal year showing the requested allotments of its appropriation by
periods within the year. The Manager shall review and authorize such allotments
with or without revision as early as possible in the fiscal year. He may revise
such allotments during the year if he deems it desirable, and shall revise them
to accord with any supplemental, emergency, reduced, or transferred
appropriations made pursuant to Sec. 6.09.
   (B)   Payment and obligations prohibited. No payment shall be made or
obligation incurred against any allotment or appropriation except in accordance
with appropriations duly made, and unless the Manager or his designee first
certifies that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in such allotment or
appropriation and that sufficient funds therefrom are or will be available to
cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable. Any
authorization of payment or incurring of obligation in violation of the
provisions of this Charter shall be void and any payment so made illegal; such
action shall be cause for removal of any officer who knowingly authorized or
made such payment or incurred such obligation, and he shall also be liable to
the city for any amount so paid. However, except where prohibited by law,
nothing in this Charter shall be construed to prevent the making or authorizing
of payments or making of contracts for capital improvements to be financed
wholly or partly by the issuance of bonds or to prevent the making of any
contract or lease providing for payments beyond the end of the fiscal year,
provided that such action is made or approved by ordinance.
ARTICLE VII: TAXATION
SECTION 7.01 POWER TO TAX AND SECURE REVENUE.
   In order to carry out the purposes, powers, and duties of city government
established by this Charter, the city may assess, levy, and collect taxes,
rents, tolls, and excise or specific taxes.
SECTION 7.02 SUBJECTS OF TAXATION.
   The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same
as for state, county, and school purposes under the general law. Except as
otherwise provided by this Charter, city taxes shall be levied, collected, and
returned in the manner provided by state law. The city shall likewise levy,
collect, and return state, county, and school taxes as provided in the general
laws of the State of Michigan.
SECTION 7.03 TAX RATE LIMIT.
   Exclusive of any levies authorized by law to be made beyond charter tax rate
limitations, the annual ad valorem tax levy shall not exceed 1.8% of the
assessed value of all the taxable personal and real property in the city.
SECTION 7.04 TAX DAY.
   Subject to the exceptions provided by and permitted by law, the taxable
status of persons and property shall be determined as of the thirty-first day
of December or such other date as may subsequently be provided by law, which
day shall be deemed tax day.
SECTION 7.05 PREPARATION OF ASSESSMENT ROLL.
   The Assessor shall make and complete an assessment roll of the city in the
manner and form provided in the general tax law of the state, not later than
the last working day in February of each year. On the first working day in
March the Assessor shall turn such assessment roll over to the Board of Review.
SECTION 7.06 BOARD OF REVIEW.
   (A)   Appointment and qualifications.  The Board of Review shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Council, and shall be
composed of three persons having the qualifications required by this Charter
for officers of the city, who are taxpayers of the city, and who during their
term of office shall not be city officers, employees, or appointees, or be
nominees or candidates for elective city offices. The filing by a member of the
Board of Review of his nomination petition for an elective city office or the
filing of a consent thereto shall constitute a resignation from the Board of
Review. The appointment of members of such board shall be based upon their
knowledge and experience in property valuation. The Council shall designate
three-year staggered terms and each term shall commence January 1. Compensation
of the members of the Board of Review shall be fixed by the Council. The
members of said board shall take the constitutional oath of office which shall
be filed with the City Clerk.
   (B)   Meetings. The Board of Review shall convene during the first week in
March of each year for the purpose of considering and correcting the roll. One
week after the first working day in March of each year, the assessment roll, as
corrected, shall be open for public inspection. Notification shall be given by
first class mail on or about one week before the meeting of the Board of Review
to owners of property according to the names of such owners and their addresses
upon the tax roll, when their assessed valuation is increased by the Assessor
or the Board of Review by 5% or more over the state equalized valuation for
said property as shown on the tax roll for the year preceding. Failure on the
part of the Assessor to give such notice or of the owner to receive it shall
not invalidate any assessment roll or assessment thereon. The Board shall
convene two weeks after the first working day in March of each year, for the
purpose of hearing the public, and shall continue in session for three
consecutive working days, provided that on the third day, the Board shall
remain in session until 9:00 p.m., and shall remain in session as many days
thereafter as may be required for the completion of its duties.
   (C)   Organization and functions. On the first day of its meeting in each
year, the Board of Review shall elect one of its members chairman. The Assessor
shall be secretary of the Board and shall attend its meeting with the privilege
of participating therein, but without the right of vote upon any decision of
the Board. It shall be the duty of the Assessor to keep a permanent record of
all proceedings, and to enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the
Board. Such record shall be filed with the City Clerk within 30 days after the
adjournment of the Board. A majority of the members of the Board shall
constitute a quorum. For the purpose of reviewing and correcting assessments,
the Board of Review shall have the same powers and perform like duties in all
respects as are by the general tax law conferred upon and required of Boards of
Review in townships. It shall hear the complaints of all persons considering
themselves aggrieved by assessments, and if it shall appear that any person or
property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll, the Board shall
correct the roll in such manner as it shall deem just. In all cases, the
assessment roll shall be reviewed according to the facts existing on tax day
and no change of the status of any property after said day shall be considered
by the Board in making its decisions. Except as otherwise provided by law, no
person other than the Board of Review shall make or authorize any change upon
or additions or corrections to the assessment roll.
SECTION 7.07 ENDORSEMENT OF ROLL; VALIDITY.
   After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll,
and on or before the first Monday in April in each year, a majority of its
members shall endorse and sign a statement to the effect that the same is the
assessment roll of the city for the year in which it has been prepared. The
omission of such endorsement shall not affect the validity of such roll. Upon
the completion of said roll and from and after midnight following the last day
of the meeting of the Board of Review, the same shall be the assessment roll of
the city for city taxes on real and personal property that may be authorized by
law and under the provisions of this Charter and shall be conclusively presumed
by all courts and tribunals to be valid and shall not be set aside except for
causes set forth in the general laws of the state.
SECTION 7.08 CERTIFICATION OF TAX LEVY.
   Within three days after the Council has adopted the budget for the ensuing
year, the City Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the total amount which the
Council determines shall be raised by general tax and all amounts of special
assessments which the Council required to be assessed or reassessed upon any
property or against any person or property.
SECTION 7.09 CITY TAX ROLL.
   After the last day for the meeting of the Board of Review, the Assessor
shall, upon receiving the certification of the several amounts to be raised, as
provided in the preceding section, proceed forthwith to spread upon the
assessment roll the several amounts determined by the Council to be charged,
assessed, or reassessed against persons or property; and shall also proceed to
spread the amounts of the general city tax according to and in proportion to
the several valuations set forth in said assessment roll. For the purpose of
avoiding fractions in computation, the Assessor may add to the amount of the
several taxes to be raised not more than 1%; said excess shall belong to the
city.
SECTION 7.10 CERTIFICATION FOR COLLECTION.
   After extending the taxes aforesaid and not later than the first day of June
in each year, the Assessor shall certify said tax roll, and the Mayor shall
annex his warrant thereto, directing and requiring the City Treasurer to
collect from the several persons named in the said roll the several sums
mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment, and
granting to him, for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments, and
charges on such roll, all the power and immunities possessed by City Treasurers
for the collection of taxes under the general laws of the state.
SECTION 7.11 TAX LIENS.
   The city taxes thus assessed shall become at once a debt due to the city
from the persons to whom they are assessed, and the amounts assessed on any
interest in real property shall on the first day of July become a lien upon
such real property, and the lien for such amounts and for all interest and
other charges thereon shall continue until payment thereof. All personal taxes
shall also be a first lien, prior, superior, and paramount, upon all personal
property of the persons so assessed from and after the first day of July in
each year and shall so remain until paid, which said tax liens shall take
precedence over all other claims, encumbrances, and liens upon said personal
property whatsoever, whether created by chattel mortgage, execution, levy,
judgment, or otherwise, and whether arising before or after the assessment of
said personal taxes, and no transfer of personal property assessed for taxes
thereon shall operate to divest or destroy such lien except where such personal
property is actually sold in the regular course of retail trade.
SECTION 7.12 NOTIFICATION OF TAXES DUE.
   The City Treasurer shall not be required to call upon persons named in the
city tax roll, nor to make personal demand for the payment of taxes, but he
shall give notice to the taxpayers of the city, by publication in a newspaper
of general circulation in the city at least once, which publication of notice
shall be made at least ten days prior to the first day of July in each year, of
the time when said taxes will be due for collection, and shall give such notice
of the time when said taxes will be due for collection by first-class mail
addressed to the owners of the property upon which taxes are assessed according
to the names of such owners and their addresses as indicated on the tax roll,
which notice shall be deemed sufficient for the payment of all taxes on said
tax roll. Failure on the part of the City Treasurer to give said notice shall
not invalidate the taxes on said roll nor release the person or property
assessed from any penalty or interest provided in this article in case of
nonpayment of the same.
SECTION 7.13 COLLECTION OF CITY TAXES.
   City taxes shall be due and payable on the first day of July of each year.
To all taxes paid after August 31, there shall be added a 4% penalty, and to
all taxes paid after said date, there shall also be added interest at the rate
of ½ of 1% for each amount or fraction of a month intervening between said date
and the date of payment, or the first day of March of the next succeeding
calendar year, which date shall first occur. The added penalties and interest
herein provided shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes
themselves apply, collectible in the same manner as the taxes to which they are
added.
SECTION 7.14 COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT TAXES.
   If the City Treasurer has been unable to collect any of the city taxes on
said roll on real property before the first day of March following the date
when said roll was received by him, it shall be his duty to return all such
unpaid taxes on real property to the County Treasurer in the same manner and
with like effect as returns by township treasurers of township, school, and
county taxes. Such returns shall be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be
prepared by the City Treasurer and shall include all the additional charges and
fees hereinbefore provided, which charges shall, in such return, be added to
the amount assessed in said tax roll against each description. The taxes thus
returned to the County Treasurer are collected under the provisions of the
general laws of the state and shall be and remain a lien upon the lands against
which they are assessed until paid.
SECTION 7.15 PROTECTION OF CITY LIEN.
   The city shall have power, insofar as the exercise thereof shall not
conflict with or contravene the provisions of any general law of the state, to
acquire by purchase any premises within the city at any tax or other public
sale, or by direct purchase from the State of Michigan, or the fee owner, when
such purchase is necessary to protect the lien of the city for taxes or special
assessments, or both, on said premises, and may hold, lease, or sell the same
solely for the purpose of securing therefrom, the amount of such taxes or
special assessments, or both, together with any incidental expenses incurred in
connection with the exercise of this power. Any such procedure exercised by the
city in the protection of its tax lien shall be deemed to be for a public
purpose.
ARTICLE VIII: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
SECTION 8.01 GENERAL POWER.
   The City Council shall have the power to determine the necessity of any
local or public improvement with or without a petition therefrom and to
determine that the whole or any part of the expense thereof shall be defrayed
by special assessment upon the property especially benefitted, provided that
all special assessments levied shall be in proportion to the benefits derived
from the improvement.
SECTION 8.02 PROCEDURE.
   The City Council shall prescribe by ordinance the complete special
assessment procedure concerning the initiation of projects, plans and
specifications, estimates of costs, notice of hearings, making and confirming
assessment rolls, and the correction of errors therein, collection of special
assessments, and any other matters concerning the making of improvements by the
special assessment method, subject to the provisions of this Charter. Notice of
hearings shall be given by first class mail to all affected property owners.
When the City may, by law, participate in intergovernmental improvements, the
cost of which may be defrayed in whole or in part by special assessment, the
procedure therefore shall be as provided by the law permitting such
participation. If such procedure is not so provided, the procedure established
by and under authority of this section shall govern.
(Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-4-14)
SECTION 8.03 OBJECTION TO IMPROVEMENT.
   If, at or prior to final confirmation of any special assessment, more than
50% of the number of owners of privately owned real property to be assessed for
any improvement, or in case of paving or similar improvements, the owners of
more than 50% of the frontage to be assessed for any such improvement, shall
object in writing to the proposed improvement, the improvement shall not be
made by proceedings authorized by this Charter without a unanimous vote of all
seven members of the City Council, provided that this section shall not apply
to sidewalk construction.
SECTION 8.04 INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS.
   The City Council may provide for the payment of special assessments in
annual installments, not to exceed 30 in number, the first installment being
due upon confirmation of the assessment roll and the deferred installments
being due annually thereafter, or in the discretion of the Council, may be
spread upon and made a part of each annual city tax roll thereafter until all
are paid. Interest may be charged upon deferred installments at a rate not to
exceed 6% per year payable annually. Under any installment plan adopted, the
whole or any deferred installments with accrued interest to date of payment may
be paid in advance of the due dates established.
SECTION 8.05 MODIFICATION OF ASSESSMENT.
   The City Clerk shall, within 60 days after the completion of each local or
special public improvement, compile the actual cost thereof and certify the
same to the City Assessor, who shall adjust the special assessment roll to
correspond therewith.
   (A)   Additional assessment. When any special assessment roll shall prove
insufficient to meet the costs of the improvements for which it was made, the
City Council may make an additional pro rata assessment.
   (B)   Refunds of assessments. Should the assessment prove larger than
necessary by 5% or less, the same shall be reported to the City Council, which
may place the excess in the city treasury or make a refund thereof pro rata
according to assessment. If the assessment exceeds the amount necessary by more
than 5%, the entire excess shall be credited to owners of property as shown by
the city assessment roll upon which such assessment has been levied, pro rata
according to assessment; provided however, that no refunds of special
assessments may be made which impair or contravene the provisions of any
outstanding obligation or bond secured in whole or part by such special
assessment.
SECTION 8.06 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ACCOUNTS.
   Moneys raised by special assessments to pay the cost of any local
improvement shall be held in a special fund to pay such cost or to repay any
money borrowed therefor. Each special assessment account must be used only for
the improvement project for which the assessment was levied.
SECTION 8.07 LIMITATION ON SUITS AND ACTIONS.
   No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the
purposes of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment
unless within 30 days after confirmation of the special assessment roll,
written notice is given to the Council of intention to file such suit or
action, stating the grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal,
and unless such suit or action shall be commenced within 60 days after the
confirmation of the roll.
SECTION 8.08 ALL REAL PROPERTY LIABLE FOR SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   All real property shall be liable for the cost of public improvements
benefitting such property, unless specifically exempted from special
assessments by law.
SECTION 8.09 COLLECTION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   Upon the confirmation of each special assessment roll, the special
assessments thereon shall become a debt to the city from the persons to whom
they are assessed and, until paid, be and continue to be a lien upon the
property assessed for the amount of such assessments and all interest and
collection charges which may accrue thereon. Such lien shall be of the same
character and effect as that which is created by this Charter for city taxes.
SECTION 8.10 POSTPONEMENT OF PAYMENTS.
   The Council, in the case of any person residing in and owning a single-
family residence who, in the judgement of Council, is by reason of poverty
unable presently to pay an assessment levied against such property for the
benefit received from a public improvement, may provide that payment of such
assessment plus accrued interest at the rate of 6% per annum be deferred until
such time as the property passes out of the hands of such owner or until such
time as the inability to pay is absolved. The Council shall establish the
procedure for making this section effective, which shall include a provision
for execution by the owner of an instrument creating a lien to protect the
city's interest, and a review of poverty status on an annual basis.
SECTION 8.11 LIEN NOT DESTROYED BY JUDGMENT.
   No judgment or decree, or any act of the City Council vacating a special
assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises
assessed, for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against
the same, or as by a regular vote or proceeding might have been lawfully
assessed thereon.
ARTICLE IX: MUNICIPAL BORROWING POWER
SECTION 9.01 GENERAL POWER.
   Subject to the applicable provisions of state law and this Charter, the
Council, by proper ordinance, may authorize the borrowing of money for any
purpose within the scope of the powers vested in the city and the issuance of
bonds of the city or other evidence of indebtedness therefor, and may pledge
the full faith and credit of the city for the payment of the obligation created
thereby.
SECTION 9.02 BORROWING LIMIT.
   The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not at
any time exceed 10% of the assessed valuation of all the real and personal
property in the city, provided that in computing such net bonded indebtedness
there shall be excluded money borrowed for the following purposes: tax
anticipation notes; special assessment bonds even though they are also general
obligations of the city; and revenue bonds and any other obligations excluded
by statute or the state constitution from such limitations.
SECTION 9.03 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT BONDS.
   Bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of special assessments may be an
obligation of a special assessment district or districts and a general
obligation of the city. All collections on special assessment rolls shall be
set apart in a special fund and shall be used only for the purpose or purposes
for which they were levied and for the payment of the principal and interest of
any bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of such special assessments. If
there be any deficiency in the special assessment fund to meet the payment of
any such principal and interest, money shall be advanced from the general funds
of the city to meet such deficiency and shall be replaced in such general fund
when the special assessment fund shall be sufficient therefor.
SECTION 9.04 BOND ISSUANCE AND RECORDS.
   Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a
statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued, and it shall be
unlawful for any officer of the city to use the proceeds thereof for any other
purpose, and any officer who shall violate this provision shall be deemed
guilty of misconduct in office. All bonds and other evidence of indebtedness
issued by the city shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the City
Clerk, under the seal of the city. Interest coupons may be executed with the
facsimile signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk. A complete and detailed
record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city
shall be kept by the City Clerk.
ARTICLE X: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, CONTRACTS, AND FRANCHISES
SECTION 10.01 PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISES.
   All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this Charter,
whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to
the right of the city:
   1.   To repeal the franchise for misuse, or non-use, or for failure to
comply with the provisions thereof;
   2.   To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service
maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency;
   3.   To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products,
and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates;
   4.   To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in
accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period
thereof;
   5.   To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to
be conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public;
   6.   To require the public utility to which any franchise is granted to
permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets,
alleys, and public places of the city, and other utilities insofar as such
joint use may be reasonable rental therefor; provided, that in the absence of
agreement, upon application by any public utility, the Council shall provide
for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use. Said arbitration
shall be governed by the rules and regulations of the American Arbitration
Association; the cost of arbitration to be paid for jointly or shared equally
by the contestants; and
   7.   To pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of the
streets, alleys, bridges, and public places of the city as shall arise from its
use thereof and to protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising
from said use.
SECTION 10.02 UTILITY CHARGES, COLLECTIONS, AND LIENS.
   The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for the collection of all public
utility charges made by the city and, for such purpose, shall have all the
power granted to cities by Act 178 of the Public Acts of 1939, as amended.
Utility bills due and unpaid shall become a lien on the property served and may
be enforced and collected in the same manner as other city taxes. When any
person or persons, or any firm or corporation, shall fail or refuse to pay to
the city any sums due on utility bills, the utility service or services upon
which such delinquency exists may be shut off or discontinued and suit may be
instituted by the city for the collection of the same in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
SECTION 10.03 PUBLIC WORKS.
   The Council shall have power to do any public work or make any public
improvement by the employment of the necessary labor and the purchase of the
necessary supplies and materials with separate accounting as to each
improvement so made, or to do such work by contract duly let after competitive
bidding. Where competitive bids are secured, the city, or any city department
qualified to do the work, may enter a bid on an equal basis with other bidders.
The Council shall also have the power to do any public work or make any public
improvement under any legally constituted plan under which the labor is
furnished by any other governmental unit, department, or agency of the United
States or by the State of Michigan, or which is wholly or in part financed by
them or either of them.
SECTION 10.04 PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS.
   Council shall establish by ordinance, rules, and regulations for all
purchases to be made by the City. No contract or purchase order shall be
subdivided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar values specified by
ordinance. It is the intent of this Charter that purchasing procedures of the
City be open and fair, and that any Ordinance passed pursuant to this provision
shall include competitive bidding procedures. (Approved by the electorate: 11-
1-99)
ARTICLE XI: NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
SECTION 11.01 QUALIFIED VOTERS.
   All citizens qualified by the constitution and laws of the State of Michigan
to vote in the city and who satisfy the requirements for registration
prescribed by law shall be qualified voters of the city within the meaning of
this Charter.
SECTION 11.02 ELECTION PROCEDURE.
   The City of Garden City shall constitute one ward. The election of all city
officers as provided in this Charter shall be on a nonpartisan basis. The
general election laws of the state shall apply to and control, as near as may
be, all procedures relating to registration and city elections except as such
general laws relate to political parties or partisan procedure and except as
otherwise provided in this Charter.
SECTION 11.03 PRIMARY ELECTIONS.
   A city primary election shall be held on the Tuesday following the first
Monday in August of each odd-numbered year unless otherwise provided in this
charter. No primary shall be conducted unless there are more than twice the
number of candidates for the vacancies to be filled. The number of candidates
receiving the highest number of votes equal to twice the number of vacancies to
be filled at the election shall be certified by the City Clerk and listed on
the general election ballot. No candidate shall be deemed elected at such
primary.
SECTION 11.04 REGULAR ELECTIONS.
   A regular city election shall be held on the Tuesday following the first
Monday in November of every odd-numbered year.
SECTION 11.05 SPECIAL ELECTIONS.
   Special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the
Council, adopted at least 60 days in advance of such election. Any resolution
calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. No
special election shall be held when a general election is within 90 days. No
more than two special elections may be called in one calendar year, nor more
than one special election on the same issue called in one calendar year.
SECTION 11.06 ELECTION CODE.
   The registration of electors, the preparation of ballots, machines, or other
voting devices, and the conduct of the election shall be in accordance with the
terms of this Charter and the state elections code and shall be under the
general supervision of the City Clerk and the Election Commission.
SECTION 11.07 ELECTION COMMISSION.
   The Election Commission of the City of Garden City shall consist of the City
Clerk, as the chair, the City Manager and the Mayor. In cases of vacancy in
such offices or inability to act, a substitute shall be appointed by the
Council to serve until the disability is removed. The Election Commission shall
have such duties as may be prescribed by law. Until otherwise provided, it
shall determine disputes as to the adequacy of petitions, determine the
qualifications of and appoint inspectors of election, and prescribe the
procedure to be followed. The Council shall fix the rate of compensation for
all election personnel, excluding the commission.
(Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-4-14)
SECTION 11.08 LATE CANDIDATE WITHDRAWALS.
   It shall be the duty of the Election Commission to notify voters that a
candidate has withdrawn from an election too late for his or her name to be
removed from the ballot, and that any vote cast for that name will be a wasted
vote. This notification shall be given to each city voting location in such
manner as to be readily visible to voters and legally acceptable under the law.
SECTION 11.09 NOMINATING PETITIONS.
    Any qualified and legally registered elector may become a candidate for
nomination to municipal office at the regular primary election by filing with
the City Clerk by 4:00 p.m. local time on or before the twelfth Tuesday prior
to the date of such election a petition signed by not less than 75 or more than
125 qualified voters of the city. Blank nomination petitions as required by law
for nonpartisan elections shall be made available by the City Clerk.
   No person shall sign the petition of more than one person for each office to
be filled. No person shall file as a candidate for more than one elective
office under this Charter in any given election.
(Am. Res. 09-07-129, passed - -)
Editor's note:
   Filing deadline superceded by M.C.L.A. § 168.551, amended 8-6-12. As a
result, beginning January 1, 2014, the secretary of state and the various
county, township, and city clerks, shall receive nominating petitions or filing
fees up to 4:00 p.m., eastern standard time, of the fifteenth Tuesday before
the August primary.
SECTION 11.10 ELIGIBILITY.
   A city employee or appointed city official may become a candidate for
nomination or election to municipal office only when: he has filed a petition
as prescribed by the Charter, Sec. 11.09, and has filed by the date for
withdrawal of petitions, and affidavit with the City Clerk verifying his
withdrawal, leave of absence, or termination of city office or employment.
SECTION 11.11 PROCEDURE AFTER FILING.
   If it shall be determined by the City Clerk that such petition has been
signed by the required number of electors of the city, nominating such person
for such office, it shall be the duty of the City Clerk to place such name on
the appropriate city election ballot. Incumbency shall not be indicated unless
required by law. Any candidate may withdraw by filing a signed statement of
request with the City Clerk not later than 4:00 p.m. local time on Friday
following the filing deadline for the original petition. Within five days after
the filing of a nominating petition, the election authorities shall notify the
candidate whether or not it satisfies the requirements prescribed by this
Charter. If a petition is found insufficient, the election authorities shall
return it immediately to the person who filed it with a statement certifying
wherein it is found insufficient. Within the regular time for filing petitions,
such a petition may be amended and filed again as a new petition or a different
petition may be filed for the same candidate. The election authorities shall
keep on file all petitions found sufficient at least until the expiration of
the term for which the candidates are nominated in those petitions.
SECTION 11.12 BOARD OF CANVASSERS.
   A Board of Canvassers shall be provided in accordance with state law and
shall publicly canvass the election returns, determine the vote upon all
questions and propositions, and declare whether the same have been adopted or
rejected and what persons have been elected at such election.
SECTION 11.13 VOTING HOURS.
   For all city elections, the polls shall be open during the hours established
by state law.
SECTION 11.14 CHALLENGERS.
   Challengers shall be permitted as provided by state election laws.
SECTION 11.15 BALLOTS FOR ORDINANCES.
   An ordinance to be voted on by the city shall be presented for voting by
ballot title. The ballot title of a measure may differ from its legal title and
shall be a clear, concise statement describing the substance of the measure
without argument or prejudice. Below the ballot title shall appear the
following question: "Shall the above described ordinance be adopted?"
Immediately below such question shall appear, in the following order, the words
"yes" and "no" to the left of each square, in which, by making a cross (X), the
voter may cast his vote.
SECTION 11.16 RECALL.
   The qualified voters of Garden City shall have authority to recall elected
officials of the city. The time limitations governing such recall, the nature
of the petition to be used, the number of signatures required, the date of any
recall election, and the provisions for filling the office of any recalled
official shall be as provided by the general laws of the State of Michigan. A
current and complete copy of the state election laws shall be on file with the
City Clerk.
ARTICLE XII: ORDINANCE INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
   An ordinance may be initiated by petition, or a referendum on an ordinance
enacted by the Council may be initiated by petition as hereinafter provided.
SECTION 12.01 INITIATIVE.
   The registered electors of the city shall have the power to propose
ordinances to the Council. If the Council fails to adopt an ordinance so
proposed, without any change in substance, the registered electors shall have
the power to adopt or reject it at a city election, provided that such powers
shall not extend to the operating or capital budget, appropriation of funds,
levy of taxes, salaries of the city non-elected officers and employees, or
contrary to this Charter or law.
SECTION 12.02 REFERENDUM.
   The qualified voters of the city shall also have power to require
reconsideration by the Council or any adopted ordinance other than an emergency
ordinance, if the Council fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, to
approve or reject it at a city election, provided that such powers shall not
extend to the measures excluded above as to initiated ordinances.
SECTION 12.03 COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS; PETITIONERS' COMMITTEE; AFFIDAVIT.
   Any five qualified voters may commence initiative or referendum proceedings
by filing with the City Clerk an affidavit stating they will constitute the
petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and
filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the
address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out
in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance sought to be
reconsidered. Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is
filed, the Clerk shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the
petitioners' committee.
SECTION 12.04 SUSPENSION OF AN ENACTED ORDINANCE.
   As to a referendum of an enacted ordinance if, within the ten-day period
mentioned in Sec. 5.03 (C), the petitioners' committee files with the City
Clerk petitions signed by registered electors of the city consisting of at
least 2.5% of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the
last regular city election, then said ordinance shall not become effective
until 45 days after its enactment. If a sufficient petition (Sec. 12.05 (A)) is
filed within said 45 days, the ordinance shall remain suspended until the issue
is determined.
SECTION 12.05 PETITIONS.
   (A)   Number of signatures. Initiative and referendum petitions must be
signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least 10% of the
total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular city
election.
   (B)   Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size
and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature
shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the
address of the person signing and the date of the signing. Petitions shall
contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of
the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
   (C)   Affidavit of circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached
to it when filed, an affidavit executed by the circulator stating that he
personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the
signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be the
genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be, and that each
signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance
proposed or sought to be reconsidered.
SECTION 12.06 PROCEDURE AFTER FILING.
   (A)   Certificate of Clerk; amendment. Within ten days after the petition is
filed, the City Clerk shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency
specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and
shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by
registered mail. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required
number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee
files a notice of intention to amend it with the Clerk within two days after
receiving the copy of his certificate and files a supplementary petition upon
additional papers within ten days after receiving the copy of such certificate.
Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsection
(B) and (C) of Sec. 12.05, and within five days after it is filed the Clerk
shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended
and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by
registered mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or
amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended petition
is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to
amend or request Council review under subsection (B) of this section, within
the time required, the Clerk shall promptly present his certificate to the
Council and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the
sufficiency of the petition.
   (B)   Council review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the
petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if an
amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two
days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be
reviewed by the Council. The Council shall review the certificate at its next
meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and
the Council's determination shall then be a final determination as to the
sufficiency of the petition.
SECTION 12.07 REFERENDUM PETITIONS; SUSPENSION OF EFFECT OF ORDINANCE.
   When a referendum petition is filed with the City Clerk, the ordinance
sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such
suspension shall terminate when:
   (1)   There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition, or
   (2)   The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition, or
   (3)   The Council repeals the ordinance, or
   (4)   Thirty days have elapsed after a vote of the city on the ordinance.
SECTION 12.08 ACTION ON PETITIONS.
   (A)   Action by Council. When an initiative or referendum petition has been
finally determined sufficient, the Council shall promptly consider the proposed
initiative ordinance in the manner provided in Article V or reconsider the
referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the Council fails to adopt a
proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within 60 days,
or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within 45 days after the date the
petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or
referred ordinance to the voters of the city.
   (B)   Submission to voters. The vote of the city on a proposed or referred
ordinance shall be held not less than 60 days and not later than one year from
the date of the final council vote thereon. If no regular city election is to
be held within the period prescribed in this subsection, the Council shall
provide for a special election; otherwise, the vote shall be held at the same
time as such regular election, except that the Council may in its discretion
provide for a special election at an earlier date within the prescribed period.
Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the
polls.
SECTION 12.09 RESULTS OF ELECTION.
   (A)   Initiative. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on proposed
initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon
certification of the election results and shall be treated in all respects in
the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the Council. If
conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the
greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such
conflict.
   (B)   Referendum. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a
referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon
certification of the election results.
SECTION 12.10 LIMITATIONS ON AMENDMENT OR REPEAL OF INITIATORY OR REFERENDUM
ORDINANCES.
   An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may
not be amended or repealed by the Council for a period of one year after the
date of the election at which it was adopted, and an ordinance repealed by the
electorate may not be reenacted by the Council for a period of one year after
the date of the election at which it was repealed. However, any amendment or
repeal of an initiated ordinance, or reenactment repealed by referendum may be
done only by a unanimous vote of the Council. Any ordinance may be adopted,
amended, or repealed at any time by appropriate initiatory or referendum
procedure in accordance with the provisions of this Charter if submitted to the
electorate by the Council on its own motion.
ARTICLE XIII: GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 13.01 GOVERNMENTAL ETHICS.
   The following rules shall govern the conduct of city officers in their
dealing with the city:
   (A)   Anti-nepotism. Unless the Council shall by 5/7 vote, which shall be
recorded as part of its official proceedings, determine that the best interests
of the city shall be served and the party considered by such a vote has met the
requirements for appointive office or employment specified in this Charter, the
following relatives of any elective or appointive officer are disqualified from
holding any appointive office or employment during the term for which said
elective or appointive officer was elected or appointed; spouse, child, parent,
grandchild, grandparent, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, or the
spouse of any of them. All relationships shall include those arising from
adoption. This section shall in no way disqualify such relatives or their
spouses who are bona fide appointive officers or employees of the city at the
time of the election or appointment of said official.
   (B)   General conflict of interest.  Members of the Council or of any board
or commission of the city, or any city administrative official or employee,
shall refrain from voting or otherwise participating in any issue or matter,
including any contract with the city or the sale of any land, material,
supplies and services to the city, in which he or a member of his family, or a
corporation in which he or a member of his family is a stockholder, shall have
a proprietary or financial interest, direct or indirect, or as the result of
which he or a member of his family may receive or gain a financial benefit,
direct or indirect. In addition, such interest or possible benefit shall be
made known in timely fashion by the city official or employee involved. Willful
concealment of such a proprietary or financial interest or possible benefit, or
violation of other requirements of this section, shall constitute malfeasance
in office or position and constitute grounds for forfeiture of such office or
position. Violation of this section with the knowledge expressed or implied of
the person or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the city shall
render such contract or sale voidable by the City Council or City Manager.
SECTION 13.02 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Activities prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall be appointed to or removed from, or in any way
favored or discriminated against with respect to any city position or
appointive city administrative office because of race, sex, political or
religious opinions, or affiliations.
      (2)   No person shall willfully make any false statement, certificate,
mark, rating, or report in regard to any test, certification, or appointment
under the personnel provisions of this Charter or the rules and regulations
made thereunder, or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud
preventing the impartial execution of such provisions, rules, and regulations.
      (3)   No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any
city position or appointive city administrative office shall directly or
indirectly give, render, or pay any money, service, or other valuable thing to
any person for or in connection with his test, appointment, proposed
appointment, promotion, or proposed promotion.
      (4)   No person holding elective office under this Charter, nor any
candidate for such elective office, shall in any way, directly or indirectly,
solicit or receive any assessment, subscription, or contribution for any
purpose whatever from any person holding any compensated appointive city
position.
      (5)   No person holding any compensated appointive city position under
this Charter shall make any contribution whatever, directly or indirectly, to
any person holding elective office in the city or to any person who is a
candidate for such elective office. No person holding any compensated
appointive city position under this Charter shall solicit or receive any
contribution for, or aid in any political campaign on behalf of, any person
holding elective office under this Charter or any candidate for such elective
office. This shall not prevent any person holding any compensated appointive
city position from fully exercising his rights as a citizen to express his
opinions and cast his vote.
   (B)   Penalties. Any person who by himself or with others willfully violates
any of the provisions of paragraphs (1) through (4) of subsection (A) shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or
both. Any person who by himself or with others willfully violates any of the
provisions of paragraph (5) of subsection (A) shall be guilty of an offense and
upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.
Any person convicted under this section shall be ineligible for a period of
five years thereafter to hold any city office or position and, if an officer or
employee of the city, shall immediately forfeit his office or position.
SECTION 13.03 AMENDMENT OF CHARTER.
   This charter may be amended from time to time in the manner provided for by
Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended, or other applicable statute
of the State of Michigan. Such amendments may be initiated by petition of the
electors or vote of the Council in accordance with the law. Should two or more
amendments, adopted at the same election, have conflicting provisions, the one
receiving the largest affirmative votes shall prevail as to those provisions.
SECTION 13.04 SEPARABILITY.
   If any provision of this charter is held invalid, the other provisions of
the Charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of the Charter or
any of its provisions to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
application to the Charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances
shall not be affected thereby.
SECTION 13.05 SURETY BONDS.
   The city shall provide, at its expense, bonds for personnel required to be
bonded in such surety and in such amounts as the Council may require by
ordinance. The city may provide for the indemnification of Council members,
appointees and employees for liability arising out of the performance of their
official duties.
SECTION 13.06 CITY RECORDS.
   All records of the city shall be deemed to be public records, shall be kept
in the city offices except when required for official reasons or for the
purposes of safekeeping to be kept elsewhere and shall be available for
inspection at all reasonable times.
SECTION 13.07 TENSE AND HEADINGS.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, all
words used in this Charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to
the time of the adoption of this Charter, but shall extend to and include the
time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made
therein, either as a power, immunity, requirement, or prohibition. The chapter
and section headings used in this Charter are for convenience only and shall
not be considered to be a part of this Charter.
SECTION 13.08 PENALTIES.
   Violations of Sec. 13.02 of this Charter or willful violation of any
provision of this Charter or any duty imposed upon any official of the city by
this Charter shall constitute misconduct in office and, in addition to any
penalty imposed by law, shall subject the offender to removal from office by
the Council.
SECTION 13.09 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
   The following words shall have the meanings and interpretations herein
stated, except as otherwise specifically provided or clearly implied by the
context of this Charter:
   (A)   BOARD or COMMISSION. An appointed citizen body with such powers as
defined by law.
   (B)   CHARTER. This Charter, as amended at any subsequent date.
   (C)   CITY or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Garden City.
   (D)   COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL. The elected body vested with the legislative
and policy-making authority of the City of Garden City, and is synonymous with
"city commission" or other term used to designate a municipal governing body in
any law.
   (E)   DAY. A calendar day.
   (F)   LAW. Applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the
State of Michigan, applicable common law, this Charter and ordinances of the
City of Garden City.
   (G)   OFFICER or OFFICIAL. Reference to a public office, officer, or
official shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, official, or employee
of the city exercising the appropriate powers, duties, or functions
contemplated in that position, irrespective of any transfer of functions or
change in the official title of the functionary.
   (H)   PERSON. Corporations, both public and private, partnerships,
associations, and individuals.
   (I)   PRINTED or PRINTING. Includes typewriting, engraving, stencil
duplication, lithographing, photostating, or similar method of reproducing
written language.
   (J)   PUBLISH. Publication in one or more newspapers in circulation in the
city and qualified by law to publish legal notices.
   (K)   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. (Except in reference to signatures)
handwritten, typed, printed, telegraphed, or teletyped communications.
   (L)   The singular number shall include the plural, the plural number the
singular, and the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter.
(Amendment adopted by electorate, 11-8-83)
ARTICLE XIV: RETIREMENT SYSTEM
SECTION 14.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Council shall, by ordinance, establish and maintain a retirement system
to provide for the retirement of officers and employees of the city who become
superannuated or totally and permanently disabled; said retirement system to
become effective April 1, 1955. The objective of the retirement system is to
create a sound and efficient means of providing pensions, in addition to social
security benefits, for the officers and employees of the city to the end that
economy and efficiency in public service may be effected and an orderly method
of retirement be provided without hardship and prejudice to employees who have
become superannuated or incapacitated. The terms and conditions of the
ordinance shall be within the discretion of the Council, except as provided in
this chapter.
SECTION 14.02 BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   The retirement system shall be administered by a Board of Trustees,
hereinafter called the Board, which shall consist of five trustees. Two such
trustees shall be elected officials of the city; two trustees shall be
employees of the city to be elected by the participating employees; and one
such trustee shall be a resident and taxpayer of the city, who is not eligible
to participate in the retirement system, to be appointed by the Mayor, by and
with the consent of the Council.
SECTION 14.03 DUTIES OF BOARD.
   The Board shall authorize the granting of all pensions and other benefits
payable from funds of the retirement system; determine the amount of service to
be credited each member within the provisions of the ordinance not inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter; keep proceedings of its meetings; cause
necessary data to be kept for the proper operation of the retirement system;
adopt from time to time mortality and other tables of experience, and a rate or
rates of interest necessary for the operation of the retirement system on an
actuarial basis; employ such professional and clerical services as are
required; and to adopt such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter and the operation ordinance, as are necessary in the
operation of the retirement system.
SECTION 14.04 OFFICERS OF RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   The Council shall designate an officer of the city to act as secretary of
the retirement system and to carry out the administrative duties of the Board.
The City Treasurer shall be treasurer of the retirement system and the
custodian of its funds. The City Attorney shall be legal advisor to the Board.
The Board shall designate an actuary who shall be technical advisor to the
Board and who shall perform such actuarial services as are required in the
operation of the retirement system.
SECTION 14.05 MEMBERSHIP OF RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   (A)   All officers and employees of the city shall be members of the
retirement system, except persons whose services are compensated on a fee
basis, and persons whose compensations per annum for services rendered to the
city average less than an amount to be determined by the Council. In all cases
of doubt as to any employee's membership status the Board shall decide the
issue.
   (B)   Provision shall be made that, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, if any member leaves the employ of the city for any reason, except to
retire with a pension payable from retirement system funds, he shall thereupon
cease to be a member of the retirement system and he shall forfeit his credited
service. He, or his legal representative, shall be entitled to the return of
his accumulated contributions standing to his credit in the pension savings
funds. In the event the said person returns to city service he shall again
become a member; and should he return within a period of years which is not
greater than the number of years out of city service, his service credit
forfeited by him at the time he last left city service shall be restored to his
credit provided he returns to the pension savings fund all amounts he may have
previously withdrawn therefrom, together with interest thereon.
SECTION 14.06 CREDITED SERVICE.
   (A)   Provision shall be made that the Board shall determine how much
service shall be credited any member; provided, that in no case shall less than
ten days of service rendered in any calendar month be credited as a month of
service, nor shall less than nine months of service rendered in any calendar
year be credited as a year of service, nor shall more than one year of service
be credited any member for all service rendered by him in any calendar year.
   (B)   The Board shall give a member service credit for the period served by
him in the Armed Forces of the United States during time of war or other
national emergency; provided, that (1) he was a city employee at the time he
entered or enters the said Armed Forces, and (2) he reentered or reenters city
employment within at least 18 months following termination of such armed
service required of him.
SECTION 14.07 AGE AND SERVICE RETIREMENT.
   (A)   Provision shall be made for the voluntary retirement of any policeman
or fireman member at age 55 years or older, and for any other class or classes
of members at age 60 years or older; provided, that in either case the member
has ten or more years of credited service; provided, further, that in either
case, if the member has 25 or more years of credited service, voluntary
retirement may be taken regardless of age.
   (B)   Provision shall be made for the mandatory retirement of policemen and
firemen members at an age not less than 60 years, and for any other class or
classes of members, except elected officials of the city, at an age not less
than 65 years. Provision shall be made that any member who attains mandatory
retirement age may be continued in service provided (1) he request to be
continued in service, and (2) his request is approved by his department head
and the chief administrative officer of the city. No such continuance in
service shall be granted beyond age 72 years or April 1, 1960 whichever is
later.
SECTION 14.08 SERVICE PENSION.
   (A)   (1)   Provision shall be made for a pension to any existing or future
retirees with ten or more years of credited service who retire from city
service on or after their voluntary retirement age, or to any member with 25 or
more years of credited service regardless of age. Said pension, called a
straight life pension, shall be an annual amount payable in equal monthly
installments throughout the life of retired member.
      (2)   The said straight life pension shall be determined in the ordinance
but in no case shall it exceed 2% of the member's average final compensation
multiplied by his first 25 years, and fraction of a year, of credited service
plus 1% of the member's average final compensation multiplied by his years of
credit service over 25 years. Said pension shall be in addition to his social
security benefits.
      (3)   The pension of each member retiring after July 1, 1968, would be
adjusted July 1, 1969, and each July 1 thereafter, as follows: (1) the adjusted
pension would be equal to the initial pension increased by 2% for each
completed year of retirement after July 1, 1968; (2) the maximum adjusted
pension would be equal to the initial pension multiplied by the ratio of (a)
the average Consumers Price Index for the calendar year preceding the years of
adjustment, to (b) the average Consumers Price Index for the calendar year
preceding retirement.
   (B)   Provision may be made that in the event a member dies before he has
received in payment of his straight life pension an aggregate amount equal to
his accumulated contributions standing to his credit in the pension savings
fund at the time of his retirement, the difference between his said accumulated
contributions and the said aggregate amount of pension payments received by him
shall be paid to such person or persons as he shall have nominated by written
designation duly executed and filed with the Board. If no such designated
person or persons survive him, then such difference, if any, may be paid to his
legal representative.
SECTION 14.09 AVERAGE FINAL COMPENSATION DEFINED.
   Provision shall be made that "average final compensation" shall be the
average of the highest annual regular compensations paid a member by the city
during a period of five consecutive years of credited service obtained within
his ten years of credited service rendered immediately preceding his
retirement. If a member has less than five years of credited service, his
average final compensation shall be the average of total annual regular
compensations paid him by the city. In no case shall any member's average final
compensation include compensation for overtime.
SECTION 14.10 DEFERRED RETIREMENT PENSION.
   Provision may be made that should any member who either (1) has not less
than 25 years of credited service, or (2) has attained an age not less than age
50 years and has not less than ten years of credited service, and in either
case leaves city service prior to his voluntary retirement age, for any reason
except to retire with a pension payable from funds of the retirement system or
his death, he shall remain a member for the exclusive purpose only of receiving
a pension upon his application therefor filed with the Board on or after his
attainment of age 65 years. In the event such member withdraws all or part of
his accumulated contributions from the pension savings fund he shall thereupon
cease to be a member and he shall forfeit his right in and to a deferred
pension.
SECTION 14.11 PENSION OPTIONS.
   (A)   Provision may be made that a member may, prior to his retirement, but
not thereafter, elect to receive an actuarial equivalent of his straight life
pension in a reduced pension payable throughout his life and nominate a
survivor beneficiary; said option election to be effective upon his retirement.
   (B)   Provision may be made for a pension to the widow or totally and
permanently disabled widower of a member whose death occurs while in city
service on or after the date he acquires not less than one year of credited
service.
SECTION 14.12 TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY.
   (A)   Provision shall be made for the retirement of a member with one or
more years of credited service who becomes totally and permanently disabled.
Upon his retirement such a member shall receive a pension as determined in the
ordinance, but in no case shall it exceed 2% of the said member's final
compensation multiplied by his years, and fraction of a year of credited
service; provided, that no disability pension shall be less than 20% of the
member's average final compensation.
   (B)   Provision shall be made that if a member with less than ten years of
credited service becomes totally and permanently disabled, his credited service
shall be increased to ten years, provided he is in receipt of workmen's
compensation benefits on account of his employment with the city.
   (C)   Provision shall be made that at the expiration of the period a retired
member is in receipt of workmen's compensation benefits, on account of his
employment with the city, he shall be given service credit for the period he
was in receipt of said workmen's compensation benefits.
   (D)   Provision shall be made that a member who retires on account of
disability, as provided herein, shall, prior to his voluntary retirement age,
be physically examined periodically by a physician or physicians designated by
the Board. If the disability retirant is found to be physically able and
capable of resuming employment, his disability pension shall terminate and he
shall be restored to city service.
SECTION 14.13 FUNDS OF RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   (A)   Provision shall be made for the creation of a pension savings fund,
pension accumulation fund, and pension reserve fund.
   (B)   The pension savings fund shall be the fund in which shall be
accumulated the contributions of members to the retirement system and from
which shall be paid refunds of member's accumulated contributions. Upon the
retirement of a member, his accumulated contributions shall be transferred to
the pension reserve fund. Each member shall contribute, by salary deductions,
5% of each member's annual compensations. Said contributions shall be credited
to the individual account of the member from whose compensations said
contributions were deducted and shall be accumulated at such rate of interest,
compounded annually, as the Board shall from time to time determine. All
members accepting compensation for services rendered the city shall be deemed
to consent and agree to have the contributions provided herein deducted from
their compensations.
   (C)   The pension accumulation fund shall be the fund in which shall be
accumulated contributions by the city to the retirement system. Upon the
retirement of a member the pension reserve for his pension, less his
accumulated contributions, shall be transferred to the pension reserve fund.
Contributions by the city to the retirement system shall be determined upon the
basis of an annual actuarial valuation employing such mortality and other
tables of experience, and an assumed rate of interest earning, as the Board
shall from time to time adopt; said contributions shall be as follows:
      (1)   An amount which, if paid annually by the city during the future
service of members, will be sufficient, together with the expected net future
contributions of members, to provide reserves at the time of their retirements
for pensions based upon future service likely to be rendered by members; and
      (2)   An amount which if paid annually by the city over a period of
years, to be determined by the Council, but not to exceed 40 years, will be
sufficient together with applicable fund balances, to provide reserves at the
time of member's retirements for pensions based upon their accrued service; and
      (3)   An amount which if paid annually by the city over the future
natural lifetime of restraints and beneficiaries will be sufficient, together
with applicable fund balances, to provide reserves for pensions payable to said
restraints and beneficiaries.
      (4)   The Council shall appropriate each year such amounts of
contributions as determined in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) above, and the city
shall pay such amounts into the pension accumulation fund during the ensuing
fiscal year.
   (D)   The pension reserve fund shall be the fund from which shall be paid
all pensions payable as provided in the operating ordinance.
SECTION 14.14 MANAGEMENT OF FUNDS.
   Provision shall be made that the Board shall be the trustees of the funds of
the retirement system. The Board shall have full power and authority to invest
and reinvest such funds, subject to all terms imposed by the State of Michigan
upon life insurance companies in the making and disposing of their investments,
except that notes, bonds or other obligations of the City of Garden City shall
not be subject to said terms, and except that no money shall be invested in the
stock of any company, association or corporation; to purchase notes or other
obligations of the City of Garden City at any legally conducted public or
private sale; to hold, purchase, sell, assign, transfer, and dispose of any
securities and investments in which any of the funds of the retirement system
are invested, as well as the proceeds of said investments and any moneys
belonging to the retirement system. All funds of the retirement system shall be
held for the sole purpose of making disbursements for pensions and other
payments authorized under this chapter and the operating ordinance shall be
used for no other purpose.
SECTION 14.15 BENEFITS UNASSIGNABLE.
   The pensions or other benefits provided under this chapter and the operating
ordinance payable to a member, retirant or beneficiary, the accumulated
contributions of a member, and moneys belonging to the retirement system shall
not be assignable, nor subject to execution, garnishment, or attachment, except
as is specifically provided in this chapter and the operating ordinance.
SECTION 14.16 REPEAL PROVISION.
   All provisions of Charter and provisions of ordinances not consistent with
the provisions of this Charter amendment are hereby repealed to the extent of
such inconsistency or inconsistencies.
ARTICLE XV: TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 15.01 PURPOSE OF TRANSITION ARTICLE.
   The purpose of this transition article is to inaugurate the government of
the City of Garden City under this Charter. It shall constitute a part of this
Charter only to the extent and for the time required to accomplish that
purpose.
SECTION 15.02 SUBMISSION TO ELECTORS.
   This Charter shall be submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the
City of Garden City at the general election to be held on Tuesday, November 5,
1974, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. The City Clerk shall give
and publish notice of such submission as the law requires.
SECTION 15.03 FORM OF BALLOT.
   The form of ballot for the submission of this Charter shall be as follows:
   Shall the proposed Charter for the City of Garden of City, drafted by the
Charter Commission which was elected August 7, 1973, be adopted?
   YES   NO
and shall also be set forth on paper ballots for absentee voting in the usual
manner therefor.
SECTION 15.04 CANVASS AND ADOPTION.
   The City Council, acting as the Board of Canvassers, shall meet at 7:30 p.m.
on Thursday, November 7, 1974, to publicly canvass the returns and declare the
results of the votes cast upon the question of adopting this Charter. If it is
determined that a majority of those voting upon the question voted "yes," the
Charter shall be declared adopted; otherwise it shall be declared rejected. If
adopted, the City Clerk shall perform all acts required by law to make this
Charter effective.
SECTION 15.05 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   If this Charter is adopted, it shall take effect and become law as the
Charter of the City of Garden City for all purposes, except as otherwise
provided for in this schedule, at 12:01 a.m., Monday, November 10, 1975, on
which date the first City Council elected under this Charter, after having
taken the oath of office, shall meet, organize, and commence functioning.
SECTION 15.06 ELECTION OF COUNCIL.
   For the purpose of nominating and electing the first City Council under this
Charter, this Charter shall take effect on June 1, 1975, and the first election
shall take place November 4, 1975, at which the qualifications and procedures
herein contained shall apply.
SECTION 15.07 CITY MANAGER.
   The first City Council elected under this Charter shall, within 90 days from
the date of its initial meeting, appoint a City Manager. The first City Council
also shall, at its initial meeting, appoint an interim City Manager to serve
until the City Manager assumes office.
SECTION 15.08 EXISTING LEGISLATION AND OBLIGATIONS.
   All ordinances and resolutions of the City of Garden City, and all orders,
rules and regulations made by any official or agency of the city, not
inconsistent with this Charter, shall remain in effect until changed by action
taken under this Charter. The provisions of Act 78, Public Acts of 1935, as
adopted by the City of Garden City, and the provisions of Act 379, Public Acts
of 1965, shall remain in effect until changed in a manner provided by law. The
city shall be vested with all property, moneys, credits, contracts, records,
files, books, and papers belonging to it under its previous Charter. No right
or liability contract, lease, or franchise, either in favor of or against the
city, and no suit or prosecution of any character, shall be affected in any
manner by any change resulting from the adoption of this Charter. All debts and
liabilities of the city shall continue to be its debts and liabilities, and all
debts owing to it, and fines, penalties, interest, or fees, imposed and
existing at the time of such change, shall be collected by the city. Until the
new City Council and City Manager herein authorized have exercised their powers
with respect thereto, all appointed officials and employees of the city shall
continue to have the same duties, rights, powers, and compensation as existed
prior to the effective date of this Charter.
SECTION 15.09 CONSTABLE.
   The position of Constable shall be abolished upon the effective date of this
Charter.
SECTION 15.10 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   Until such time as the new City Council shall take action with respect
thereto, all boards and commissions in existence at the effective date of this
Charter shall continue in existence.
SECTION 15.11 RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   The retirement system, added by Charter amendment November 4, 1954, shall
continue and be maintained under the provisions of that amendment and
subsequent ordinances affecting the system. (Article XIV).
SECTION 15.12 SUPPLEMENTAL TRANSITION LEGISLATION.
   In all cases involving the transition of the city government from that under
the previous Charter to that under this Charter, which are not covered by this
article, the current City Council shall supply the necessary procedures and
plans, and may adopt such rules, regulations, and ordinances as may be required
therefor.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   CITY STANDARDS
      
12.   COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01     Short title
   
10.02     Contents of code
   
10.03     Definitions
   
10.04     Rules of construction
   
10.05    Construction of section references
   
10.06    Conflicting provisions
   
10.07    Errors and omissions
   
10.08     Severability
   
10.09    References to offices
   
10.10    Responsibility
   
10.11    Publication of rules and regulations
   
10.12    Notice
   
10.13    Amendments to code
   
10.99     General penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLE.
   (A)   This Code may be known and cited as the "Garden City Code," for which
designation "codified ordinances" or "code" may be substituted.
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to such
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the "traffic code." Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation "§" followed by the number, such as "
§ 10.01." Headings and captions used in this code other than the title,
chapter, and section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and
shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section. No provision of this
code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any chapter or section
heading.
(‘83 Code, § 10.01)
Cross-reference:
   Codification, see Charter, Sec.
5.05
§ 10.02 CONTENTS OF CODE.
   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
   (B)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of
ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed
expressly or by necessary implication. Such ordinances shall be numbered
consecutively, authenticated, published, and recorded in the book of
ordinances, but shall not be prepared for insertion in this code, nor be deemed
a part hereof.
   (C)   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body, or a certain municipal officer or employee, to make
additional ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent
of the ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving
such purpose effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto,
shall remain in effect and are saved.
   (D)   The Zoning Code of the city is adopted by reference as set forth in
Chapter 156 of this code. The adoption of this code shall not be interpreted as
authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure
or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of
adoption of this code.
(‘83 Code, § 10.02)
§ 10.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this code the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   BOARD or COMMISSION. See Charter, Sec. 13.09(A).
   CHARTER. See Charter, Sec. 13.09(B).
   CITY or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Garden City, Michigan.
   COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL. See Charter, Sec. 13.09(D).
   DAY. See Charter, Sec. 13.09(E).
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of incorporeal nature.
   LAW. See Charter, Sec. 13.09(F).
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION. An act or omission that is prohibited by this
Code or any other ordinance of the city, but which is not a crime under this
code or other ordinance, and for which civil sanctions, including, without
limitation, fines, damages, expenses and costs, may be ordered, as authorized
by Chapter 87 of Public Act 236 of 1961, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 600.8701 et
seq. A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser included offense of a
violation of this Code that is a criminal offense.
   OFFICER or OFFICIAL. See Charter, Sec. 13.09(G).
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, or
tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.
   PERSON. Any individual, copartnership, corporation, association, club, joint
adventure, estate, trust, and any other group or combination acting as a unit,
and the individuals constituting such group or unit.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PRINTED or PRINTING. See Charter, Sec. 13.09(I).
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to or upon which the public resorts, or travels,
whether such place is owned or controlled by the city or any agency of the
state, or is a place to or upon which the public resorts or travels by custom,
or by invitation, express or implied.
   PUBLISH. See Charter, Sec. 13.09(J).
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail, and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines or lateral lines
and the right-of-way lines which is intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The State of Michigan.
   STREET, HIGHWAY, or ALLEY. The entire width subject to an easement for
public right-of-way, or owned in fee by the city, county, or state, of every
way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use
of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of public travel. ALLEY shall
mean any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress to and egress
from a property.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such
premises, alone or with others.
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
(‘83 Code, § 10.03) (Ord. 94-009, passed 9-6-94)
§ 10.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Word usage. Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed
according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have
acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative definition
or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (B)   Singular and plural; gender. As used in the code, unless the context
otherwise requires, the following shall apply.
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
   (C)   Tense. Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the
context, all words indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the
time of adoption of this code but shall extend to and include the time of the
happening of any act, event, or requirement for which provision is made
therein, either as a power, immunity, requirement, or prohibition.
   (D)   Calendar; computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When a public office in which an act required by law is to be
performed is closed to the public for the entire day which constitutes the last
day for doing such act, or before its usual closing time on such day, then such
act may be performed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or a
legal holiday.
      (3)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a
day named, no part of that day shall be included.
      (4)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
      (5)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or
notice shall mean the time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance
of such duty or compliance with such notice.
   (E)   Authority. When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (F)   Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three
or more municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of the officers or other persons, unless it is
otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority or inconsistent
with state statute or other provisions.
   (G)   Exceptions. The rules of construction shall not apply to any law which
contains any express provision excluding such construction, or when the subject
matter or context of such law may be repugnant thereto.
(‘83 Code, § 10.04)
§ 10.05 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(‘83 Code, § 10.05)
§ 10.06 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of the codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the subject matter taken as a whole.
(‘83 Code, § 10.06)
§ 10.07 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express such intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
(‘83 Code, § 10.07)
§ 10.08 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   It is the legislative intent of the Council, in adopting this code,
that all provisions and sections of this code be liberally construed to protect
and preserve the peace, health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the
city. Should any provision or section of this code be held unconstitutional or
invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any
of the remaining provisions or sections, it being the intent that this code
shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section
thereof.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any
section of this code whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in
the amendatory ordinance.
(‘83 Code, § 10.08)
§ 10.09 REFERENCES TO OFFICES.
   Whenever, by the provisions of this code, any officer of the city is
assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, the title of the
officer shall mean and include the officer or his deputy or authorized
subordinate.
(‘83 Code, § 10.09)
§ 10.10 RESPONSIBILITY.
   Whenever any act is prohibited by this code, by an amendment thereof, or by
any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, the prohibition shall extend to and
include the causing, securing, aiding, or abetting of another person to do the
act.
(‘83 Code, § 10.10)
§ 10.11 PUBLICATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   All rules and regulations made by the administrative officers which are
subject to approval by the Council under the provisions of this code, after
approval is given, and all rules and regulations adopted by the Council on its
own initiative, shall be published in the manner provided in the Charter for
the publication of city ordinances. Copies of all rules and regulations shall
be kept in the office of the Clerk for public inspection and distribution.
(‘83 Code, § 10.11)
§ 10.12 NOTICE.
   (A)   Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections,
dangerous structures, abating a nuisance, or any other act, the expense of
which if performed by the city, may be assessed against the premises under the
provisions of this code, and shall be served in the following manner.
      (1)   By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the
same at his residence, office, or place of business with some person of
suitable age and discretion, or
      (2)   By mailing the notice by certified or registered mail to the owner
at his last known address, or
      (3) If the owner is unknown, by posting the notice in some conspicuous
place on the premises for five days.
   (B)   No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal, or tear
down any official notice or placard posted by any city officer, unless
permission is given by the officer to remove the notice.
(‘83 Code, § 10.12)
§ 10.13 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   This code shall be amended by ordinance. The title of each amendatory
ordinance, adapted to the particular circumstances and purposes of the
amendment, shall be substantially as follows.
   (A)   To amend any section:
   AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTION__________(OR SECTIONS________AND______) OF
CHAPTER_______OF TITLE________OF THE CODE OF THE CITY OF GARDEN CITY.
   (B)   To insert a new section, chapter, or title:
   AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CODE OF THE CITY OF GARDEN CITY BY ADDING A NEW
SECTION (NEW SECTIONS, A NEW CHAPTER, OR A NEW TITLE, AS THE CASE MAY BE) WHICH
NEW SECTION (SECTIONS, CHAPTER OR TITLE) SHALL BE DESIGNATED
AS SECTION___________(SECTIONS________AND_________) OF CHAPTER_________OF TITLE
__________(or proper designation if a chapter or title is added) OF SAID CODE.
   (C)   To repeal a section, chapter, or title:
   AN ORDINANCE TO REPEAL SECTION__________(SECTIONS_______AND__________),
CHAPTER_________, TITLE__________, (as the case may be) OF THE CODE OF THE CITY
OF GARDEN CITY.
(‘83 Code, § )
Cross-reference:
   Ordinance enactment, see Charter, Sec.
5.03
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless a violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the city is
specifically designated in the Code of ordinances as a municipally civil
infraction, the violation shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor.
   (B)   The penalty for a misdemeanor violation shall be a fine not exceeding
$500 (plus costs of prosecution), or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or
both, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided for by the violation by
this code or any ordinance.
(‘83 Code, § 10.99)
   (C)   The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction
shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this Code or any ordinance,
plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under
Chapter 87 of Public Act 236 of 1961, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 600.8701 et
seq. and other applicable laws; except as specified in division (C)(3) of this
section. (Ord. 97-008, passed 12-1-97)
      (1)   Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal
civil infraction violation by this Code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a
violation shall be not less than $20, plus costs and other sanctions, for each
infraction.
      (2)   Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a
person of any requirement or provision of this Code or any ordinance. As used
in this section, REPEAT OFFENSE means a second (or any subsequent) municipal
civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision committed by a
person within any six-month period (unless some other period is specifically
provided by this Code or any ordinance) and for which the person admits
responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless otherwise
specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance for a particular municipal
civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as
follows.
         (a)   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall
be no less than $35, plus costs.
         (b)   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $50, plus costs.
(‘83 Code, § 10.99)
      (3)   A defendant issued three civil infractions for a violation of the
same requirement or provisions committed within any six-month period shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor subject to the fines and penalties set forth in
division (B) of this section.
   (D)   A defendant who fails to answer a citation or notice to appear in
court for a municipal civil infraction, as defined in
§ 10.03, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is subject to the fines and penalties
described in division (B) in place and instead of those prescribed in divisions
(C)(1) and (2) of this section.
   (E)   If a defendant fails to appear as directed by a municipal civil
infraction citation, or other notice, at a scheduled appearance before the
District Court, or at a scheduled informal hearing, or at a scheduled formal
hearing, the court shall enter a default judgment against the defendant.
   (F)   If a defendant defaults in the payment of a civil fine, cost, or any
installment as ordered by the court, upon the motion of the prosecutor or upon
its own motion, the court may require the defendant to show cause why the
defendant should not be held in civil contempt, and may issue a summons, order
to show cause, or a bench warrant of arrest for the defendant's appearance.
   (G)   If a corporation or an association is ordered to pay a civil fine,
cost, or damages or expenses, the individuals authorized to make disbursement
shall pay the fine, cost, or damages or expenses, and their failure to do so
shall be civil contempt unless they make the showing required in this section.
   (H)   Unless the defendant shows that the default was not attributable to an
intentional refusal to obey the order of the court or to a failure on his or
her part to make a good faith effort to obtain the funds required for payment,
the court shall find that the default constitutes a civil contempt and may
order the defendant committed until all or a specified part of the amount due
is paid.
   (I)   If it appears that the default in the payment of a fine, cost, or
damages or expenses does not constitute civil contempt, the court may enter an
order allowing the defendant additional time for payment, reducing the amount
of payment or of each installment, or revoking the fine, cost, or damages or
expenses.
   (J)   The term of imprisonment on civil contempt for nonpayment of a civil
fine, cost, or damages or expenses shall be specified in the order of
commitment, and shall not exceed one day for each $30 due. A person committed
for non-payment of a civil fine, cost, or damages or expenses shall be given
credit toward payment for each day of imprisonment and each day of detention in
default of recognizance before judgment at the rate of $30 per day.
   (K)   A defendant committed to imprisonment for civil contempt for non-
payment of a civil fine, cost, or damages or expenses shall not be discharged
from custody until one of the following occurs:
      (1)   The defendant is credited with the amount due pursuant to division
(J).
      (2)   The amount due is collected through execution of process or
otherwise.
   (L)   If a defendant does not pay a civil fine or costs or an installment
ordered by the court within 30 days after the day on which payment is due for a
municipal civil infraction action brought for a violation involving the use or
occupation of land or a building or other structure, the prosecutor may obtain
a lien against the land, building or structure involved in the violation by
recording a copy of the court order requiring payment of the fine and costs
with the Register of Deeds for the county in which the land, building, or
structure is located. The court order shall not be recorded unless a legal
description of the property is incorporated in or attached to the court order.
The lien is effective immediately upon recording of the court order with the
Register of Deeds.
   (M) The court order recorded with the Register of Deeds shall constitute
notice of the pendency of the lien. In addition, a written notice of the lien
shall be sent by the prosecution by first class mail to the owner of record of
the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known address.
   (N)   The lien may be enforced and discharged by the city in the matter
prescribed in the Charter for the City of Garden City, by the general property
tax in Public Act 206 of 1893, being M.C.L.A. § 211.1 through 211.57. However,
property is not subject to sale under section 60 of Public Act 206 of 1893,
being M.C.L.A. § 211.60, for non-payment of a civil fine or cost or an
installment ordered by the Court, unless the property is also subject to sale
under section 60 of Public Act 206 of 1893 for delinquent property taxes.
   (O)   A lien created under this section has priority under any other lien
unless one or more of the following apply.
      (1)   The other lien is a lien for taxes or special assessment.
      (2)   The other lien is created before the effective date of the
amendatory act that added to this section.
      (3)   Federal law provides that the other lien has priority.
      (4)   The other lien is recorded before the lien under this section is
recorded.
   (P)   The city may institute an action in accord of competent jurisdiction
for the collection of fines and costs imposed by a court order for a municipal
civil infraction. However, an attempt by the city to collect the fines or costs
by any process does not invalidate or waive the lien upon the land, building,
or structure.
   (Q)   A lien provided by this section shall not continue for a period longer
than five years after a copy of the court order imposing a fine or cost is
recorded, unless within that time an action to enforce the lien is commenced.
(Ord. 97-008, passed 12-1-97)
   (R)   A VIOLATION includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared
to be unlawful or an offense by this Code or any ordinance, and any omission or
failure to act where the act is required by this Code or any ordinance.
   (S)   Each day on which any violation of this Code or any ordinance
continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or
sanctions as a separate offense.
   (T)   In addition to any remedies available at law, the city may bring an
action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent
or abate any violation of this Code or any city ordinance.
(‘83 Code, § 10.99) (Ord. 94-010, passed 9-26-94)
Cross-reference:
   Penalties, See Charter, Sec.
5.06
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   City Brand established
§ 11.01 CITY BRAND ESTABLISHED.
   The Seal of the city shall be as printed below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2745.gif]
(‘83 Code, § 11.01)  (Am. Res. passed 4-10-06)
CHAPTER 12: COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE
Section
   
12.01   Comprehensive fee schedule adopted
§ 12.01 COMPREHENSIVE FEE SCHEDULE ADOPTED.
   The City Council shall adopt by resolution a comprehensive fee schedule.
Such fees shall bear reasonable relationship to all costs, including overhead
of services rendered, and may be changed from time-to-time. All existing fees
that are not contained in the comprehensive fee schedule shall remain and
continue as provided by the City Code.
(Ord. A-04-004, passed 6-7-04; Am. Ord. A-04-005, passed 6-16-04; Am. Ord. A-
05-010, passed 6-27-05 ; Am. Ord. A-07-007, passed 6-21-07 )
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY GOVERNMENT
      
31.   MUNICIPAL OFFICES AND DEPARTMENTS
      
32.   ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY AND PROCEDURE
      
33.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
34.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
35.   PURCHASES, CONTRACTS AND SALES
      
36.   EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM
      
37.   UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION SYSTEM
      
38.   (RESERVED)
      
39.   CITY POLICIES
      
40.   SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
      
41.   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS
CHAPTER 30: CITY GOVERNMENT
Section
Emergency Powers
   
30.01   Powers of Mayor during time of riot or disturbance
   
30.02   Proclamation of emergency
   
30.03   Effective date of orders; termination
Cross-reference:
   Powers and duties of Mayor and City Council, see Charter, Article II
   Powers and duties of City Manager, see Charter, Article III
   Legislation by City Government, see Charter, Article V
EMERGENCY POWERS
§ 30.01 POWERS OF MAYOR DURING TIME OF RIOT OR DISTURBANCE.
   The Mayor or the Mayor Pro-Tem as provided for in the Charter is authorized
and directed to prepare, implement, and execute the following emergency powers
as long as he shall deem it necessary for the purpose of suppressing any riot,
civil disturbance, or insurrection in the city as those terms are generally
defined during any period when rioting, looting, or massive disturbance of the
peace is taking place or is imminent on the basis of information received from
authoritative sources. No such declaration shall remain effective for a period
of more than three days unless extended by determination of the majority of the
Council at a duly called meeting.
(‘83 Code, § 30.35)
§ 30.02 PROCLAMATION OF EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Under the above circumstances, the Mayor may declare a state of
emergency to exist. If a state of emergency is declared, the Mayor must
proclaim the existence of the emergency.
   (B)   After the proclamation, the Mayor may promulgate such reasonable
orders, rules, and regulations as he deems necessary, to protect life and
property or to bring the emergency situation within the city under control.
These regulations, rules, or orders may include, but shall not be limited to
the following.
      (1)   Prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles, both public
and private for the purpose of traffic control.
      (2)   Prohibiting or restricting the use and occupancy of buildings and
the ingress and egress of persons and vehicles.
      (3)   Prohibiting or restricting the opening of places of amusement and
assembly.
      (4)   Establishing a curfew.
      (5)   Prohibiting or restricting the sale, transportation, and use of
alcoholic beverages and liquors upon approval of the Liquor Control Commission
of the State of Michigan.
      (6)   Prohibiting or restricting the use, storage, sale of, possession,
and transportation of explosives or inflammable materials or liquids deemed to
be dangerous to public safety.
      (7)   Regulations and orders designed to lessen the hazard to life and
property.
(‘83 Code, § 30.36) (Am. Ord. 10-002, passed 8-24-09)
§ 30.03 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDERS; TERMINATION.
   The orders, rules, and regulations shall be effective from the date and in
the manner prescribed in the orders, rules, and regulations, and shall be made
public as provided therein. The orders, rules, and regulations may be amended,
modified, or rescinded, in like manner, from time to time during the pendency
of the emergency, but shall cease to be in effect upon declaration of the Mayor
that the emergency no longer exists.
(‘83 Code, § 30.37)
Cross-reference:
   Powers and duties of Mayor and City Council, see Charter, Article II
   Powers and duties of City Manager, see Charter, Article III
   Legislation by City Government, see Charter, Article V
CHAPTER 31: MUNICIPAL OFFICES AND DEPARTMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   System of Departments
Department of Police
   
31.010   Chief of Police; powers and duties
   
31.011   Responsibility of Police Department
   
31.012   Department rules
   
31.013   Standards for police personnel
   
31.014   Lost or stolen property
Department of Fire
   
31.025   Fire Department
   
31.026   Fire Chief; powers and duties
   
31.027   Office of Fire Marshal
   
31.028   Personnel; age and physical requirements
   
31.029   Interference with Department
Department of the Clerk-Treasurer
   
31.040   Clerk-Treasurer; powers and duties
   
31.041   Payment of property taxes
   
31.042   Payment of water bills
   
31.043   Deemed contract
Department of Public Services
   
31.055   Director
   
31.056   Function of Department
Department of Parks and Recreation
   
31.070   Director
   
31.071   Function of Department
General City Offices
   
31.095   Health Department
   
31.096   City Attorney
   
31.097   Buildings division
Cross-reference:
   Firefighters and police officers, see
Chapter 33
   Office of Assessor, see Charter, Sec. 4.05
   Board of Review, see Charter, Sec.
7.06
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 SYSTEM OF DEPARTMENTS.
   (A)   The city executive and administrative offices, powers, and duties are
allocated among six principal departments. The heads of those departments are
as follows.
 
Department                         Head
Department of Police               Chief of Police
Department of Fire                 Fire Chief
Department of the Clerk-Treasurer  Clerk-Treasurer
Department of Public Services      Director of Department of Public Services
Department of Parks and Recreation Director of Parks and Recreation
   (B)   Based on recommendations of the City Manager, the Council may
increase, decrease, or reallocate the functions of the above departments, or
may establish or abolish other departments, when it considers changes necessary
for the efficient administration of city government.
(‘83 Code, § 31.01)
Cross-reference:
   Administrative Departments and appointments, see Charter, Article IV
DEPARTMENT OF POLICE
§ 31.010 CHIEF OF POLICE; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Department of Police shall be headed by the Chief of Police, who
shall be the commanding officer of the police force. He shall direct the police
work of the city, and shall be responsible for the enforcement of law and
order. (‘83 Code, § 31.05)
   (B)   In case of the Police Chief’s absence from the city, or his disability
or inability from any cause to act as Chief of Police, the City Manager shall
designate and appoint a member of the Police Department to act as Chief during
such absence or disability. (‘83 Code, § 31.08)
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall assume the duties of Traffic Engineer. (‘83
Code, § 31.12)
§ 31.011 RESPONSIBILITY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The Department of Police shall be responsible for the preservation of the
public peace, prevention of crime, apprehension and detention of criminals,
regulation of traffic, protection of rights of persons and property, and
enforcement of the laws of the state, the ordinances of the city and all rules
and regulations made in accordance therewith.
(‘83 Code, § 31.06)
§ 31.012 DEPARTMENTAL RULES.
   The Chief of Police may prescribe rules for the government of police
officers of the city, which shall be entered in a book of Police Department
rules and orders, and may be amended or revoked by the Police Chief. The rules
may establish one or more divisions within the Police Department, each of which
may be charged with performing one or more of the functions of the Police
Department enumerated in
§ 31.011. Any such division shall be supervised by a qualified officer of the
Police Department, who shall be responsible for the particular functions of the
Police Department assigned to the particular division supervised by him. It
shall be the duty of all members of the police force to comply with such rules
and orders while effective.
(‘83 Code, § 31.07)
§ 31.013 STANDARDS FOR POLICE PERSONNEL.
   (A)   The minimum employment standards for law enforcement officers as
established and adopted by the state Commission on Law Enforcement Standards,
in accordance with Public Act 203 of 1965, being M.C.L.A. §§ 28.601 through
28.616, are adopted as follows:
      (1)   United States citizenship.
      (2)   Minimum age of 21 years.
      (3)   Graduation from high school or equivalent, equivalent defined as
having attained a passing score on the General Education Development test
indicating high school graduation level.
      (4)   Fingerprinting of applicants with a search of local, state, and
national fingerprint files to disclose any criminal record.
      (5)   No felony offense convictions.
      (6)   Good moral character as determined by a favorable report following
a comprehensive background investigation covering school and employment
records, home environment, personal traits, and integrity. Consideration will
be given to any and all law violations, including traffic and conservation law
convictions as indicating a lack of good character.
      (7)   Acceptable physical, emotional, and mental fitness as established
by a licensed physician following examination to determine the applicant is
free from any physical, emotional, or mental condition which might adversely
affect his performance of duty as a police officer.
      (8)   Normal hearing and normal color vision. The trainee shall be free
from any impediments of the senses. He must possess normal visual functions and
visual acuity in each eye correctable to 20/20. The trainee must be physically
sound and well developed physically, with height and weight in relation to each
other and to age as indicated by accepted medical standards, and in possession
of his extremities. He shall be free from any physical defects, chronic
diseases, organic diseases, organic or functional conditions, or mental
instabilities which may tend to impair efficient performance of duty or which
might endanger the lives of others or himself.
      (9)   A declaration of the applicant's medical history as a part of the
background investigation. The information shall be available to the examining
physician.
      (10) An oral interview held by the hiring authority or his
representative, to determine the applicant's acceptability for a police officer
position and to assess appearance, background, and ability to communicate.
      (11) Recruitment and employment practices and standards shall be in
compliance with existing state statutes.
   (B)   The standards of the Michigan Law Enforcement Officers Training
Council are recognized as minimum standards and higher standards are
recommended by the Training Council when qualified applicants are available.
Any portion of any ordinance not meeting the minimum standards is repealed; any
portion of any ordinance which meets the minimum standards or exceeds those
standards shall remain in effect.
(‘83 Code, § 31.11)
§ 31.014 LOST OR STOLEN PROPERTY.
   All stolen or other property taken or found by any police officer in the
possession of any person or persons arrested or charged with a violation of the
law, all property or money taken on suspicion of having been feloniously
obtained or being the proceeds of crime and for which there is no other
claimant than the person from whom it was taken, all lost property coming into
the possession of the Police Department, and all property and money taken from
pawn brokers as the proceeds of crime, or from any insane or intoxicated person
or persons otherwise incapable of taking care of themselves, shall be disposed
of, handled, and accounted for under regulations prescribed by the City
Council. Any unclaimed property sold in a manner prescribed by such regulations
shall have the proceeds deposited in the city treasury in the General Fund. No
property, however, shall be sold until after the expiration of 60 days from the
time it came into the possession of the Police Department.
(‘83 Code, § 31.10)
DEPARTMENT OF FIRE
§ 31.025 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)    The city Fire Department shall be known as the Garden City Fire
Department. It shall consist of a Fire Chief and firefighters, the number to be
set by the Council from time to time as conditions and circumstances shall in
its discretion require. (‘83 Code, § 31.20)
   (B)   The members and officers of the Fire Department shall receive
compensation as approved by resolution of the Council. (‘83 Code, § 31.28)
(Am. Ord. 21-001, passed 1-25-21)
§ 31.026 FIRE CHIEF; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)    The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City Council. The other
firefighters will be appointed by the Chief, subject to meeting the
requirements of the Civil Service Commission of the city. (‘83 Code, § 31.22)
   (B)   The Fire Chief shall have control over all firefighting apparatus and
shall be solely responsible for its care and condition. They shall report to
the Council as to the condition of the equipment and the needs of the Fire
Department. They may submit additional reports and recommendations at any
meeting of the Council. They shall be responsible for the proper training and
discipline of the members of the Fire Department and may suspend any member for
refusal or neglect to obey orders, pending final action by the Civil Service
Commission on his dismissal or retention. The Fire Chief shall have the
authority to use all police officers for firefighting duties whenever he feels
they are so required. (‘83 Code, § 31.24)
   (C)   The Fire Chief shall keep, in convenient form, a complete record of
all fires. The reports shall include the time of the alarm, location of the
fire, cause of fire (if known), type of building, name of owner and tenant,
purpose for which occupied, value of building and contents, members of the
department responding to the alarm, and such other information as he may deem
advisable or as may be required from time to time by the Council or State
Insurance Department. They will also keep all necessary records in accordance
with the regulations of theNational Fire Incident Reporting System. (‘83 Code,
§ 31.25)
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to hold practice drills for the
firefighters with instruction on approved methods of firefighting, fire
prevention, and emergency medical services. He shall also be prepared, on
request of the Council, to present a status report of the current training
program. (‘83 Code, § 31.26)
   (E)   In the absence of the Fire Chief, a person designated by the Chief
with full authority shall perform all the functions and exercise all the
authority of the Chief. (‘83 Code, § 31.27)
   (F)   The Fire Chief shall have the power to command any bystanders at a
fire to give any assistance necessary in performing the duties of a
firefighter.
(‘83 Code, § 31.31) (Am. Ord. 21-001, passed 1-25-21)
§ 31.027 OFFICE OF FIRE MARSHAL.
    The Fire Marshal shall have the authority, with approval by the Fire Chief,
to deputize any member or members of the Fire Department, and shall be charged
with the enforcement of all provisions of this code aimed at fire prevention.
He shall have full authority to inspect all premises, in accordance with the
International Fire Code and National Fire Codes and Standards and to cause the
removal or abatement of all fire hazards.
(‘83 Code, § 31.23) (Ord. 72-033, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 21-001, passed 1-25-
21)
§ 31.028 PERSONNEL; AGE AND PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)    No person shall be accepted into the Fire Department prior to
attaining the age of 21 years at the time of his acceptance. Retirement age
requirements shall be subject to Chapter 36 of this code, the Employees
Retirement System.
   (B)   All members of the Fire Department must pass a complete physical
examination, psychological examination, and written and physical ability
testing (CPAT) prior to their acceptance into either of the above mentioned
departments.
(‘83 Code, § 31.29) (Am. Ord. 21-001, passed 1-25-21)
§ 31.029 INTERFERENCE WITH DEPARTMENT.
   No person shall give or make, or cause to be given or made, a fire alarm
without probable cause, or neglect or refuse to obey any reasonable order of
the Chief at a fire, or interfere with the Fire Department in the discharge of
its duties.
(‘83 Code, § 31.32) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
DEPARTMENT OF THE CLERK-TREASURER
§ 31.040 CLERK-TREASURER; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Department of the Clerk-Treasurer shall be headed by the City
Clerk-Treasurer, who shall serve as Clerk of the Council and perform such other
duties for the Council as may be required by it. He shall be responsible for
the publication, filing, indexing, and safe keeping of all proceedings of the
Council. (‘83 Code, § 31.40)
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall examine and audit all accounts against the
city and promptly report to the City Council in writing any default or
delinquency he may discover in the books, records, or accounts of any city
department. It shall be his duty to examine, verify, and approve all accounts
against the city. He shall not verify or approve for payment any voucher until
he has verified the correctness of the account for which it is issued, neither
shall he approve for payment any account unless the money has been appropriated
therefor. He shall not verify or sign any voucher for any account against the
city unless sufficient money to pay it is in the fund on which it is drawn.
(‘83 Code, § 31.42)
   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall have access to all books, records, and
documents kept by any officer, employee, or department of the city. Daily
reports of all monies collected and of the disposition thereof shall be made to
the Clerk-Treasurer by the department or person receiving the same. The books
in all departments of the city shall be balanced each calendar month, and a
report thereon made by the Clerk- Treasurer to the City Council. (‘83 Code, §
31.43)
   (D)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall present to the City Council monthly and
annually, a detailed statement of the financial condition of the city relative
to the operating budget, which shall include an account of all receipts and
disbursements. (‘83 Code, § 31.44)
Cross-reference:
   Department of the Clerk-Treasurer, see Charter, Sec. 4.05
   Office of the Assessor, see Charter, Sec. 4.05(C)
   Board of Review, See Charter, Sec.
7.06(B)
§ 31.041 PAYMENT OF PROPERTY TAXES.
   (A)   The full payment of regular city real and personal property taxes may
be paid at the Cherry Hill Branch of the Manufacturer's National Bank, the
Garden City Office of the National Bank of Detroit, the Ann Arbor Trail Branch
of Comerica, the Ford-Telegraph Branch of Michigan National Bank, the Warren
and Middlebelt Branch of the Bank of the Commonwealth, the Garden City Office
of Standard Federal Savings and Loan Association, the Garden City Credit Union,
and the Westland Office of First Federal of Michigan, and the Middlebelt and
Cherry Hill branch of Down River Federal Savings and Loan Association. (‘83
Code, § 31.45)
   (B)   (1)   Upon payment to a bank designated in division (A), the regular
original and duplicate tax bill issued by the City Treasurer will be marked
“Paid” by the bank with a stamp carrying the name of the City Treasurer, the
name of the bank, and the date of payment.
      (2)   Banks shall receive payments for only the full amount of the taxes
as stated in the city tax bill issued by the City Treasurer. In the event
payment hereunder is made to any banks other than by a cash payment and the
instrument by which payment is made proves to be uncollectible, or credit is
otherwise erroneously given, the tax payment shall be canceled by the city and
the bank shall be reimbursed and relieved of liability to the city for the
amount of the tax payment.
(‘83 Code, § 31.46) (Ord. 78-016, passed 8-7-78; Am. Ord. 80-007, passed 7-21-
80; Am. Ord. 81-007, passed 3-2-81; Am. Ord. 83-005, passed 6-23-83)
§ 31.042 PAYMENT OF WATER BILLS.
   (A)   Payment. Water bills may be paid without penalty at the collecting
agencies designated by the city on or before the last day for payment, but not
afterwards. All monies so collected shall be deposited in an account designated
by the City Treasurer on the next banking business day after receipt by the
agents on account of water bills. The agents shall give to the City Treasurer
all duplicate paid water bills for which payment has been received, together
with a duplicate deposit slip for the full amount paid on account thereof on a
preceding banking business day. The agents shall be paid the sum as authorized
by Council resolution for each bill collected.
   (B)   Water bill collection agents. Bill may be paid at the following
locations.
      Minder's Rexall Drugs
      Ghannam Drugs
      Venoy Drugs, Inc.
      National Bank of Detroit
      Manufacturer's National Bank (Cherry Hill & Inkster)
      Garden City Catholic Credit Union
      First Federal Savings & Loan Association of Detroit
      Standard Federal Savings
(‘83 Code, § 31.47) (Ord. 80-008, passed 7-21-80; Am. Ord. 81-008, passed 3-21-
81)
§ 31.043 DEEMED CONTRACT.
   The banks and collection agents designated in §§
31.041 and
31.042, respectively, shall receive the payment of taxes and water bills
respectively for the city, as set forth in §§
31.041 through 31.044, and shall comply with the terms thereof, as though a
formal contract had been entered into between the banks and the city.
(‘83 Code, § 31.48)
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICES
§ 31.055 DIRECTOR.
    The Department of Public Works shall be headed by the Director. They shall
be responsible for all matters except those dealing with engineering, relative
to the construction, management, maintenance and operation of all physical
properties of the city, except as provided elsewhere in this code.
(‘83 Code, § 31.60) (Am. Ord. 21-001, passed 1-25-21)
Cross-reference:
   Department of Public Works,  see Charter, Sec.
4.06
§ 31.056 FUNCTION OF DEPARTMENT.
   (A)    The Department of Public Works shall have the following specific
functions.
      (1)   It shall have charge of the operation and maintenance of the city
sewage system.
      (2)   It shall have charge of the maintenance of all improved and
unimproved street surfaces, the cleaning of improved streets, the removal of
snow, the maintenance of sidewalks, and the operation of the garbage and
rubbish collection and disposal service of the city.
      (3)   It shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of city
water mains and connections and other facilities pertaining to the water
distribution system. It shall have charge of the pumping of water into and
through the city water distribution system.
      (4)   It shall have charge of the control and regulation of the municipal
parking lots and structures.
      (5)   It shall be responsible for the control and regulation of the
planting of trees, and the planning, development, maintenance, management, and
operation of all boulevards. The Department shall care for all shade trees
located on lands devoted to public purposes and shall control all lawn
extensions between sidewalks and street curbs.
      (6)   Maintenance of parks system facilities and city buildings.
(‘83 Code, § 31.61)
      (7)   The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for the
issuance of all permits and the inspection of all work involved in the
construction of all sewer and water lines, sewer and water services, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, curb cuts, street openings, and commercial building grades.
This Department shall also be responsible for planning in connection with such
changes or improvements to the physical properties of the city as are
consistent with and necessary to the future growth and development of the city.
This Department shall perform such other engineering services as the various
departments of the city may require. (‘83 Code, § 31.62)
(Am. Ord. 21-001, passed 1-25-21)
DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 31.070 DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION.
   (A)   The Department of Parks and Recreation shall be headed by the Director
of Parks and Recreation. He shall be responsible for all matters relating to a
recreation program and a system of parks, and accompanying activities or
functions. (‘83 Code, § 31.65)
   (B)   The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be appointed by the City
Manager, and shall be the executive officer in charge of the use and
maintenance of parks, properties, and buildings owned by the city and assigned
to the Department of Parks and Recreation. The Director is responsible for the
recreation programs in buildings or on properties of other public or private
institutions that may be used by the city through rental, lease, or gifts. (‘83
Code, § 31.66)
§ 31.071 FUNCTION OF DEPARTMENT.
   The Department of Parks and Recreation shall have the following specific
functions.
   (A)   It shall be charged with the establishment and maintenance of a city
recreation program.
   (B)   It shall be charged with the use, maintenance and operation of a park
system.
   (C)   It shall be charged with beneficial community services for leisure
time activities when and where public or private agencies cannot handle the
responsibility.
(‘83 Code, § 31.67)
GENERAL CITY OFFICES
§ 31.095 HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The functions of the City Department of Health shall be performed by
the Wayne County Health Department. The city shall enter into such agreements
with the Wayne County Health Department as may be necessary to insure the
fulfillment of the functions of the City Health Department, as hereinafter set
forth, and to insure that the county may be properly compensated for the
services of its employees in fulfilling such functions. The Director of the
Wayne County Health Department shall be deemed the City Health Officer and
shall have all powers accorded the office by the statutes of the state, the
Charter of the city, or provisions of this code relating to the public health.
   (B)   The Health Department shall be responsible for the adoption of such
measures as will prevent the spread of, or aid in the prevention of
communicable diseases. The Director of the Wayne County Department of Health,
or his duly authorized representative, shall exercise the power of quarantine
and detention within the city.
   (C)   The Health Department shall be responsible for the inspection and
supervision of the preparation, manufacture, storage, and sale of all articles
and commodities intended for human consumption, and for the regulation of all
matters pertaining to sanitary conditions affecting the public health.
(‘83 Code, § 31.75)
§ 31.096 CITY ATTORNEY.
   (A)   The City Attorney shall be charged with the performance of all legal
services of the city, including those of legal advisor to the Council, the City
Manager, and to all departments and officers of the city, and the prosecution
of all cases arising out of the violation of the provisions of the city
ordinances. He shall also represent the city in matters in which the city is
interested, coming before any court or tribunal, and shall perform such other
duties as may be required by the Council. He shall be charged with the
responsibility for calling to the attention of the City Council all matters of
law affecting the city.
   (B)   The compensation set by the Council for the Attorney for the normal
duties of the office shall be deemed a salary for budgetary purposes. Extra
compensation may be paid to the Attorney for extraordinary services upon
approval by the Council.
(‘83 Code, § 31.76)
§ 31.097 BUILDINGS DIVISION.
   Sections §§
31.040 through
31.043 shall be enforced by the Chief Building Official. He shall be
responsible for the issuance of all permits and the inspection of all work done
under the provisions of the Electrical, Plumbing, Mechanical and Building Codes
of the city and the safety inspection of all premises, including structures
thereon, and the enforcement of zoning and housing regulations of the city.
(‘83 Code, § 31.52)
Cross-reference:
   Building Codes, see
Ch. 151
CHAPTER 32: ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY AND PROCEDURE
Section
   
32.01   Department heads
   
32.02   Ordinance Enforcement Officer
   
32.03   Vacancies; new practices
   
32.04   Delegation of duties
   
32.05   Reports
   
32.06   Public records
   
32.07   Payment of monies
   
32.08   Approval of legal documents
   
32.09   Bonds
   
32.10   Salaries and positions of employment
   
32.11   Insurance for city-owned vehicles
   
32.12   Compliance with Community Development Act
§ 32.01 DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   All department heads are responsible to the City Manager for the effective
administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned to
them. All department heads or their designated representatives charged with the
enforcement of any provisions of this code shall be permitted to issue a
“citation,” i.e., a complaint or notice to any alleged violator upon which he
shall record an occurrence involving one or more violations of this code by the
person cited, demanding the violator to appear in court within a reasonable
time to answer the alleged violation contained in the citation. This section is
not to be construed as granting the power to arrest, where that power is not
otherwise authorized.
(‘83 Code, § 32.01) (Ord. 73-016, passed 10-15-73)
§ 32.02 ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   The position of Ordinance Enforcement Officer, under the supervision of the
Police Chief, is for the purpose of a more selective and effective enforcement
of nuisance, general building, public service, and business licensing ordinance
provisions. The officer, if qualified and authorized by his supervisor, may
carry a sidearm. He shall, in his enforcement duties be permitted to issue a
“citation,” i.e., a complaint or notice, to any alleged violator, a complaint
of notice, upon which he shall record any occurrence involving one or more
violations of this code by the person cited, demanding the violator to appear
in court within a reasonable time to answer the alleged violation contained in
the citation. The permission herein granted shall not be construed as granting
the officer the power to arrest.
(‘83 Code, § 32.02) (Ord. 77-021, passed 11-7-77)
§ 32.03 VACANCIES; NEW PRACTICES.
   In case of a vacancy in office or during the absence of any department head,
the City Manager may designate an interim acting head, but any interim
appointment shall be terminated if thereafter disapproved by the City Council.
All department heads shall keep informed as to the latest practices in their
particular field and shall inaugurate, with the approval of the City Manager,
such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public.
(‘83 Code, § 32.03)
§ 32.04 DELEGATION OF DUTIES.
   The Council may direct any department, division, or bureau to perform the
work for any other department, division, or bureau, or may delegate to any
officer or employee any duties other than those established for the department,
division, or bureau to which he may be assigned.
(‘83 Code, § 32.04)
§ 32.05 REPORTS.
   Reports of the activities of each department shall be made to the City
Manager as requested. A summary of all such reports shall be made by the City
Manager and submitted to the Council. Each department head shall establish a
system of records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information
necessary for proper control of departmental activities, and to form a basis
for the periodic reports to the City Manager. The City Manager shall submit a
written report to the Council as soon as possible after the close of each
month, showing the operation and expenditures of each department for the
preceding month. He shall keep the Council fully advised at all times as to the
financial condition and needs of the city.
(‘83 Code, § 32.05)
§ 32.06 PUBLIC RECORDS.
   Each department head shall be held responsible for the preservation of all
public records under his jurisdiction, and shall provide a system of filing and
indexing the same. No public records, reports, correspondence, or other data
relative to the business of any department shall be destroyed or removed
permanently from the files without the knowledge and approval of the department
head.
(‘83 Code, § 32.06)
§ 32.07 PAYMENT OF MONIES.
   All monies belonging to the city shall be paid out as authorized by the
Charter or action of the Council by checks drawn by the Clerk-Treasurer and
countersigned by the Mayor.
(‘83 Code, § 32.07)
§ 32.08 APPROVAL OF LEGAL DOCUMENTS.
   The Mayor shall sign, the City Clerk shall attest to, and the City Attorney
shall approve as to form, all legal instruments requiring the assent of the
city, unless otherwise provided for by law, the Charter, ordinance, or the
provisions of this Code.
(‘83 Code, § 32.08)
§ 32.09 BONDS.
   Surety bonds, conditioned as required by Sec. 13.05 of the Charter, shall be
filed by the following officers of the city in not less than the amounts
indicated: Clerk-Treasurer, $50,000; Deputy Treasurer, $25,000; Deputy Clerk,
$10,000. All other officers of the city and employees (except the Mayor and
Council members) shall file a blanket bond of $2,500.
(‘83 Code, § 32.09)
§ 32.10 SALARIES AND POSITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT.
   Salaries and positions of employment are as established by Council. All past
ordinances in effect as of the time this code was adopted dealing with and
pertaining to salaries and positions of employment shall be saved and
incorporated by reference as a part of this code.
(‘83 Code, § 32.14)
§ 32.11 INSURANCE FOR CITY-OWNED VEHICLES.
   The fleet insurance coverage provided for city owned vehicles shall be in
the following minimum amounts.
   $100,000 - Personal injury - each person.
   $250,000 - Personal injury - each accident.
   $100,000 - Property damage.
(‘83 Code, § 32.15) (Ord. 80-002A, passed 2-18-80)
§ 32.12 COMPLIANCE WITH COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ACT.
   It is determined, that in order to implement and facilitate the effectuation
of the community development program which has been approved, certain official
action must be taken by this body with reference to certain assurances and
certifications made by the city as to be carried out by the administrative
officer, and, accordingly, this body pledges and ordains that the City Manager,
as the chief administrative officer of the city, shall be responsible for the
city's compliance with the Community Development Act in that he shall do the
following.
   (A)   Comply with the provisions of Titles VI and VIII of the Civil Rights
Act of 1968 and any regulations providing for equal opportunity in housing.
   (B)   Provide citizens with adequate information, and opportunity to
participate and be heard on the community development needs and programs.
   (C)   Carry out all of the regulations under the Uniform Relocation
Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act.
   (D)   Provide access to and right of federal officials to examine all
records, books, papers, or documents pertaining to the grant.
   (E)   Comply with the provisions of the Hatch Act.
   (F)   Comply with provisions of E.O. 11296 relating to evaluation of flood
hazards.
   (G)   Consent to assume under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969,
as such provisions apply to the Community Development Grant, the status of a
federal official, and consent to accept jurisdiction of federal courts to
enforce his responsibilities.
(‘83 Code, § 32.20) (Ord. 75-006, passed 4-14-75)
CHAPTER 33: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Planning Commission
   
33.001   Planning Commission
   
33.002   Statutory authority
   
33.003   Powers and duties
   
33.004   Procedures
Library Fund
   
33.017   Library fund
Historical Commission
   
33.030   Membership
   
33.031   Officers; compensation
   
33.032   Duties
Parks and Recreation Commission
   
33.045   Membership; term; compensation
   
33.046   Duties
   
33.047   Meetings
   
33.048   Acquisition of property
Housing Commission
   
33.075   Establishment; membership
   
33.076   Powers and duties
   
33.077   Officers; procedure
   
33.078   Funding and reimbursement
Board of Tax Review
   
33.105   Board of Review; relief of payments
   
33.106   Membership; terms
   
33.107   Compensation
   
33.108   Appeals
Human Relations Commission
   
33.120   Purpose
   
33.121   Organization; membership
   
33.122   Powers
Commission on Aging
   
33.135   Establishment; purpose
   
33.136   Definitions
   
33.137   Membership; terms; compensation
   
33.138   Organization
   
33.139   Powers and duties
Elected Officials' Compensation Commission
   
33.150   Establishment; membership
   
33.151   Duties
   
33.152   Meetings
Downtown Development Authority
   
33.165   Creation; purpose
   
33.166   Definitions
   
33.167   Board of Trustees
   
33.168   Powers of Authority
   
33.169   Director; bond
   
33.170   Fiscal year; budget
   
33.171   Downtown district
   
33.172   Council determination
   
33.173   Approval; amendments
Entertainment and Arts Commission
   
33.185   Establishment; purpose
   
33.186   Definitions
   
33.187   Membership; terms; compensation
   
33.188   Powers and duties
Garden City Citizen Hall of Fame Commission
   
33.205   Establishment; purpose
   
33.225   Commission composition; terms; compensation; organizational meeting
   
33.235   Powers and duties
   
33.245   Reports
   
33.255   Budgeting and financial accounting
   
33.265   Meetings, minutes, and documents
Board of Ethics
   
33.300   Created; purpose
   
33.301   Definitions
   
33.302   Membership; quorum; confidentiality
   
33.303   Member recusal
   
33.304   Meeting procedures
   
33.305   Powers
   
33.306   Confidentiality
   
33.307   Prohibited conduct
   
33.308   Citizen requests and process
   
33.309   Due process
   
33.310   Written advisory opinions and penalties
   
33.311   Miscellaneous provisions
Statutory reference:
   Authority to create a civil service commission for fire and police
department, see M.C.L.A. §§ 38.501 et seq.
   Recreating, appointing, promotion, and other aspects of police and fire
personnel policies, see Public Act 78 of 1955, being M.C.L.A. §§ 38.501 et seq.
Cross-reference:
   Firefighters and police officers, see
Chapter 31
   Retirement System Board of Trustees, see Charter, Sec.
7.06
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 33.001 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   An ordinance to confirm the establishment under the Michigan Planning
Enabling Act, P.A. 33 of 2008, as amended of the Garden City Planning
Commission.
   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint seven members and may appoint up to nine
members to the Planning Commission, subject to the approval of the City Council
or as otherwise provided by state law. The members’ terms of office shall be
three years, or until their successors take office, except that the respective
terms of two of the members shall be for one year, and one for two years.
(‘83 Code, § 33.001)
   (B)   Members of the Planning Commission may, after public hearing, be
removed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council or as
otherwise provided by state law, for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance
in office.
(‘83 Code, § 33.002)
   (C)   Vacancies in the Planning Commission shall be filled in the same
manner as original appointments.
(‘83 Code, § 33.003)
(Ord. 75-009, passed 12-22-75; Am. Ord. 11-009, passed 7-25-11)
§ 33.002 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   The Planning Commission is hereby established with the powers, duties, and
limitations provided by the State Acts, the Michigan Planning Enabling Act,
P.A. 33 of 2008, as amended and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, P.A. 110 of
2006, as amended.
(‘83 Code, § 33.006) (Am. Ord. 11-009, passed 7-25-11)
§ 33.003 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys
and studies of present conditions and future growth of the city with due regard
to its relation to neighboring territory, designed for the construction of a
master plan for physical development of the city. The plan shall be made with
the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted, and
harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance
with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order,
convenience, prosperity, and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and
economy in the process of development, including, among other things, adequate
provision for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers,
adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of healthful and convenient
distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement,
wise and efficient expenditure of public funds, and the adequate provision of
public utilities and other public requirements.
(‘83 Code, § 33.004)
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall make an annual written report to City
Council concerning its operations and the status of planning activities,
including recommendations regarding actions related to planning and
development.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall further review and make recommendations
as assigned by the Zoning Ordinance and the State Planning and Zoning Enabling
Acts, P.A. 33 of 2008, as amended and P.A. 110 of 2006, as amended.
(Ord. 11-009, passed 7-25-11)
§ 33.004 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall elect its Chairperson from among its
membership and shall create and fill such other of its offices as it may
determine. The term of Chairperson shall be one year, with eligibility for
reelection.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall hold at least four regular meetings each
year as required by P.A. 33 of 2008, as amended.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall adopt rules (by-laws) in compliance with
the state act for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its
resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which shall be public
records.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall be the recording secretary of the Commission. The
Clerk may designate a deputy clerk from his office to act in his behalf.
(‘83 Code, § 33.005) (Am. Ord. 11-009, passed 7-25-11)
LIBRARY FUND
§ 33.017 LIBRARY FUND.
   A library fund is established pursuant to Public Act 164 of 1877, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. 397.201 et seq. All monies received for the Public
Library shall be deposited to the credit of the library fund, kept separate and
apart from other monies of the city, and drawn upon by the proper officers of
the city.
(‘83 Code, § 33.013) (Ord. 75-011, passed 12-22-75; Am. Ord. 82-006, passed 1-
18-82)
HISTORICAL COMMISSION
§ 33.030 MEMBERSHIP.
   The City Historical Commission is continued. The Commission shall consist of
seven members, to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council for terms of three years each, and/or until their successors are
appointed and qualified. All members thereof shall be residents of the city,
and all shall commence on April 1 of the year of appointment.
(‘83 Code, § 33.020) (Ord. 74-001, passed 3-25-74)
§ 33.031 OFFICERS; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The Commission shall annually elect a Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson,
and a Secretary from among their number, and they shall adopt by-laws and
establish rules of their procedure and provide for a date of an annual
organizational meeting in January of each year. (‘83 Code, § 33.022)
   (B)   Members of the Historical Commission shall act without compensation,
except that they may be reimbursed for actual expenses by resolution of the
City Council. (‘83 Code, § 33.021)
§ 33.032 DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Historical Commission, within the means of
allotted funds provided by the City Council, to acquire ownership or control of
landmarks of the city, historical documents pertaining to matters of natural
history and local events, or any other matter which appears to the Commission
to be of sufficient interest or value for preservation by the city. The
Commission shall compile a history of the origin and growth of the city and the
territory where it is located, keep it currently up to date, and file a copy
thereof with the city library.
(‘83 Code, § 33.023)
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
§ 33.045 MEMBERSHIP; TERM; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The Parks and Recreation Commission for the city is continued. (‘83
Code, § 33.025)
   (B)   The Commission shall consist of nine electors of the city, who shall
be qualified by experience and shall have evidenced interest in the development
of parks and recreation services for public use. The Commissioners shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council or as
otherwise provided by state law, for a term of three years, with vacancies
occurring each year, except that for the first appointment, three members shall
be appointed for three years, three members for two years, three members for
one year. (‘83 Code, § 33.026)
   (C)   Members of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall act without
compensation, except they may be reimbursed for actual expenses by resolution
of the City Council.
(Ord. 75-008, passed 12-22-75)
§ 33.046 DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Commission to advise the Director of Parks and
Recreation as to reasonable needs of recreational facilities and activities in
which the city may properly participate.
(‘83 Code, § 33.027)
Cross-reference:
   Parks and Recreation, see
Ch. 93 
   Department of Parks and Recreation, see Charter, Sec.
4.07
§ 33.047 MEETINGS.
   The Commission shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations for the
conduct of business within its jurisdiction, and shall keep a record of all its
proceedings. Five members shall constitute a quorum. A vacancy in the
Commission shall occur when any member shall fail to be present at four
consecutive regular meetings, or 25% of the meetings in any fiscal year, unless
such absence shall be excused by the Commission and the reason therefor entered
in the proceedings.
(‘83 Code, § 33.028)
§ 33.048 ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY.
   The city shall have the power to acquire by purchase, gift, bequest, or
otherwise, and to improve, protect, and equip real property for the benefit of
the people of the city, and to organize park and recreational activities using
such properties and/or other public or private properties by consent of the
owners or directors.
(‘83 Code, § 33.029)
HOUSING COMMISSION
§ 33.075 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Pursuant to Public Act 18, Extra Session of 1933, being M.C.L.A. §
125.651 et seq., as amended, the Housing Commission is created. (‘83 Code, §
33.045)
   (B)   The Commission shall consist of five members to be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Council. City employees and/or officials other
than elected officials are eligible for appointment to the Commission. The term
of office of the members of the Commission shall be five years. Members of the
first Commission existing hereunder shall be appointed for the terms of one
year, two years, three years, four years and five years respectively, and
annually thereafter one member shall be appointed for the term of office of
five years. Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation and may
be removed from office by the appointing authority. Any vacancy in office shall
be filled by the appointing authority for the remainder of the unexpired term.
(‘83 Code, § 33.046)
§ 33.076 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Housing Commission shall have all the powers and duties vested or
permitted to be vested in housing commissions by Public Act 18, Extra Session
of 1933, being M.C.L.A. § 125.651 et seq., as amended, it being the intention
of this section to vest in the Housing Commission all powers and duties
permitted by law.
(‘83 Code, § 33.047)
§ 33.077 OFFICERS; PROCEDURES.
   The Commission shall meet at regular intervals, and the meetings shall be
public. It shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of
the proceedings. Three members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. A President and Vice-President shall be elected by the Commission.
The Mayor, with the approval of the Council, shall designate the Housing
Director, who shall serve as the administrative head and Secretary for the
Commission. The Commission may, from time to time, as necessary, employ
engineers, architects, consultants, or other employees. The Commission shall
prescribe the duties of all its officers and employees and may, with the
approval of the appointing authority, fix their compensation.
(‘83 Code, § 33.048)
§ 33.078 FUNDING AND REIMBURSEMENT.
   Funds for the operation of the Commission may be provided by the Council,
but the Commission shall as soon as possible reimburse the city for all monies
expended by it for the Commission from revenue received from the sale of bonds.
(‘83 Code, § 33.049)
BOARD OF TAX REVIEW
§ 33.105 BOARD OF REVIEW; RELIEF OF PAYMENT.
   The Board of Review may entertain petitions of taxpayers for temporary
relief from payment of real estate taxes where the petition is based upon a
demonstrated inability to pay. In the case of exemptions made to persons who,
in the opinion of the Assessor and Board of Review, are, by reason of poverty,
unable to contribute towards the public charges, the Assessor or Board of
Review shall require as a condition to the grant of temporary exemption, a lien
and agreement for reimbursement upon a form approved and provided by the City
Council, which lien shall assign to the city all of the real or personal
property of the beneficiary of the temporary exemption for the purpose of
reimbursement to the city of the amount of taxes as are temporarily relieved by
the action of the Board of Review. No lien and agreement for reimbursement
shall deprive the owner of the property to whom the temporary tax exemption is
granted of his or her right to freely occupy and use the property, but shall
give the city, in the event the ownership of the property is transferred to
another in any manner whatsoever, such an interest therein as will provide for
the payment to the city of an amount equal to all taxes which would have been
assessed and collected by the city against the property of the owner, had the
temporary exemption not been granted.
(‘83 Code, § 33.071) (Ord. 72-009, passed 6-5-72)
Cross-reference:
   Meetings and duties, see Board of Review, Charter, Sec.
7.06.
§ 33.106 MEMBERSHIP; TERM.
   Under the authority of M.C.L.A. § 211.28(2), the Michigan General Property
Tax Law, as amended (M.C.L.A. §§ 211.1 through 211.57), the Board of Review
shall consist of as many panels of three as the Mayor and Council should deem
necessary, to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council for terms of two years each, or until their successors are appointed
and qualified. All members thereof shall be residents and property owners of
the city, and all shall commence on January 1 of the year of appointment, which
shall be in odd-numbered years.
(‘83 Code, § 33.072) (Ord. 83-006, passed 6-20-83; Am. Ord. 93-015, passed 6-7-
93)
§ 33.107 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Board of Review will receive compensation as established, by
resolution, by the City Council.
(‘83 Code, § 33.073) (Ord. 83-006, passed 6-20-83)
§ 33.108 APPEALS.
   Under the authority granted in Public Act 539 of 1982, being M.C.L.A. 211.30
(5), a resident taxpayer may file his or her protest before the Board of Review
by letter without a personal appearance by the taxpayer or his or her agent.
(‘83 Code, § 33.074) (Ord. 83-006, passed 6-20-83)
HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
§ 33.120 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Human Relations Commission shall be to promote the
purpose of the Fair Housing Act, Public Act 112 of 1968, as amended, and to
secure for all individuals in the city freedom from discrimination in real
estate transactions because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
marital status, age, or handicap.
(‘83 Code, § 33.082) (Ord. 77-006, passed 4-4-77)
§ 33.121 ORGANIZATION; MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Pursuant to the City Charter, the Home Rule Act (M.C.L.A. Chapter
117), and the Fair Housing Act, the Human Relations Commission is established.
(‘83 Code, § 33.080)
   (B)   The Commission shall consist of five members, to be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The term of office of the members
of the Commission shall be for two years from date of appointment. Members
shall serve without compensation and may be removed for cause by the Mayor with
the approval of the City Council. Any vacancy shall be filled only for the
remainder of the unexpired term. (‘83 Code, § 33.081)
   (C)   The Commission shall elect its own Chairperson and may create and fill
such other of its offices as it may determine. The Commission shall hold
regular meetings. The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the
transactions of its business, and shall keep records of its transactions,
findings, and determinations; and to the extent consistent with the Fair
Housing Act, the records shall be public. The records and reports required by
the Commission shall conform as nearly as convenient to corresponding records
and reports required by the state commission and by federal law. An annual
report shall be filed with the City Council as to the Commission's activities.
(‘83 Code, § 33.084)
(Ord. 77-006, passed 4-4-77)
§ 33.122 POWERS.
   The Commission shall have those powers within its jurisdiction which the
state commission has under Chapter IV of the Fair Housing Act, except that it
shall not issue cease and desist orders without written approval of the state
commission upon filing of the transcript of proceedings, findings of fact, and
recommendations. It may, however, conciliate claims of unfair housing
practices. Written notice of the extent of its powers shall be given to a
claimant prior to accepting any claim. Review or enforcement of a final order
shall be the same as that of the state commission.
(‘83 Code, § 33.083) (Ord. 77-006, passed 4-4-77)
COMMISSION ON AGING
§ 33.135 ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   A Commission on Aging is created, whose purpose shall be to promote the
advancement and enrichment of the lives of senior citizens who reside in the
city in every area of life.
(‘83 Code, § 33.090) (Ord. 77-019, passed 10-17-77; Am. Ord. 86-06, passed 5-
19-86)
§ 33.136 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHAIRPERSON. The Chairperson of the Commission on Aging.
   COMMISSION. The Commission on Aging of the city.
   SECRETARY. The Secretary of the Commission on Aging.
(‘83 Code, § 33.091) (Ord. 77-019, passed 10-17-77; Am. Ord. 86-06, passed 5-
19-86)
§ 33.137 MEMBERSHIP; TERMS; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The Commission shall consist of nine members appointed by the Mayor,
subject to Council approval. Of the nine members appointed, at least four shall
be 60 years of age or older. At least one member of each officially recognized
senior citizen's club shall be so appointed. Four members of the Commission
shall be appointed at large from the entire community. Members of the
Commission may be removed for cause by the Mayor subject to the approval of the
City Council. (‘83 Code, § 33.092)
   (B)   The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. The
members of the Commission shall be appointed for terms of three years each;
however, of the first members appointed, three shall be appointed for terms of
one year each, three for a term of two years each, and three for a term of
three years each. Any vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original
appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term. (‘83 Code, § 33.093)
(Ord. 77-019, passed 10-17-77; Am. Ord. 86-06, passed 5-19-86)
§ 33.138 ORGANIZATION.
   The Commission members shall, immediately after their appointment, meet and
organize by electing one of their members as Chairperson and one as Secretary,
and by electing such other officers as they may deem necessary. The Commission
shall meet not less than once each month for the transaction of its business.
(‘83 Code, § 33.094) (Ord. 77-019, passed 10-17-77)
§ 33.139 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   General. The powers and duties of the Commission, which shall be
exercised and performed as herein provided and in conformity with the Charter
and the general ordinances of the city, shall be as follows.
      (1)   To confer with and advise the Mayor and the Council on programs and
services, including state, federal, county, and municipal programs which are
beneficial to the aging.
      (2)   To develop, compile, and disseminate information to the Council as
necessary for the implementation of programs and services to be recommended by
the Commission.
      (3)   To periodically survey conditions within the city to determine
whether or not the community affords those services and facilities which are
conducive to a healthy and meaningful existence for the aged.
      (4)   To recommend to the Council the possible creation of rewarding
social and recreational programs for the aged in an enriched community
environment.
      (5)   To inform and advise the Council of fraudulent, unethical, or
unfair business practices to which the aged might become prey, and make
recommendations to the Council of means to stop such practices.
      (6)   To recommend opportunities for the aged for creative self-
expression.
      (7)   To perform any other duties as suggested or approved by the City
Council.
(‘83 Code, § 33.095)
   (B)   Rules and regulations. The Commission shall make such rules as are
necessary to carry out the Commission's business. (‘83 Code, § 33.097)
(Ord. 77-019, passed 10-17-77)
ELECTED OFFICIALS' COMPENSATION COMMISSION
§ 33.150 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   In accordance with Public Act 8 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. 117.5c, an
Elected Officials' Compensation Commission is created. (‘83 Code, § 33.100)
   (B)   The Commission shall consist of seven members, who are registered
electors of the city, appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by a
majority of the members elected and serving in the City Council. The terms of
office shall be seven years; however, of the first members appointed, one each
shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four, five, six and seven
years. The first members shall be appointed within 30 days after January 15,
1979. Thereafter, members shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of
appointment. After the initial appointments, all terms shall begin on October 1
and end on September 30. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the
unexpired term. No member or employee of the legislative, judicial, or
executive branch of any level of government, or members of the immediate family
of such member or employee, shall be eligible to be a member of the Commission.
(‘83 Code, § 33.101)
(Ord. 77-019, passed 10-17-77)
§ 33.151 DUTIES.
   The Commission shall determine the salaries of the Mayor and the members of
the City Council, which determination shall be such salaries unless the Mayor
and the City Council, by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members
elected to and serving on the City Council, reject them. The determination of
the Commission shall be effective 30 days following their filing with the City
Clerk, unless rejected by the City Council. In case of rejection, the existing
salary shall prevail.
(‘83 Code, § 33.102) (Ord. 77-019, passed 10-17-77)
§ 33.152 MEETINGS.
   The Commission shall meet for not more than 15 session days in every odd-
numbered year, and shall make its determination within 45 calendar days of its
first meeting. A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum for conducting the business of the Commission. The Commission shall not
take action or make determinations without a concurrence of a majority of the
members appointed and serving on the Commission. The Commission shall elect a
Chairperson from among its members. SESSION DAYS shall be any calendar day on
which the Commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of the
Commission shall receive no compensation.
(‘83 Code, § 33.103) (Ord. 77-019, passed 10-17-77)
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
§ 33.165 CREATION; PURPOSE.
   (A)   There is created pursuant to Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.1651 et seq., a downtown development authority. The Authority shall be a
public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers under the
title of “Garden City Downtown Development Authority.” The Authority may adopt
a seal, may sue and be sued in any court for this state, and shall possess all
of the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as
provided by this subchapter and Public Act 197. The enumeration of a power in
this subchapter or in Public Act 197 shall not be construed as a limitation
upon the general powers of the Authority. (‘83 Code, § 33.116)
   (B)   The City Council hereby determines that it is necessary for the best
interest of the city to halt property value deterioration and increase property
tax valuation where possible in the business district of the city, to eliminate
the causes of that deterioration, and to promote economic growth by
establishing a downtown development authority pursuant to Act 197. (‘83 Code, §
33.011)
(Ord. 81-003, passed 2-18-81)
§ 33.166 DEFINITIONS.
   The terms used in this subchapter shall have the same meaning as given to
them in Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 et seq., or as
hereinafter in this section provided unless the context clearly indicates to
the contrary.
   AUTHORITY. The Garden City Downtown Development Authority created by this
subchapter.
   ACT 197. Public Act 197 of 1975 as now in effect or hereafter amended, being
M.C.L.A. 125.1651 et seq. and MSA 5.3010 (1) et seq.
   BOARD or BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The Board of Trustees of the Authority, the
governing body of the Authority.
   CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER. The Mayor of the city.
   DOWNTOWN DISTRICT. The downtown district designated by this subchapter as
now existing or hereafter amended.
(‘83 Code, § 33.110) (Ord. 81-003, passed 2-18-81)
§ 33.167 BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   (A)   The Authority shall be under the supervision and control of a Board of
Trustees consisting of the Chief Executive Officer of the city and  10  members
as provided by Act 197 of 1975,  as amended, being M.C.L.A. 125.1654. The
members shall be appointed by the Chief Executive Officer subject to approval
by the Council.
   (B)    Six members shall be persons having an interest in property located
in the downtown district. Not less than one of the members shall be a resident
of the downtown district, if the downtown district has 100 or more persons
residing within it. Of the members first appointed, three each shall be
appointed for one year, two years, three years and four years. A member shall
hold office until the member’s successor is appointed. Thereafter, each member
shall serve a term of four years. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be
made by the Chief Executive Officer subject to the approval of Council, for the
unexpired term only.
   (C)   Members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall be
reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses.
   (D)   The Chairperson of the Board shall be elected by the Board.
   (E)   The business which the Board may perform shall be conducted at a
public meeting of the Board held in compliance with Public Act 267 of 1976,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275. The Board shall adopt rules consistent
with the act governing its procedure and the holding of regular meetings,
subject to the approval of the governing body.
   (F)   Pursuant to notice and after having been given an opportunity to be
heard, a member of the Board may be removed for cause by the governing body.
Removal of a member is subject to review by the circuit court.
   (G)   Records of the authority shall be available to the public in
compliance with Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 through
15.246.
(‘83 Code, § 33.112) (Ord. 81-003, passed 2-18-81 ; Am. Ord. 06-010, passed 5-
22-06 )
§ 33.168 POWERS OF AUTHORITY.
   Except as specifically otherwise provided in this subchapter, the Authority
shall have all powers provided by law subject to the limitations improved by
law and herein. The Authority shall have the power to levy ad valorem taxes on
the real and tangible personal property not exempt by law, and as finally
equalized in the downtown district at the rate of not more than two mills each
year if the City Council annually approves the levy thereof by the Authority.
(‘83 Code, § 33.113) (Ord. 81-003, passed 2-18-81)
§ 33.169 DIRECTOR; BOND.
   If a Director is employed as authorized by Public Act 197 of 1975, being
M.C.L.A. 125.1655(1), he shall post bond in the penal sum of $5,000 as required
by that section of the statutes, payable to the Authority for use and benefit
of the Authority, and filed with the City Clerk.
(‘83 Code, § 33.114) (Ord. 81-003, passed 2-18-81)
§ 33.170 FISCAL YEAR; BUDGET.
   (A)   The fiscal year of the Authority shall begin on July 1 of each year
and end on June 30 of the following year, or such other fiscal year as may
hereafter be adopted by the city.
   (B)   The Board shall annually prepare a budget and shall submit it to the
Council on the same date that the proposed budget for the city is required by
the City Charter to be submitted to the Council. The Board shall not finally
adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the
City Council. The Board may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection
with the operation of any improvements which have been financed by revenue
bonds where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing the revenue bonds.
   (C)   The Authority shall submit financial reports to the City Council
monthly. All expense items shall be publicized monthly. The Authority shall be
audited annually by the same independent auditors auditing the city and copies
of the audit report shall be filed with the Council.
(‘83 Code, § 33.115) (Ord. 81-003, passed 2-18-81)
§ 33.171 DOWNTOWN DISTRICT.
   The Downtown District in which the Authority shall exercise its powers as
provided by Act 197 shall consist of the following described territory in the
city, subject to such changes as may hereinafter be made pursuant to this
subchapter and Act 197.
   An area in the City of Garden City, Michigan, within the boundaries
described as follows:
   North of Ford Road (to 295 feet), east of Henry Ruff, south of Beechwood,
and west of Brandt:
      Lots 126 through 129 of Folker's Full Acre Farms No. 1 Subdivision,
      Lots 270 through 277 of Folker's Full Acre Farms No. 2 Subdivision.
   North of Ford Road, east of Brandt, south of Beechwood and west of
Middlebelt Road:
      Lots 130 through 147 of Folker's Full Acre Farms No. 1 Subdivision,
      All of I.L. Blalack's Denzer Subdivision.
   North of Beechwood, east of Brandt (to 349.04 feet), south of Elmwood and
west of Middlebelt Road:
      Lots 162a through 166(a, b) of Folker's Full Acre Farms No. 1
Subdivision,
      Lots 187 (a1, b) through 191 (a1) of Folker's Full Acre Farms No. 1
Subdivision, excluding Lot 191 (b1, b2, b3, b4).
   North of Elmwood, east of Brandt, south of Balmoral and west of Middlebelt
Road:
      Lots 1a through 9a, 84, 85, 86a of Stellar Subdivision including the 20
ft. alley located 100 feet west of Middlebelt Road.
   North of Balmoral, east of Brandt (south 100.51 feet to 195 feet and rest to
175 feet), south of Maplewood, and west of Middlebelt Road:
      Acreage E8b1, E9d1a, E9a1a, E9d1b, Lots 87a, 88a, 89a, 90a1 of Stellar
Subdivision including 25.32 feet of alley located 100 feet west of Middlebelt
Road.
   North of Ford Road, east of Middlebelt Road, south of Maplewood and west of
Central:
      Lots 1a and 28a1 of Assessor's Folker's Little Farms Subdivision,
(including adjacent alley),
      Lots 30 through 36 of McFarlane Brothers Ford Road Subdivision No. 1,
      Lots 8 through 29 of McFarlane Brothers Ford Road Subdivision (including
20 foot alley adjacent to north).
   North of Ford Road, east of Central, south of Krauter and west of Garden:
      Lots 523 through 537 and 580 through 599 of I.L. Blalack's Garden City
Addition Subdivision.
   North of John Hauk, east of Middlebelt, south of Ford Road and west of
Garden:
      Lots 1a through 26a of Folker's Garden City Acres Subdivision.
   North of John Hauk, east of Brandt, south of Ford Road (to 268 feet except
Lots 18, 24 and 28 which are to 295 feet), and west of Brandt:
      Lots 18 through 37a of Folker's Full Acre Farms Subdivision.
   North of John Hauk, east of Henry Ruff, south of Ford Road (to 295 feet) and
west of Brandt:
      Lots 1 (a1, b1, b2) to 17 of Folker's Full Acre Farms Subdivision.
   North of Ford Road (to 130 feet), south of Krauter, east of Garden, west of
Harrison:
      Lots 556 through 579 of I.L. Blalack's Garden City Addition Subdivision,
      Lots 744 through 765 including the 20 foot alley of I.L. Blalack's Garden
City Addition No. 1 Subdivision.
   South of Ford Road, north of Pardo, east of Garden and west of Harrison:
      Lots 1 through 29 of Harry E. Kinyon's Little Estates Subdivision,
      Lots 1 through 8 of Ingersoll's Ford Road Subdivision,
      Acreage S1a,
      Lots 1 through 14 of Montgomery's Subdivision.
   East of Middlebelt Road (to 222.65 feet), north of Bock, south of John Hauk
and west of Garden:
      Lots 48 (a, b1), 49 (a, b1), 50a, 51a, 52a, 53a and 54a of Folker's
Garden City Acres Subdivision and all of Donnelly Court.
   West of Middlebelt Road (to 201.38 feet), north of Bock, south of John Hauk
and east of Brandt:
      Lots 94a through 99a of Folker's Full Acre Farms Subdivision.
(‘83 Code, § 33.117) (Ord. 81-003, passed 2-18-81)
§ 33.172 COUNCIL DETERMINATION.
   Based on a public hearing held on November 7, 1983 in compliance with the
provisions of Act 197, the City Council hereby determines that:
   (A)   The development plan constitutes a public purpose.
   (B)   The tax increment financing plan constitutes a public purpose.
   (C)   The development and tax increment financing plan meets the
requirements set forth in § 17(2) of Act 197.
   (D)   The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the
Authority has the ability to arrange the financing.
   (E)   The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes
of this Act.
   (F)   The land included within the development area to be acquired is
reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plan and of this Act in
an efficient and economically satisfactory manner.
   (G)   The development plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of
the city.
   (H)   Public services, including fire and police protection and utilities,
are adequate to service the project area.
   (I)   Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, and utilities are
reasonably necessary for the project.
(‘83 Code, § 33.118) (Ord. 83-011, passed 11-21-83)
§ 33.173 APPROVAL; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The development and tax increment financing plan for the Downtown
Development Authority district as recommended by the Authority and presented at
the public hearing on November 7, 1983 is hereby approved and adopted, subject
to modifications hereafter set forth in division (B) of this section. (‘83
Code, § 33.119)
   (B)   The Development and Tax Increment Financing Plan for the Downtown
Development Authority shall extend through the earlier of December 31, 2026 or
the completion of the projects described in the development plan. (‘83 Code, §
33.120)
   (C)   Section 3 of the Tax Increment Financing Plan contained in the Second
Amended and Restated Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan of the
Garden City Downtown Development Authority dated November 2006 is hereby
amended to read as follows:
      3.   Maximum Amount of Bonded Indebtedness to be Incurred.
   The DDA is currently repaying bonds issued to finance the Ford Road
streetscape. Those bonds are due to be retired in 2019, as reflected in Table
4. Other than the streetscape bonds, at this time the DDA has no plans to incur
any bonded indebtedness to finance the improvement program. Most improvements
will be implemented on a "pay-as-you-go" basis as tax increment revenues are
transmitted to the DDA, or as may be accumulated over more than one year, and
held in reserve to allocate for projects.
   The DDA may obtain a load to fund purchase of the library site, depending
upon the favorability of terms, availability of other funds, and its decision
on whether to purchase the site.
         Table 2
         Applicable Millage Summary
Taxing Jurisdictiona Projected Captured Millage Rate (2006 Rates)b
Taxing Jurisdictiona                Projected Captured Millage Rate (2006
                                    Rates)b
City of Garden City                 16.5218
Schoolcraft Community College       1.7967
Jail                                0.9381
HCMA: Huron-Clinton Metro Authority 0.2146
WCTA                                0.5980
Wayne County                        6.6380
Wayne County Parks                  0.2459
Total Applicable Millage            26.9531
         Notes:
         a.   Garden City Schools, State Education Tax and Intermediate Schools
are not included because the tax levies of these jurisdictions are exempt from
capture.
         b.   Rates are per $1,000.00 of taxable value.
   Under this TIF plan, the tax levy on the entire captured assessed valuation
is planned to be utilized by the DDA. The tax increment revenues will be
expended in the manner as set forth in this Plan. Estimates of the projected
growth in taxable value, the revenue captured by taxing jurisdictions and the
tax increment revenues to be received by the DDA are included in Tables 3 and
4.
   The DDA may enter into an agreement with the City of Garden City to share a
portion of the captured assessed value of the district, pursuant to MCL
125.1664(4). Commencing in fiscal year 2012 through the duration of this TIF
Plan, the DDA may exempt a portion of the City of Garden City's millage levy
directly proportionate to the millage captured for rubbish collection. Such
exemption from capture shall be in accordance with a written agreement between
the DDA and the City of Garden City pursuant to the authority of MCL 125.1664
(4).
(Ord. 83-011, passed 11-21-83; Am. Ord. 86-007, passed 8-18-86; Am Ord. 07-003,
passed 1-22-07; Am. Ord. 12-001, passed 4-2-12)
ENTERTAINMENT AND ARTS COMMISSION
§ 33.185 ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   An Entertainment and Arts Commission is created, whose purpose shall be to
enhance the quality of life in the city by supporting and encouraging creative
and cultural activities.
(‘83 Code, § 33.125) (Ord. 88-017, passed 5-16-88)
§ 33.186 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHAIRPERSON. The Chairperson of the Entertainment and Arts Commission.
   COMMISSION. The Entertainment and Arts Commission of the city.
   SECRETARY. The Secretary of the Entertainment and Arts Commission.
(‘83 Code, § 33.126) (Ord. 88-017, passed 5-16-88)
§ 33.187 COMPOSITION; TERMS; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The Entertainment and Arts Commission shall consist of seven members
appointed by the Mayor, subject to Council approval. Members of the Commission
may be removed for cause by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City
Council. (‘83 Code, § 33.127)
   (B)   The members of the Entertainment and Arts Commission shall serve
without compensation, except that they may be reimbursed for actual expenses by
resolution of the City Council. The members of the Commission shall be
appointed for terms of three years each; however, of the first members
appointed, three shall be appointed for terms of one year each, two for a term
of two years each, and two for a term of three years each. Any vacancies shall
be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the remainder of
the unexpired term. (‘83 Code, § 33.128)
   (C)   The Entertainment and Arts Commission members shall, immediately after
their appointment, meet and organize by electing one of their members as
Chairperson and one as Secretary, and by electing such other officers as they
may deem necessary. The Commission shall meet not less than once each calendar
quarter for the transaction of its business. (‘83 Code, § 33.129)
(Ord. 88-017, passed 5-16-88)
§ 33.188 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   General. The powers and duties of the Entertainment and Arts
Commission, which shall be exercised and performed as herein provided and in
conformity with the Charter and the general ordinances of the city, shall be as
follows.
      (1)   To confer with and advise the Mayor and Council on programs of a
creative nature and which are of cultural significance to the city.
      (2)   To recommend to the Council possible creation of rewarding cultural
and creative programs after assessing the current options and opportunities for
such programs.
      (3)   To seek out state, federal and county resources, as well as other
funding sources for a variety of creative and cultural activities.
      (4)   To assist other civic organizations in the promotion of cultural
activities and events and to serve as a forum for the representation of
potential entertainment and cultural concepts and programs of such
organizations.
      (5)   To assess the needs of the community for cultural activities other
than those currently available and to recommend strategies to Council in order
to meet those needs.
      (6)   To perform any other duties as suggested or approved by the City
Council.
(‘83 Code, § 33.130)
   (B)   Reports. The Entertainment and Arts Commission shall make an annual
report to the Mayor and the City Council, setting forth the character and
extent of the Commission's recommendations. Other reports may be submitted at
any time to the Council. (‘83 Code, § 33.131)
   (C)   Rules and regulations. The Entertainment and Arts Commission shall
make such rules and regulations as are necessary to carry out the Commission's
business. (‘83 Code, § 33.132)
(Ord. 88-017, passed 5-16-88)
GARDEN CITY CITIZEN HALL OF FAME COMMISSION
§ 33.205 ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   The Garden City Citizen Hall of Fame Commission is hereby established, whose
purpose shall be to establish and maintain a permanent citizen hall of fame
display at a location or facility to be approved by the City Council to honor,
praise, and recognize those citizens of the city that have performed great
deeds for the betterment and well-being of the city and its residents; to
encourage citizen volunteerism; to build a sense of community between
generations; and to preserve and record valuable stories, details, and events
of the city’s history for all generations of city residents.
(Ord. 10-017, passed 10-25-10)
§ 33.225 COMMISSION COMPOSITION; TERMS; COMPENSATION; ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING.
   (A)   The Garden City Citizen Hall of Fame Commission shall consist of seven
citizens and one City Council liaison appointed by the Mayor with confirmation
by the City Council. Members of the Commission may be removed for cause by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The City Council liaison may
participate in discussion on matters coming before the Commission but shall
have no voting privileges.
   (B)   The members of the Garden City Citizen Hall of Fame Commission shall
serve without compensation, except that they may be reimbursed for actual
expenses by resolution of the City Council. The members of the Commission shall
be appointed for terms of four years each; however, of the first members
appointed, four members shall be appointed for terms of four years each and
three members shall be appointed for terms of two years each. Any vacancies
shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
   (C)   The Garden City Citizen Hall of Fame Commission members shall,
immediately after their appointment, meet and organize by electing one of their
members as Chairperson and one as Secretary and by electing such other officers
as they may deem necessary. The Commission shall meet not less than once each
calendar quarter for the transaction of its business. The Chairperson of the
Commission shall provide a report to the City Council on the progress of the
Commission not later than 120 days after the Commission’s first meeting.
(Ord. 10-017, passed 10-25-10)
§ 33.235 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the Garden City Citizen Hall of Fame Commission,
which shall be exercised and performed as herein provided and in conformity
with the Charter and the general ordinances of the city, shall be as follows:
   (A)   To confer with, and advise, the City Council on programs and
activities supporting the honor, praise, and recognition of citizens of the
city that have performed great deeds for the betterment and well-being of the
city and its residents; encouraging citizen volunteerism; building a sense of
community between generations; and preserving and recording valuable stories,
details, and events of the city’s history for all generations of the city.
   (B)   To recommend to the City Council for approval the design,
construction, location, operation, maintenance, disposition, and methods of
funding a Citizen Hall of Fame display.
   (C)   To seek county, state, and federal resources, as well as other funding
sources, for the establishment of the Citizen Hall of Fame display and
programs.
   (D)   To coordinate with, and assist, other civic organizations in the
promotion of programs and activities to carry out the purpose and duties of the
Commission.
   (E)   To establish Commission bylaws and rules of procedure for the conduct
of its business.
   (F)   To establish policies and procedures for the nomination,
qualification, and election of citizens to the Garden City Citizen Hall of
Fame.
   (G)   To make such rules and regulations as are necessary to carry out the
Commission’s business to the extent that such rules and regulations are
consistent with law and the rules, regulations and policies of the city.
   (H)   To perform any other duties as may from time to time be assigned by
the City Council.
(Ord. 10-017, passed 10-25-10)
§ 33.245 REPORTS.
   The Garden City Citizen Hall of Fame Commission shall make an annual report
to the City Council setting forth the character and extent of the Commission’s
activities and accomplishments for the prior year. Other reports may be
submitted from time to time as required by the City Council or by the
Commission’s own initiative.
(Ord. 10-017, passed 10-25-10)
§ 33.255 BUDGETING AND FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING.
   The Garden City Citizen Hall of Fame Commission shall be subject to the same
laws, rules, regulations, and policies as other departments of the city
generally relating to budgeting and financial accounting.
(Ord. 10-017, passed 10-25-10)
§ 33.265 MEETINGS, MINUTES, AND DOCUMENTS.
   Meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public in accordance with
the Michigan Open Meetings Act, P.A. 267 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261
through 15.275, as amended. Official minutes of meetings, once approved by the
Commission, shall be filed with the Office of the City Clerk. All documents
prepared by, or in the possession of, the Commission shall be public documents
and shall be available for public inspection in accordance with the Michigan
Freedom of Information Act, P.A. 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 through
15.246, as amended. Documents belonging to the Commission shall be retained in
accordance with the city’s adopted record retention schedule.
(Ord. 10-017, passed 10-25-10)
BOARD OF ETHICS
§ 33.300 CREATED; PURPOSE.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Board to be known as the Board of Ethics.
   (B)   The purpose of the Board of Ethics is to issue written opinions
regarding ethical questions and to engage in activities which will promote
ethical behavior.
(Ord. 24-003, passed 5-20-24)
§ 33.301 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   CITY BOARD. Shall collectively include City Council, city advisory boards,
and city commissions.
   CITY OFFICIAL. A person elected or appointed serving in any capacity with
the City of Garden City, which is established by the City Charter or by City
Ordinance which involves the exercise of a public power, trust, or duty. The
term CITY OFFICIAL for this section does not include contracted or non-
contracted employees, but does include any other official of the city, whether
or not they receive compensation, including those who serve on City Council,
city advisory boards and commissions, and volunteers.
   COMPENSATION. Any money, property or thing of value or benefit received by
any person in return for services rendered.
   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Any information which is available to a city
official only because of the city official's status as an official of the City
of Garden City and is not a matter of public knowledge or available to the
public on request.
   CONFLICT OF INTEREST. A personal interest of such substance as to induce
action by a city official to promote the governmental decision or promote one's
own personal or business benefit in the course of one's duty as a city
official. Conflict of interest is either a personal interest or a duty or
loyalty to a third party that competes with or is averse to a city official's
duty to the public interest in the exercise of official duties or official
actions.
   DIRECT OR INDIRECT PARTICIPATION. The involvement through decision,
approval, disapproval, recommendation, preparation of any part of a purchase
request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard.
   DISINFORMATION. False or misleading information deliberately spread to
deceive a person or people.
   GOVERNMENT DECISION. A determination, action, vote, or disposition upon a
motion, proposal, recommendation, resolution, ordinance, or measure on which a
vote by the members of the City Council is required, and by which the City
Council formulates or effectuates public policy.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBERS. Mean domestic partner, spouse, child, stepchild,
sibling, parent, relative living in the same home.
   MALFEASANCE. The doing of a wrongful act.
   MISFEASANCE. The doing of a lawful act in a wrongful manner.
   NONFEASANCE. The failure to perform an act required by the duties of the
office.
   OFFICIAL DUTIES/ACTION. A decision, recommendation, approval, disapproval or
other action or failure to act which involves the use of discretionary
authority.
   PROCUREMENT. The buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, or otherwise
acquiring of any supplies, services, or construction. It also includes all
functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supply, service, or
construction, including description of requirement, selection, and solicitation
of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract
administration.
   SUBSTANTIAL GIFT. Any gift in an amount over $100.
   VENDOR. A vendor is a person, or business entity, that enters into a
contract with the City of Garden City.
(Ord. 24-003, passed 5-20-24)
§ 33.302 MEMBERSHIP; QUORUM; CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (A)    The Mayor shall appoint seven members to the Board of Ethics, subject
to the approval of the City Council, or as otherwise provided by state law.
Current city officials (appointed or elected) or employees shall not be
eligible for appointment to the Board. A person is eligible to be appointed to
the Board of Ethics if he/she meets all of the following criteria:
      (1)   Has not been convicted of a felony;
      (2)   Is a resident of the City of Garden City;
      (3)   Is at least 21 years of age; and
      (4)   Is not the spouse of, romantically involved with, or a third-degree
relative (great-grandparent, grandparent, parent, uncle, aunt, brother, sister,
child, grandchild, great-grandchild, nephew or niece) of a current member of
the City Council.
   (B)    Members of the Board may be removed by the Council for cause. Cause
shall be determined by violating one of the prohibited conduct concerns in §
33.307.
   (C)    Members shall be appointed for terms of four years, except that of
those first appointed, three shall serve for four years, three shall serve for
three years, and one shall serve for two years.
   (D)    Four members of the Board of Ethics shall constitute a quorum and the
affirmative vote of the majority of the Board (not the quorum) shall be
necessary for any action.
   (E)    The City Clerk, or designee, is the "Liaison" to the Board of Ethics
to assist the Board in carrying out its functions under this Board of Ethics
subchapter and any policies and procedures approved by the Board of Ethics. The
request for information held by city governmental offices may be directed to
the Garden City Police Chief, or designee, to research requested information
and forward their findings to the Ethics Board. The research shall be solely
for fact finding, not for opinion. Should a complaint rise to a greater level,
an outside special counsel may be contracted. SPECIAL COUNSEL need not be a
licensed attorney, but must be a person with demonstrated experience in
investigation.
(Ord. 24-003, passed 5-20-24)
§ 33.303 MEMBER RECUSAL.
   A member of the Board of Ethics shall recuse himself or herself from acting
on a case for reasons that include, but are not limited to, the following:
   (A)   The member is biased or prejudiced for or against:
      (1)   A person who has made a complaint;
      (2)   A person who is under investigation; or
      (3)   The attorney for a person who is under investigation.
   (B)   The member, based on objective and reasonable perceptions, has a
serious risk of actual bias impacting the due process rights of a city official
under investigation or a person who has filed an ethics complaint against a
city official.
   (C)   The member has personal knowledge of disputed evidentiary facts
concerning the proceeding.
   (D)   The member knows that he or she, individually or as a fiduciary, or
the member's spouse, parent, or child wherever residing, or any other person
who resides in the member's household, has more than a de minimis economic
interest in the subject matter in controversy that could be substantially
impacted by the proceeding.
   (E)   The member or the member's spouse or romantic partner, or a person
within the third degree of relationship to either of them, or the spouse of
such a person:
      (1)   Is a party to the proceeding, or an officer, director, or trustee
of a party;
      (2)   Is acting as a lawyer in the proceeding;
      (3)   Is known by the member to have a more than de minimis interest that
could be substantially affected by the proceeding; or
      (4)   Is to the member's knowledge likely to be a material witness in the
proceeding.
(Ord. 24-003, passed 5-20-24)
§ 33.304 MEETING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics shall elect its own officers, consisting of Chair,
Vice-Chair, and Secretary. The Secretary will keep the minutes of the meetings.
The Chair will preside over the meetings. The Vice-Chair will preside in the
absence of the Chair. The Secretary shall preside in the absence of the Chair
and Vice-Chair. The person presiding over the meeting shall be deemed the
Chair.
   (B)   The Executive Committee, consisting of the Chair, Vice-Chair, and
Secretary, shall exclusively evaluate requests and complaints directed to the
Ethics Board, in a non-public committee meeting. Any discussion of requests and
complaints by the Executive Committee shall remain confidential.
   (C)   The Board of Ethics shall meet as needed. Meetings may be called by
the Chair with 18 hours' notice. Meetings of the Board shall be subject to the
requirements and exemptions of the Michigan Open Meetings Act.
   (D)   Members of the Board shall notify the Chair or Vice-Chair
electronically if they are unable to attend any meetings.
   (E)   The liaison will prepare and distribute an agenda three days prior to
the next Board of Ethics meeting. The liaison may place additional items on the
agenda at the written request of the Chair or Vice-Chair and at least one other
Board member.
   (F)   The agenda will generally consist of the following:
      (1)   Call the meeting to order;
      (2)   Roll call;
      (3)   Approval of the prior meeting minutes;
      (4)   Unfinished business;
      (5)   New business;
      (6)   Comment from the public (up to three minutes);
      (7)   Comment from the city administration;
      (8)   Board Member comments; and
      (9)   Adjournment.
   (G)   The rules of parliamentary procedure, as contained in the most recent
edition of Robert's Rules of Order, shall govern the Board of Ethics where
applicable and as modified to accommodate small assembly, provided such rules
are not in conflict with:
      (1)   "Policies and Procedures" adopted by the Board of Ethics;
      (2)   The Charter or Ordinances of the City of Garden City; or
      (3)   State or federal law.
   (H)   The Minutes of the Board of Ethics meetings will be kept by the
Secretary. The minutes shall contain the date, time, and place of the meeting,
members present, members absent, and any decisions made.
   (I)   Board members may not engage in any political discussion or
campaigning of any kind, during the Board's public meetings, as it relates to
elected officials. No discussion shall take place regarding the Board members'
support or opposition to a current or past elected official as well as any
potential future candidates.
   (J)   Michigan Open Meetings Act provides that persons shall be permitted to
address a meeting of a public body under the rules established by the public
body, and also provides that the public body may limit the right to address the
public body to prescribed times.
      (1)   There shall be a three minute time limit for each public speaker.
      (2)   The Chair, Vice-Chair, and/or the Secretary shall be responsible
for keeping track of the public's allotted time of three minutes. The clock
will start upon the first words of the speaker and will not stop while the
speaker is recognized from the floor. The clock will continue to run until the
speaker is completed or their speaking time is exhausted.
      (3)   Any person wishing to address the Board shall provide their name,
city of residence, and shall address their comments to and through the Chair
when speaking. Only the person recognized by the Chair shall be allowed to
speak during the public comment portion of the agenda. Public comment is not a
time for questions and responses, of which the Chair shall make the final
decision.
      (4)   Everyone speaking before the Board should do so in a civil manner.
Speakers shall refrain from abusive or profane remarks, vulgar language,
disruptive outbursts, threats, racial slurs, or other conduct that interferes
with the orderly conduct of the business meeting. Personal attacks on Board
members, the administration, city staff, other speakers, or members of the
public will not be tolerated.
      (5)   The Chair shall call to order any person who is being disorderly by
speaking when not having been recognized by the Chair or is being disruptive to
the proceedings. If any person, after being called to order, continues to be
disorderly and disruptive to the meeting, the Chair may order that person be
removed from that meeting immediately.
(Ord. 24-003, passed 5-20-24)
§ 33.305 POWERS.
   The Board of Ethics shall have the power to:
   (A)   Receive complaints concerning alleged unethical conduct by a city
elected or appointed city official or board member, from any person or entity
(naming a contact person), and conduct hearings on those complaints.
   (B)   Complaints must include verifiable information about the requester
including name, address, phone number, and email address. Anonymous requests
will not be considered.
   (C)   Upon receipt of a request for advisory opinion or complaint,
preliminarily review the matter to determine if the Board has jurisdiction over
the matter and/or persons identified in the request or complaint.
   (D)   Requests concerning city employees covered by a collective bargaining
agreement, city employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement, and
city employees under any other contract will not be considered by the Board.
The Board of Ethics does not have jurisdiction over these requests. Elected
city officials are not considered city employees for purposes of this section.
   (E)   Upon receipt of an appropriate request for an advisory opinion, the
liaison may recommend to the Board of Ethics that the matter be addressed in a
manner provided by this subchapter. A request must be based on alleged
unethical conduct that has occurred. The Board of Ethics will not consider
requests that are speculative, hypothetical, or based on rumor.
   (F)   Act in compliance with §
33.308.
   (G)   Adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, applications for
reinstatement, and any other written instruments necessary or desirable under
these rules.
   (H)   Propose and monitor an ongoing program of education regarding ethical
issues and concerns.
   (I)   Report to the City Council, no less than annually, regarding such
matters as the Board deems appropriate, which may include the degree to which
the objectives of the Board is being achieved; the number and nature of
requests for advisory opinions and complaints; and the ultimate dispositions
thereof.
   (J)   Review this subchapter as needed to evaluate and propose to the City
Council any suggested changes.
(Ord. 24-003, passed 5-20-24)
§ 33.306 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   Public records, as contemplated by the Michigan Freedom of Information Act
(FOIA), M.C.L.A. 15.231 et seq., are generally subject to disclosure upon a
proper request. To the maximum extent permitted by FOIA and other applicable
laws, including this subchapter, each member of the Board of Ethics shall
maintain full confidentiality of any and all matters submitted to and/or
investigated by the Board of Ethics under this subchapter.
(Ord. 24-003, passed 5-20-24)
§ 33.307 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics shall weigh a variety of factors in considering
whether unethical conduct may have occurred with respect to a transaction or
set of facts in which a public official was involved, including all relevant
facts and circumstances and whether a city official engaged in conduct
prohibited under this section.
   (B)   No city official shall:
      (1)   Threaten or intimidate a member of a city board or commission, or a
city employee for the purpose of influencing the decision of the member or
employee.
      (2)   Use of official city time or the official city time of a
subordinate for personal business or personal use.
      (3)   Use of any city time or property for their own political benefit or
for the political benefit of any other person seeking elective office; however,
they may use property or facilities available to the general public on an equal
basis.
      (4)   Engage in political activity which interferes with the performance
of their usual duties.
      (5)   Promote themselves, their personal business, or any other business,
verbally, wearing of clothing, and/or promoting signage, while acting as a city
official, in which they could derive a personal benefit.
      (6)   Devote any city property or labor to their own personal use.
      (7)   Engage in or accept employment or render services for a private or
public interest when that employment or service is incompatible or in conflict
with the discharge of the official's official duties or when that employment
may tend to impair their independence of judgment or action in the performance
of official duties.
      (8)   Use or attempt to use their official position to unreasonably
secure, request, or grant, any privileges, exemptions, advantages, contracts,
or preferential treatment for themselves or others. The bestowing of any
special favor as part of their position that has a lasting benefit to those who
reside in or do business with the city, except in situations that would be
extended to any person.
      (9)   Be directly or indirectly involved in any payment, gratuity, or
offer of employment to be made by or on behalf of a subcontractor under a
contract to the prime contractor or higher tier subcontractor or any person
associated therewith, as an inducement for the award of a contract,
subcontract, or order.
      (10)   Solicit or accept directly or indirectly any gift that is intended
to influence or might reasonably be expected to influence a decision, nor shall
any city official accept gifts on such a frequent basis that a reasonable
person would believe that the city official was using public office for private
gain.
      (11)   Engage in disinformation.
      (12)   The intentional incitement of others against a potential decision
or a final government decision. As a member of a board, once a board makes a
final decision, members shall not incite others against the decision.
      (13)   Found guilty of a misdemeanor or felony.
      (14)   Violate the City Council approved Social Media Policy.
      (15)   Take part in misconduct in office including malfeasance (doing a
wrongful act); misfeasance (doing of a lawful act in a wrongful manner); and/or
nonfeasance (failure to perform an act required by the duties of the office).
      (16)   Violate the Contracts of Public Servants with Public Entities Act,
M.C.L.A. 15.324 et seq.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the above divisions (A) and (B), except as otherwise
provided by law or ordinance, the grant or receipt of the following does not
constitute unethical conduct:
      (1)   An opportunity, benefit, or service available to others on similar
conditions.
      (2)   A good or service in exchange for fair market value, whether in
cash or in kind, as reasonably and in good faith determined at the time of the
transaction.
      (3)   A contract or other award based on a competitive process, including
a City of Garden City bid, consortium bid, an approved sole source provider, or
other similar means intended to ensure competitive pricing.
      (4)   A contribution made in compliance with the campaign finance laws of
the State of Michigan.
      (5)   Any act, omission, contribution, or disposition authorized by
Charter, ordinance, or law.
      (6)   The giving of advice or the seeking of information as required
during the city official's regular duties.
      (7)   Communications from city officials that are received by a board or
commission in the ordinary course of business.
      (8)   The grant or receipt of an inheritance, transfer on death, or goods
or services from a family member, or under circumstances that do not involve
the unreasonable use or attempted use of position of public office or public
trust for personal benefit.
      (9)   Any transaction or occurrence the material terms of which are fair
and reasonable under the circumstances.
      (10)   Any action involving constitutional free speech or political
speech, that does not conflict with division (B)(13) of this section.
(Ord. 24-003, passed 5-20-24)
§ 33.308 CITIZEN REQUESTS AND PROCESS.
   (A)   If a City of Garden City citizen or a person who conducts regular
business in Garden City, believes that a person subject to this subchapter may
have violated its provisions, they may request an advisory opinion from the
Board of Ethics.
   (B)   The process is to forward a request to the City Clerk's Office through
the online portal on the city's website, or by way of postal mail. The request
must be from a person, or an entity (naming a contact person), and include
verifiable information about the requester including name, address, phone
number, and email address. Anonymous requests will not be considered. A request
must be based on alleged unethical conduct that has occurred as stated in §
33.308. The Board of Ethics will not consider requests that are not supported
by eyewitnesses, direct knowledge, or competent circumstantial evidence.
   (C)   The Board of Ethics Executive Committee will first review the
complaint to determine whether such complaint presents enough evidence to
submit to the entire Board of Ethics for consideration. If a majority of the
Executive Committee determines that the complaint presents sufficient evidence,
then the complaint shall be reviewed by the Board of Ethics. Upon review by the
full Ethics Board, upon majority vote of the Board, the Board may either:
      (1)   Summarily dispose of the matter if the request fails to state a
violation of this subchapter;
      (2)   Complete a basic or detailed investigation and issue an advisory
opinion to the City Council, in compliance with §
33.308.
      (3)    Refer the matter to the appropriate law enforcement agency, that
an intentional violation of a law beyond this subchapter may have been
committed and request an investigation for further information.
(Ord. 24-003, passed 5-20-24)
§ 33.309 DUE PROCESS.
   All hearings will be conducted pursuant to this subchapter. All those
appearing before the Board of Ethics will be entitled to due process. A person
accused of unethical conduct will be entitled to:
   (A)   Receive and review the original request; any supporting documentation
submitted with the request; and any additional documentary evidence being
considered by the Board of Ethics.
   (B)   Submit a written response along with additional documentary evidence,
if any.
   (C)   Speak before the Board of Ethics for up to 30 minutes and may have
additional time as the Board of Ethics may determine to rebut the allegations
of unethical conduct.
   (D)   Representation by an attorney or other agent of such person's
choosing.
(Ord. 24-003, passed 5-20-24)
§ 33.310 WRITTEN ADVISORY OPINIONS AND PENALTIES .
   This subchapter is intended to encourage and promote the highest standards
of ethical conduct and behavior by city officials. It is anticipated that the
issuance by the Board of Ethics of advisory opinions will conclude all matters
originating as complaints. The Board of Ethics is not an adjudicative body, and
no finding of the Board shall be deemed conclusive nor, in and of itself,
subject any city official to penalties. Recommended penalties will be forwarded
to the City Council. However, civil infraction proceedings may be brought
against violators of this subchapter.
   (A)   The Board of Ethics pursuant to the powers granted to it in §
33.305 may issue written advisory opinions.
   (B)   Written advisory opinions may be in response to complaints filed in
accordance with §
33.308.
   (C)   Advisory opinions shall be issued within 120 days of a request and be
available for public inspection. However, if additional time is needed, the
time may be extended by majority vote of the Board, not to exceed an additional
90 days.
   (D)   Advisory opinions may include guidance to any city official on
questions including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Whether an identifiable conflict of interest exists between their
personal interests or obligations and their official duties.
      (2)   Whether the result of the potential conflict of interest is
substantial or constitutes a real threat to the independence of their judgment.
      (3)   What effect their participation under the circumstances would have
on the confidence of the people and the impartiality of their public officials.
      (4)   Whether the public interest would be best served by their
withdrawal or abstention.
      (5)   Whether undue influence is being exerted on them.
   (E)   When the Board of Ethics issues an advisory opinion regarding ethical
questions pursuant to this subchapter, the Board shall promptly send a copy of
its opinion to:
      (1)   The individual who requested the opinion;
      (2)   The city official affected; and
      (3)   The City Council.
   (F)   If the Ethics Board finds that an appointed or elected board, council,
or commission member violated one or more of the prohibited conduct rules as
stated in §
33.307, it shall make written findings and recommendations to the City Council,
including one or more of the following penalties:
      (1)   Issuing a cease-and-desist recommendation;
      (2)   Issuing a censure or other reprimand recommendation;
      (3)   Recommend the removal of member from a board; or
      (4)   Recommend a referral to the State Attorney's Office or other
appropriate law enforcement agency.
   (G)   The City Council will have the final say regarding any penalties, if
any, that may be implemented.
(Ord. 24-003, passed 5-20-24)
§ 33.311 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The Ethics Board shall be permitted to adopt any additional rules,
policies, and procedures not defined within this subchapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any individual to retaliate in any way
against any individual who requests an advisory opinion from the Board of
Ethics. However, this provision shall not in any way abrogate an individual's
right to seek civil remedies.
   (C)   This subchapter is intended to be supplementary to other legal
requirements. This subchapter shall be reasonably interpreted and shall not be
construed to abrogate in any way the provisions of state law, or applicable
provisions of the City Charter.
   (D)   All city officials shall be required to read this subchapter and
acknowledge that they have read its provisions by signing a copy of it.
   (E)   The City Clerk shall deliver a copy of this Ethics Ordinance to all
current and newly elected and appointed officials and members of the boards and
commissions of the City of Garden City at the time of their appointment.
(Ord. 24-003, passed 5-20-24)
CHAPTER 34: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
34.01   Intent
   
34.02   Definitions
   
34.03   Creation of Organization for Emergency Management
   
34.04   Director and employees; powers and duties
   
34.05   Cooperation with Director
   
34.06   Volunteers
   
34.07   Disclaimer of liability
   
34.08   Violations
   
34.09   Conflict with state or federal statutes
§ 34.01 INTENT.
   (A)   It is the intent of this chapter that the organization established
will insure the complete and efficient utilization of all of the city's
facilities to combat disaster occasioned by enemy attack on the city or its
environs, and that the organization will also serve to combat natural disasters
as defined herein.
   (B)   The Office of Emergency Management provided by this chapter will be
the coordinating agency for all activity in connection with the emergency
management program, and during a period of attack or natural disaster it will
be the instrument through which the Mayor may exercise the authority and
discharge the responsibilities vested in him in the chapter.
   (C)   This chapter shall not relieve any city department of the normal
responsibilities or authority ascribed to it in the Charter, nor will it
adversely affect the work of the American Red Cross or other volunteer agencies
dedicated to disaster relief activity.
(‘83 Code, § 34.01)
§ 34.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATTACK. A direct assault against the city by forces of a hostile nation or
the agents thereof, including assault by bombing, chemical or biological
warfare, or sabotage.
   COUNTY. The County of Wayne, or a person acting for the County of Wayne
pursuant to legislative authority.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Office of Emergency Management appointed by
the Mayor as executive head of the office of emergency management, or a Deputy
Director duly appointed and acting for the Director in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Shall have a broad meaning and shall include
preparations against, and relief from, the effects of attack on the city by the
forces of an enemy nation or the agents thereof, and it shall also include any
activity in connection with natural disaster as defined herein. It shall not,
however, include any activity that is the responsibility of the military forces
of the United States.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES. The employees, equipment, and facilities of all
city departments, boards, institutions, and commissions suitable for, or
adaptable to emergency management and designated by the Mayor to participate in
the emergency management activity. In addition, it shall include all volunteer
personnel, equipment, and facilities contributed by, or obtained from,
volunteer persons or agencies.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT VOLUNTEER. Any person duly registered and appointed by
the Director of the Office of Emergency Management and assigned to participate
in the emergency management activity.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of Garden City, or the Mayor Pro-Tem as provided for in the
Charter whenever the Mayor is unable to perform his duties under this chapter
by reason of his absence or incapacitation.
   NATURAL DISASTER. Any condition seriously affecting or threatening public
health, welfare, or security as a result of severe fire, explosion, flood,
tornado, hurricane, or similar natural or accidental cause, and which is beyond
the control of public or private agencies ordinarily responsible for the
control or relief of such conditions. This does not include riots, strikes,
insurrections, or civil disturbance.
   STATE. The State of Michigan, or a person acting for the State of Michigan
pursuant to legislative authority.
   VOLUNTEER. A person contributing a service, equipment, or facilities to the
emergency management organization, without remuneration or without a formal
agreement or contract of hire.
(‘83 Code, § 34.02)
§ 34.03 CREATION OF ORGANIZATION FOR EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
   The Mayor is authorized and directed to create an Organization for Emergency
Management. The Mayor, as chief executive of the city, shall be the Director of
the Organization for Emergency
Management and shall be responsible for its organization, administration, and
operation. The Organization shall consist of the following.
   (A)   An Office of Emergency Management within the executive department of
the city government. There shall be an executive head of the Office of
Emergency Management, who shall be known as the Director of the Office of
Emergency Management, and any assistants and other employees as are deemed
necessary to the proper function of the Organization.
   (B)   The employees, equipment, and facilities of all city departments,
boards, institutions, and commissions suitable for, or adaptable to, emergency
management and designated by the Mayor to participate in the emergency
management activity. Duties assigned to a city department shall be analogous to
the normal duties of the department.
   (C)   Volunteer persons and agencies offering service to the Organization.
(‘83 Code, § 34.03)
§ 34.04 DIRECTOR AND EMPLOYEES; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor shall appoint the Director of the Office of Emergency
Management, who shall be a person experienced in public safety, disaster
relief, or work related thereto. He shall be subject to removal by the Mayor
for incompetency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. The Mayor shall,
with the approval of the Council, fix the compensation, if any, of the
Director. The Mayor shall also designate deputy directors of the Office of
Emergency Management to assume the emergency duties of the Director in the
event of the absence or incapacitation of the Director. The deputy directors
shall be selected and shall serve as follows.
         (a)   There shall be one deputy director appointed from each of the
city departments designated by the Mayor to constitute the emergency management
forces.
         (b)   The deputy directors shall be city employees who are heads of
their respective departments.
         (c)   Deputy directors shall assume the duties of the director in the
order of their designation by the Mayor.
      (2)   The Director of the Office of Emergency Management shall, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter relative to civil service,
appoint the assistants and other employees of the Office of Emergency
Management, prescribe their duties, and, with the approval of the Council, fix
their compensation, if any.
(‘83 Code, § 34.04)
   (B)   The Mayor may exercise the emergency power and authority as specified
herein. Whenever a situation requires, or is likely to require, that the Mayor
invoke such power and authority, he shall forthwith convene the City Council to
perform its legislative and administrative powers as the situation
demands, and he shall immediately report to that body relative to emergency
management activities. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as power or
authority to abridge or lessen the legislative and administrative powers of the
Council unless such is specifically granted herein.
      (1)   Under the following circumstances, the Mayor may assemble and
utilize the emergency management forces, and he may prescribe the manner and
conditions of their use.
         (a)   Whenever, on the basis of information received from
authoritative sources, he feels that attack on the city is impending and
imminent.
         (b)   During any period of attack on the city, and thereafter so long
as he shall deem it necessary.
      (2)   During any period when attack on the city is imminent, or when the
city has been subjected to attack, the Mayor may promulgate any reasonable
regulations as he deems necessary to protect life and property and preserve
critical resources. The Mayor shall report these regulations to the City
Council, and it shall by resolution adopt, amend, or revoke such regulations.
The regulations may include, but shall not be limited to the following.
         (a)   Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles
in order to facilitate the work of emergency management forces, or to
facilitate the mass movement of persons from critical areas of the city.
         (b)   Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas
deemed to be hazardous or vulnerable to attack.
         (c)   Regulations designed to lessen the hazard to property and
citizens from attack.
      (3)   The Mayor shall order emergency management forces to the aid of
other communities when required in accordance with the statutes of the state,
and he may request the state, or political subdivisions of the state, to send
aid to the city in case of natural disaster, or in case of disaster resulting
from attack when conditions in the city are beyond the control of the local
emergency management forces.
      (4)   When obtaining formal approvals would result in delay of attack-
relief activity, the Mayor may, until the City Council convenes, waive
procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to performance of
public works, entering into contracts, incurring of obligations, employment of
temporary workers, rental of equipment, purchase and distribution of supplies,
materials, and facilities, and expenditure of existing funds. The Council is
also empowered to waive any procedures and formalities.
      (5)   Whenever the Mayor finds that any condition in the city has
attained, or threatens to attain, the proportions of a natural disaster, he may
assemble and utilize emergency management forces, and he may prescribe the
manner and conditions of their use. He may, when he deems it in the public
interest, send emergency management forces of the city to the aid of other
communities stricken by
natural disaster when the disaster is affecting the health, welfare, or
security of the stricken community; however, after the Council convenes, the
further continuance of any natural disaster relief, and the period thereof,
shall be subject to the action of the Council.
      (6)   The Mayor may make regulations permitting the Director to assemble
and utilize the emergency management forces and request disaster-relief aid as
prescribed in divisions (B)(1), (B)(3), and (B)(5) of this section; and he may
make regulations permitting the conduct of practice air raid alerts or tests of
the emergency management organization. The regulations shall be filed with the
Council, and shall be binding upon the emergency management forces when they
have been approved by resolution of the Council.
(‘83 Code, § 34.05)
   (C)   The Director of the Office of Emergency Management shall be
responsible for supervision over the planning and administration of the
emergency management activity in the city. He shall maintain liaison with the
county and state authorities and the authorities of other nearby political
subdivisions to ensure the most effective implementation of the emergency
management plans. His duties shall include the following.
      (1)   Development of plans for the coordinated utilization of all the
resources and facilities of the city for emergency management.
      (2)   Coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to
augment the personnel and facilities of the city for emergency management
purposes.
      (3)   Through public educational programs, preparing the civilian
population for the protection of their persons and property in case of attack
or natural disaster.
      (4)   Conducting public practice alerts to ensure the efficient operation
of the Emergency Management Organization, and to familiarize the citizen with
emergency management regulations and procedures. The Director shall notify the
City Council in writing prior to any practice alerts, and embody therein the
regulations and procedures pertaining thereto.
      (5)   Coordinating the activity of all public and private agencies
comprising the Emergency Management Organization, including coordination of
planning and of purchasing of emergency management equipment and supplies for
the city.
      (6)   Negotiating with owners or persons in control of buildings or other
property for the use of the buildings for emergency management purposes, and
designating suitable buildings as public shelters.
      (7)   Assuming such authority and conducting such activity as the Mayor
may direct to promote and execute the emergency management plan.
      (8)   Making a quarterly written report to the City Council relative to
the progress of the emergency management program and of the regulations and
procedures adopted for the protection of the public. The Council may, for the
information of the public, print the report, or any part thereof, in its
proceedings.
(‘83 Code, § 34.06)
§ 34.05 COOPERATION WITH DIRECTOR.
   (A)   All officers and employees of departments, commissions, boards,
institutions, and other agencies of city government designated by the Mayor as
emergency management forces shall cooperate with the Director in the
formulation of the emergency management plan, and they shall comply with the
orders of the Director when orders are issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter. All emergency management forces shall apprise the Director of
conditions in the city resulting from attack or natural disaster, and they
shall notify the Director of any condition threatening to reach the proportions
of a natural disaster as defined herein. Failure to notify the Director,
however, shall not prevent the Director from exercising any authority assigned
to him in this chapter or delegated to him by the Mayor. (‘83 Code, § 34.07)
   (B)   City employees assigned to duty as part of the emergency management
forces pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall retain all of the
rights, privileges, and immunities of city employees, and shall receive the
compensation incident to their employment. (‘83 Code, § 34.11)
§ 34.06 VOLUNTEERS.
   The Director may at any time appoint or authorize the appointment of
volunteer citizens to augment the personnel of any city department in time of
emergency management. Volunteer citizens shall be enrolled as emergency
management volunteers in cooperation with the heads of city departments
affected, and they shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth by
the Director for volunteers. The Director may also appoint volunteer citizens
to form the personnel of a emergency management service for which the city has
no counterpart, or to temporarily augment personnel of the city engaged in
emergency management activity.
(‘83 Code, § 34.08)
§ 34.07 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The city assumes no liability for injury or death of emergency
management volunteers in performance of their duty as volunteers except that
which is imposed by state law or by ordinance or resolution of the Council of
the city; however, emergency management volunteers assigned to duty during a
period of natural disaster in the city shall be eligible for the benefits of
the State Workmen's Compensation Law at a rate of compensation commensurate
with that of persons performing similar work under conditions of regular
employment. (‘83 Code, § 34.10)
   (B)   (1)   This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental
functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety, and
neither the city nor agents and representatives of the city, or any individual,
receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, or any of
the agents thereof, in good faith, carrying out, complying with or attempting
to comply with any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be liable for damage sustained to persons or
property as the result of such activity.
      (2)   Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who
voluntarily and without compensation grants the city the right to inspect,
designate, and use the whole or any part or parts of any real estate or
premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, or
practice enemy attack shall not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury
to, any person on or about the real estate or premises under license,
privilege, or other permission, or for loss of, or damage to, the property of
any person.
(‘83 Code, § 34.12)
§ 34.08 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to
display any identifying emergency management insignia for any purpose other
than that for which it was intended, or under circumstances not authorized by
the Director.
      (2)   It shall also be a violation of this chapter for any person to wear
or display in any manner any insignia, sign, or device purported to be a
emergency management insignia, except when the insignia has been duly issued by
the Office of Emergency Management, and the insignia is displayed in accordance
with regulations established by the Director.
(‘83 Code, § 34.09)
   (B)   No person shall violate any of the regulations issued pursuant to the
authority contained in this chapter, or shall wilfully obstruct, hinder, or
delay any member of the Emergency Management Organization in the enforcement of
any regulations. (‘83 Code, § 34.13)
§ 34.09 CONFLICT WITH STATE OR FEDERAL STATUTES.
   This chapter shall not be construed to conflict with any state or federal
statute, or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation.
(‘83 Code, § 34.14)
CHAPTER 35: PURCHASES, CONTRACTS AND SALES
Section
   
35.01   Definitions
   
35.02   Purchases or contracts over $10,000.00
   
35.03   Purchases or contracts between $4,000.01 and $10,000.00
   
35.04   Purchases or contracts between $1,000.01 and $4,000.00
   
35.05   Purchases or contracts of $1,000.00 and below
   
35.06   Federal, state or Interlocal Government contracts
   
35.07   Emergency purchases
   
35.08   Bidding procedures
   
35.09   Sale of property
   
   
35.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   General Finance, see Charter, Article VI
   Taxation, see Charter, Article VII
   Special Assessments, see Charter, Article VIII
   Municipal Borrowing Power, see Charter, Article IX
§ 35.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BID. A written response to a request by the city for pricing on specific
goods or services in a format acceptable to the city.
   BIDDER. Any respondent to a request by the city for goods, services, or
contracts in a format acceptable to the city.
   BIDDERS’ LIST. A nonexclusive list maintained by the city of interested
vendors which the city shall use to obtain bids for goods, services, and
contracts. Vendors who wish to be included on the list shall submit a request
to the Purchasing Agent in writing. Vendors who do not respond to any city bid
request may be removed from the BIDDERS’ LIST.
   BULLETIN BOARD. A board located in the Civic Center accessible to the public
during normal hours of operation on which notice of public interest may be
posted.
   CITY-BASED BUSINESS. A business that is located within the City of Garden
City and that has made payment of all required property taxes on real and
personal property for at least one fiscal year, and that is compliant with all
permitting, licensing and other ordinance requirements.
   CITY PROJECT. Any new construction, alteration, repair, installation,
painting, decorating, completing, demolition, conditioning, reconditioning, or
improvement of public buildings, works or roads authorized by a contracting
agent as defined herein and which costs or is estimated to cost in excess of
$20,000.
   CONSTRUCTIVE MECHANIC. A skilled or unskilled mechanic, laborer, worker,
helper, assistant, or apprentice working on a city project, but shall not
include executive, administrative, professional, office or custodial employees.
   CONTRACTING AGENT. Any officer, City Council, board or commission of the
city, or any institution of the city supported in whole or in part by city
funds, authorized to enter into a contract for a city project or to perform a
city project by the direct employment of labor.
   DEPOSITS. Monetary funds or surety which, when deemed necessary by the
Purchasing Agent, must be accompanied with a bid as a promise to enter into a
contract, provide a service or good, or fulfill a bid for sale of city
property. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of their deposit
or surety. A successful bidder shall forfeit any deposit or surety required
upon failing to enter the contract within a time determined by the city.
   FISCAL YEAR. The fiscal year of the city, being July 1 through June 30.
   PURCHASING AGENT. The City Manager or his duly authorized representative
shall act as Purchasing Agent of the city. The City Manager shall adopt any
necessary rules respecting requisitions and purchase orders pursuant to this
Chapter.
   QUOTES. Written or verbal offer to sell or buy at a stated price.
   REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL (RFP). A request for interested parties to submit a bid
or proposal to do work for the city and/or businesses or government entities
affiliated with the city.
(Ord. 99-016, passed 11-29-99; Am. Ord. 10-012, passed 12-21-09)
§ 35.02 PURCHASES OR CONTRACTS OVER $10,000.00.
   Any purchase or contract for supplies, materials, or equipment, the price of
which exceeds, or is estimated to exceed $10,000.00 in value, shall require
approval of the City Council after receiving sealed bids in accordance with
this chapter. Products and services available only from a single source will
not require sealed bids. The City Manager shall determine available source(s)
for a product or service.
(Ord. 99-016, passed 11-29-99; Am. Ord. 09-003, passed 2-23-09; Am. Ord. 10-
012, passed 12-21-09; Am. Ord. 18-017, passed 4-23-18)
§ 35.03 PURCHASES OR CONTRACTS BETWEEN $4,000.01 AND $10,000.00.
   Any purchase or contract for supplies, materials, or equipment, the price of
which is, or is estimated to be, of a value between $4,000.01 and $10,000.00,
shall require the approval of the City Manager after receiving three written
quotes or diligently attempting to obtain three written quotes from qualified
suppliers. Products and services available only from a sole source will not
require three quotes. The City Manager shall determine available source(s) for
a product or service.
(Ord. 99-016, passed 11-29-99; Am. Ord. 09-003, passed 2-23-09; Am. Ord. 10-
012, passed 12-21-09; Am. Ord. 18-017, passed 4-23-18)
§ 35.04 PURCHASES OR CONTRACTS BETWEEN $1,000.01 AND $4,000.00.
   Any purchase or contract for supplies, materials, or equipment, the price of
which is, or is estimated to be, of a value between $1,000.01 and $4,000.00,
shall require the approval of the Department Head after receiving three quotes
or diligently attempting to obtain three quotes from qualified suppliers.
Products and services available only from a sole source will not require three
quotes. The Department Head shall determine available source(s) for a product
or service.
(Ord. 99-016, passed 11-29-99; Am. Ord. 09-003, passed 2-23-09; Am. Ord. 10-
012, passed 12-21-09; Am. Ord. 18-017, passed 4-23-18)
§ 35.05 PURCHASES OR CONTRACTS $1,000.00 AND BELOW.
   Any purchase or contract for supplies, materials, or equipment, the price of
which is or is estimated to be of a value of $1,000.00 or less shall require
only the approval of the Department Head.
(Ord. 99-016, passed 11-29-99; Am. Ord. 09-003, passed 2-23-09; Am. Ord. 10-
012, passed 12-21-09; Am. Ord. 18-017, passed 4-23-18)
§ 35.06 FEDERAL, STATE, OR INTERLOCAL GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS.
   Where there is a federal, state, interlocal government consortium conducting
mass purchases of goods or services on a competitive basis, the city may
purchase in collaboration with these units without complying with the
competitive bidding practices of this chapter.
(Ord. 99-016, passed 11-29-99; Am. Ord. 09-003, passed 2-23-09; Am. Ord. 10-
012, passed 12-21-09)
§ 35.07 EMERGENCY PURCHASES.
   (A)   The City Manager, in case of emergency, may purchase directly any
supplies, materials, or equipment not costing in excess of $10,000.00 when
immediate procurement is in the best interest of the city. The City Manager
shall certify in writing that the emergency exists, and detail the reasons for
the claimed emergency and why he is waiving formal bidding procedures. The City
Manager shall file his certification and reasons for waiving bidding procedures
with the City Clerk.
   (B)   For emergency purchases exceeding $10,000.00, the City Manager shall
meet the requirements of §
35.08(A), and obtain City Council approval at its next regularly scheduled
meeting.
(Ord. 99-016, passed 11-29-99; Am. Ord. 09-003, passed 2-23-09; Am. Ord. 10-
012, passed 12-21-09; Am. Ord. 18-017, passed 4-23-18)
§ 35.08 BIDDING PROCEDURES.
   Purchases requiring sealed bids in accordance with this chapter shall adhere
to the following procedures.
   (A)   Notice inviting bids. Notice inviting bids shall be published in one
of the following manners at least ten calendar days preceding the last day set
for receipt of the proposals. The notice shall include a general description of
the articles to be purchased, where bid blanks and specifications may be
obtained, and the time and place for the public opening of the bids.
      (1)   Electronic Internet posting. A commonly accessible Internet site;
accessible without direct charge to the bidder.
      (2)   Newspaper. A newspaper or publication of general circulation in the
city.
      (3)   Bidders’ List. The Purchasing Agent may solicit sealed bids from
all responsible suppliers who have requested their names to be added to a
“bidders’ list” which the Purchasing Agent shall maintain, by sending them a
copy of the newspaper notice or such other notice as will acquaint them with
the proposed purchase.
      (4)   Bulletin board. The Purchasing Agent may also advertise all pending
purchases by a notice posted on the public bulletin board in the Civic Center.
   (B)   Bid deposits. When deemed necessary by the Purchasing Agent, bid
deposits shall be prescribed in the bid specifications. Unsuccessful bidders
shall be entitled to the return of their deposit or surety. A successful bidder
shall forfeit any deposit or surety required upon failing to enter into a
contract within ten days after the award, or other such time frame at the
discretion of the city.
   (C)   Bid opening procedures.
      (1)   Signed and sealed. All bids must be signed by an authorized
official of the bidding entity. Bids shall be submitted sealed to the
Purchasing Agent by the appointed time and date, and shall be identified as
bids on the envelope. Bids submitted by electronic mail must be identified as
bids in the subject field.
      (2)   Opening. Upon request, bids shall be opened in public and read
aloud at the time and place stated in the public notices.
      (3)   Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be made part of
the public record, and, if required by this chapter, submitted to the City
Council along with the appropriate recommendation.
   (D)   Rejection of bids. The Council shall have the authority to reject all
bids or parts of bids for any one or more supplies, materials, or services
included in the proposed contract, when the public interest will be best served
thereby.
   (E)   Award of contract. The Council shall award contracts or bids within
the purview of this section to the LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER, as defined in
this division. In determining the lowest responsible bidder, the Council shall
consider the following factors which are of equal importance with no one factor
being more important than any other factor.
      (1)   The amount of the bid including, if applicable, any adjustments
after application of the city-based business preference.
      (2)   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the services.
      (3)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract promptly or within the
time specified without delay.
      (4)   The character, integrity, reputation, experience, and efficiency of
the bidder.
      (5)   The quality of performance of previous contracts or services.
      (6)   Previous or existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the service of contract; sufficiency of the bidder’s
financial resources to perform the contract.
      (7)   Ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for
the use of the subject matter of the bid.
      (8)   Any other factor which would ensure the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the city.
   (F)   Award of the contract. When the award of the contract is made, a full
and complete statement of the reasons for determining a particular bidder is
the lowest responsible bidder shall be made part of the public record.
   (G)   Tie bids. If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit
price, and all other factors being equal, the contract shall be awarded to a
local bidder. Where a tie is between local bidders and between non-local
bidders, the contract shall be at the discretion of the City Manager or City
Council.
   (H)   Performance bonds. The city shall have the authority to require a
performance bond before entering a contract, in such amount as it shall find
reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city.
   (I)   Prohibition against subdivision. No contract or purchase shall be
subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section.
   (J)   City-based business preference. In comparing bids, the bid of any
city-based business shall be deemed a lower bid than the bid of any competing
business whenever the bid of such competing non-city-based business shall be
equal to or higher than the bid of the city-based business after the
appropriate preference credit has been applied to the bid of the city-based
business. For all purchases or contracts for supplies, material, equipment, or
services with a value of $100,000.00 or less, the preference credit shall be
equal to 3% of the total bid amount of each city-based bid. For all purchases
or contracts for supplies, material, equipment, or services with a value
greater than $100,000.00, the preference credit shall be equal to one 1% of the
total bid amount of each city-based bid. The business making the lowest bid
after application of the preference credit shall be deemed the lowest bidder.
Any bidder who claims entitlement to a preference credit shall be responsible
for providing the City with all records and other documentation necessary for
establishing that it is a city-based business as defined by this ordinance. A
request for city-based business preference credit must contain an affidavit
that, absent written city approval, the contract being bid upon shall be
performed only through the Garden City location and that office’s employees as
opposed to any other location of a multi-jurisdiction business.
   (K)   Assignment prohibited. A city-based business may not assign or
subcontract any contract with the city to a non-city-based business without the
written approval of such assignment or subcontract by the City Council.
(Ord. 99-016, passed 11-29-99; Am. Ord. 10-012, passed 12-21-09)
§ 35.09 SALE OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   Whenever any city property, real or personal, is no longer deemed
needed for corporate or public purposes, the same may be offered for sale.
Personal property not exceeding $1,000 in value may be sold for cash by the
Treasurer or her designee upon approval of the City Manager after receiving
quotations or competitive bids for the best price obtainable. Property with a
value in excess of $1,000 may be sold after advertising and receiving sealed
competitive bids, as provided in this chapter, and after approval of the sale
has been given by the Council. However, the competitive bid provisions shall
not apply to the sale of property if the sale of the property is made to
another governmental unit or agency. Personal property of the city with a cash
value of less than $100 may be disposed of in the manner prescribed by the City
Manager. Real property of any value shall only be sold in accordance with
Article V, Section 5.02 of the City Charter.
   (B)   When it is determined by the Council that the sale of property by
means of auction, including electronic auction (i.e. eBay), is necessary and
reasonable in the exercise of the Council's fiduciary duty to obtain the best
price for property to be sold, the Council may authorize such sale. If a
minimum bid is advisable, the Council shall set a minimum bid that will be
accepted for the property. Such auction of city property shall only occur upon
the recommendation of the appropriate department head and/or the City Manager
and the results of the auction shall be reported to the Council.
   (C)   An account for an electronic auction shall be set up in the city's
name and the department head supervising the process shall be responsible for
handling all questions about the item being sold, its condition, inspection by
potential purchasers, pictures of the item and delivery/pick-up.
(Ord. 99-016, passed 11-29-99; Am. Ord. 10-012, passed 12-21-09; Am. Ord. 12-
002, passed 4-16-12)
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or entity that violates any provision of this chapter may, upon
conviction, be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or
both, in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 10-012, passed 12-21-09)
CHAPTER 36: EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Section
General Provisions
   
36.01   Definitions
   
36.02   Establishment
   
36.03   Membership
   
36.04   Reserve cash
   
36.05   Payments
Service Credits; Retirement
   
36.15   Service credit; accounts
   
36.16   Military service
   
36.17   Service retirement
   
36.18   Mandatory retirement; extensions
   
36.19   Pension; options
   
36.20   Deferred retirement
   
36.21   Death in service; benefits
Disability Retirement
   
36.35   Disability incurred
   
36.36   Early retirement due to disability
   
36.37   Disability retirant; death
   
36.38   Medical examinations
Retirement System Funds
   
36.50   Pension savings fund
   
36.51   Refund of accumulated contributions
   
36.52   Pension accumulation fund
   
36.53   Management of fund
   
36.54   Transfers from fund
   
36.55   Pension reserve fund
Board of Trustees
   
36.65   Board of Trustees; Board membership; terms
   
36.66   Board vacancies
   
36.67   Organization; meetings
   
36.68   Board records
   
36.69   Management of funds
   
36.70   Allowance of regular interest
   
36.71   Errors
Cross-reference:
   Retirement System, see Charter, Article XIV
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCRUED SERVICE. Service rendered prior to a valuation date.
   ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS. The sum of all amounts deducted from the
compensations of a member and credited to his individual account in the pension
savings fund, together with applicable regular interest thereon.
   AVERAGE FINAL COMPENSATION. The average of the highest annual regular
compensations received by a member not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement during any period of five consecutive years of credited service
contained within his ten years of credited service rendered immediately
preceding his retirement. In the event a member has less than five years of
credited service, his average final compensation shall be the average of his
annual regular compensations for his total years of credited service.
   BENEFICIARY. Any person, except a retirant, who is in receipt of a pension
payable from funds of the retirement system.
   BOARD. The Board of Trustees provided for in this chapter.
   CITY. The City of Garden City and its predecessor, the Village of Garden
City.
   COMPENSATION. The regular salary or wages paid a member for service, not
including overtime, rendered by him to the city. In case a member's
compensation is not all paid in money, the Board shall fix the value of that
part of his compensation not paid in money. For purposes of § 415 of the
Internal Revenue Code, compensation shall mean compensation actually paid
during the limitation year and the limitation year shall be July 1 through June
30 or such other consecutive 12-month period over which compensation is
otherwise determined under the retirement system. For limitation years
beginning on and after January 1, 2001, for purposes of applying the
limitations described herein, compensation paid or made available during such
limitation years shall include elective amounts that are not includible in the
gross income of the member by reason of § 132(f)(4) of the Internal Revenue
Code. The annual compensation of each member taken into account in determining
benefit accruals in any retirement system year beginning after December 31,
2001, shall not exceed $200,000. Annual compensation means compensation during
the retirement system year or such other consecutive 12-month period over which
compensation is otherwise determined under the retirement system (the
determination period). In determining benefit accruals in years beginning after
December 31, 2001, the annual compensation limit for determination periods
beginning before January 1, 2002 shall be $150,000 for any determination period
beginning in 1996 or earlier; $160,000 for any determination period beginning
in 1997, 1998, or 1999; and $170,000 for any determination period beginning in
2000 or 2001. The $200,000 limit on annual compensation shall be adjusted for
cost-of-living increases in accordance with § 401(a)(17)(B) of the Internal
Revenue Code. The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year
applies to annual compensation for the determination period that begins with or
within such calendar year.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the city.
   CREDITED SERVICE. Service credited to a member's service account. See
Charter, Sec. 14.06.
   FIREFIGHTER. Any employee of the Fire Department holding the rank of
firefighter, including probationary firefighter, or higher rank, but not
including any privately employed firefighter, any person temporarily employed
as a firefighter for an emergency, any civilian employee of the Fire
Department, any person who is not employed as a firefighter on a full-time
basis by the city.
   FUTURE SERVICE. Service to be rendered on and after a valuation date.
   MANDATORY RETIREMENT AGE. Not less than 60 years for police officers and
firefighters. Not less than 65 years for any other class or classes of members,
except elected officials of the city. Provision can be made for continued
service. See Charter, Sec. 14.07(B).
   MEMBER. Any person included in the membership of the retirement system. See
Charter, Sec. 14.05.
   PENSION or STRAIGHT LIFE PENSION. An annual amount payable in equal monthly
installments from funds of the retirement system for the life of a retired
member, or as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   PENSION RESERVE. The present value of all payments to be made on account of
any pension, or benefit in lieu of any pension, computed upon the basis of
mortality tables and other tables of experience as the Board may from time to
time adopt, plus regular interest.
   POLICE OFFICER. Any employee of the Police Department holding the rank of
patrolman, including probationary patrolman, or higher rank, but not including
any privately employed police officer, any person temporarily employed as a
police officer for an emergency, any civilian employee of the Police
Department, or any person who is not employed as a police officer on a full-
time basis by the city.
   REGULAR INTEREST. A rate or rates of interest per annum, compounded
annually, as the Board may from time to time determine.
   RETIRANT. A member who retires with a pension payable from funds of the
retirement system.
   RETIREMENT SYSTEM or SYSTEM. The city employee retirement system.
   SERVICE. Service rendered to the city by a person in the employ of the city.
   SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS. The benefits provided under the old age and
survivors' insurance program of the Federal Social Security Act as now enacted
and as it may be amended from time to time.
   VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT AGE. Fifty-five years or older for any police officer
or firefighter member. Sixty years or older for any other class or classes of
members, provided in either case that the member has ten or more years of
credited service. However, if any member has 25 or more years of credited
service, voluntary retirement may be taken regardless of age. During time of
war engaged in by the United States, or other national emergency recognized by
the Council, the Council may extend the age at which any class of members may
voluntarily retire.
(‘83 Code, § 36.01) (Am. Ord. 2002-07, passed 5-13-02)
§ 36.02 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The city employee retirement system is continued for the purpose of
providing for the retirement of officers and employees of the city due to
superannuation or total and permanent disability, providing pensions
supplemental to Federal Social Security benefits, providing for contributions
to the retirement system by members and the city, and providing for the
administration of the retirement system. The retirement system is intended to
qualify as a pension plan and trust meeting the requirements of §§ 401(a) and
501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, as now in effect or hereafter amended, and
shall be administered so as to fulfill this intent. Notwithstanding any
provision of this chapter to the contrary, benefits and contributions shall be
limited in accordance with § 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, which is hereby
incorporated by reference. ('83 Code, § 36.02)
   (B)   The effective date of the retirement system shall be April 1, 1955.
(‘83 Code, § 36.03) (Am. Ord. 2002-07, passed 5-13-02)
§ 36.03 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   (1)   The membership of the retirement system shall include the
following.
         (a)   All persons who are in the employ of the city on March 31, 1955
and who continue in the employ of the city on or after April 1, 1955;
         (b)   All persons who become officers or employees of the city on and
after April 1, 1955; this subdivision shall be subject to division (A)(2) of
this section.
      (2)   The membership of the retirement system shall not include the
following.
         (a)   Any person whose services to the city are compensated on a fee
basis.
         (b)   Any person whose compensation normally averages less than $7,000
per annum.
      (3)   In all cases of doubt as to the membership status of any person,
the Board shall decide the issue, and the decision of the Board shall be final
and conclusive.
(‘83 Code, § 36.15)
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, should any member leave
the employ of the city for any reason except retirement or death, he or she
shall cease to be a member, and he or she shall forfeit his or her credited
service. In the event the person returns to city service, he or she shall again
become a member, and should he or she return within a period of years not
greater than the number of years of forfeited city service, his or her
forfeited service credit shall be restored to his or her credit, subject to the
provisions of
§ 36.50. In the event a member becomes a retirant or dies, he or she shall
thereupon cease to be a member.
(‘83 Code, § 36.16) (Ord. 77-017, passed 8-15-77; Am. Ord. 2002-07, passed 5-
13-02; Am. Ord. 03-011, passed 4-7-03)
§ 36.04 RESERVE CASH.
   There shall be kept on deposit available cash not exceeding 10% of the total
assets of the retirement system. All funds of the retirement system shall be
held for the sole purpose of meeting disbursements for pensions and other
payments authorized by the provisions of this chapter, and shall be used for no
other purpose. The description of the various funds of the retirement system
shall be interpreted to refer to the accounting records of the retirement
system, and not to the segregation of monies in the various funds of the
retirement system.
(‘83 Code, § 36.56)
§ 36.05 PAYMENTS.
   All payments from the funds of the retirement system shall be made according
to Charter provisions and only upon regular city checks. No check shall be
drawn unless it has been previously authorized by resolutions adopted by the
Board.
(‘83 Code, § 36.57)
SERVICE CREDIT; RETIREMENT
§ 36.15 SERVICE CREDIT; ACCOUNTS
   (A)   The Board shall fix and determine by appropriate rules and regulations
the amount of service to be credited any member. In no case, however, shall
less than ten days of service rendered in any calendar month be credited as a
month of service; nor shall less than nine months of service rendered in any
calendar year be credited as a year of service; nor shall more than one year of
service be credited for all service rendered by a member in any calendar year.
Firefighters working on 24-hour shifts shall be granted three service days for
each shift they work in order to meet the minimum ten-day service requirement
for monthly retirement service credits. (‘83 Code, § 36.20)
   (B)   The Board shall credit each member's service account with the number
of years and months of service to which he may be entitled.
(‘83 Code, § 36.22) (Ord. 77-004, passed 3-21-77)
§ 36.16 MILITARY SERVICE.
   (A)   A member shall be given service credit for the period he served in the
armed forces of the United States during time of war or other national
emergency, provided that he was a city employee at the time he entered the
armed forces, and that he reentered or reenters city employment within 18
months after termination of his armed services.
   (B)   In case of doubt as to the period to be credited to any member, the
Board shall have final power to determine the period. During the period of
armed forces service rendered to the federal government and until the re-
employment by the city, a member's contributions to the pension savings fund
shall be suspended and any balance standing to his credit in the pension
savings fund shall be accumulated at regular interest.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary,
contributions, benefits and service credited with respect to qualified military
service will be provided in accordance with § 414(u) of the Internal Revenue
Code.
(‘83 Code, § 36.21) (Am. Ord. 2002-007, passed 5-13-02)
§ 36.17 SERVICE RETIREMENT.
   (A)   Any member who has attained or attains his voluntary retirement age,
and who has ten or more years of total service, may retire from city service
upon his written application filed with the Board setting forth at what time he
desires to be retired, not less than 30 days or more than 90 days subsequent to
the execution and filing thereof.
   (B)   In accordance with § 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and the
regulations thereunder, which are incorporated herein by reference, a member's
pension shall be distributed to him or her not later than April 1 of the
calendar year following the later of the following.
      (1)   The calendar year in which the member attains age 70-1/2 years.
      (2)   The calendar year in which the member retires.
   (C)   With respect to distributions under the retirement system made for
calendar years beginning on or after January 1, 2001, the minimum distribution
requirements of § 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code will be applied in
accordance with the regulations under § 401(a)(9) that were proposed on January
17, 2001, notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary. This
amendment shall continue in effect until the end of the last calendar year
beginning before the effective date of final regulations under § 401(a)(9) or
such other date as may be specified in guidance published by the Internal
Revenue Service.
(‘83 Code, § 36.25) (Am. Ord. 2002-007, passed 5-13-02)
§ 36.18 MANDATORY RETIREMENT; EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Any police officer who has attained or attains age 65 years, and
any member in any other branch of city service who has attained or attains age
70 years, shall be separated from service on the first day of the calendar
month in which he attains age 65 years or 70 years, respectively. This division
shall be subject to division (B) of this section, and shall not apply in the
case of any elected official of the city.
      (2)   Any firefighter who has attained or attains age 60 years shall be
separated from service on the first day of the calendar month in which he
attains the age of 60 years. The Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief may
continue in service until attaining the age of 65 years, at which time he will
be separated from service on the first day of the calendar month in which he
attains age 65 years.
(‘83 Code, § 36.26)
   (B)   Any police officer who has attained or attains his age of normal
retirement, as provided in division (A) of this section, may continue in
service for periods not to extend beyond his attainment of age 72 years,
provided that the member's continuance in service is requested by him in
writing and approved by the City Council.
(‘83 Code, § 36.27) (Am. Ord. 2002-007, passed 5-13-02)
§ 36.19 PENSION; OPTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon retirement from service, a member not covered by a
collective bargaining agreement who has attained the voluntary retirement age
and has ten or more years of credited service shall receive a pension, called a
straight life pension, equal to 2% of the member’s average final compensation
multiplied by his years and fraction of a year of credited service for his
first 25 years of service, plus 1% of the member's average final compensation
multiplied by his years of credited service over 25 years. Upon his retirement,
he shall have the right to elect an option provided for in division (B) of this
section.
      (2)   Effective July 1, 1969, the formula of the straight life pension in
division (A)(1) shall apply to all existing retirees who otherwise are
qualified to receive this pension.
      (3)   In the event a retirant dies before receiving division (A)(1)
pension payments totaling an amount equal to his accumulated contributions to
his credit in the pension savings fund at the time of his retirement, the
difference between the accumulated contributions and the aggregate amount of
pension payments shall be paid from the pension accumulation fund to the person
or persons as the retirant has nominated by written designation duly executed
and filed with the Board. If there is no designated person or persons surviving
the retirant, then the difference, if any, shall be paid to his legal
representative. No benefits shall be paid under this division on account of the
death of a retirant if he elected Option (A) or Option (B) provided for in
division (B) of this section.
      (4)   The pension of each member retiring after July 1, 1968, shall be
adjusted July 1, 1969, and each July 1 thereafter, as follows.
         (a)   The adjusted pension shall be equal to the initial pension
increased by 2% for each completed year of retirement after July 1, 1968.
         (b)   The maximum adjusted pension shall be equal to the initial
pension multiplied by the ratio of the average Consumer Price Index for the
calendar year preceding the year of adjustment to the average Consumer Price
Index for the calendar year preceding retirement.
('70 Code, § 36.28)
   (B)   Prior to the effective date of his retirement, but not thereafter, a
member may elect to receive his pension as a straight life pension payable
throughout his life, or he may elect to receive the actuarial equivalent of his
straight life pension in a reduced pension payable throughout his life, and
nominate a survivor beneficiary, in accordance with the provisions of Option
(A) or (B) as set forth below.
      (1)   Option (A): Joint and survivor pension. Upon the death of a
retirant, his reduced pension shall be continued throughout the life of and
paid to that person having an insurable interest in his life, as he has
nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the Board prior
to the effective date of his retirement.
      (2)   Option (B): Modified joint and survivor pension. Upon the death of
a retirant, one-half of his reduced pension shall be continued throughout the
life of and paid to that person, having an insurable interest in his life, as
he has nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the Board
prior to the effective date of his retirement.
('70 Code, § 36.30)
Cross-reference:
   Pension options, see Charter, Sec.
14.11
§ 36.20 DEFERRED RETIREMENT.
   In the event a member has 25 or more years of credited service, or has
attained age 55 years and has ten or more years of credited service, and leaves
city service prior to his attainment of his voluntary retirement age for any
reason except retirement or death, he shall remain a member only for the
purpose of receiving a pension provided for in
§ 36.19(A) subject to
§§ 36.19(A)(3) and 36.19(B). Upon attainment of age 65 years, the member’s
pension shall begin as of the first day of the calendar month following the
date his application therefor is filed with the Board. If the member withdraws
all or part of his accumulated contributions from the pension savings fund, he
shall cease to be a member, and he shall forfeit all his rights in and to a
deferred pension provided for in this section.
(‘83 Code, § 36.29)
Cross-reference:
   Deferred retirement, see Charter, Sec.
14.10
§ 36.21 DEATH IN SERVICE; BENEFITS.
   (A)   Any member who continues in the employ of the city on or after the
date he acquired not less than one year of credited service, may, at any time
prior to the effective date of his retirement, elect Option (A) provided for in
§ 36.19(B) in the same manner as if he were then retiring from service, and
nominate a survivor beneficiary whom the Board finds to be dependent upon the
member for at least 50% of his support due to lack of financial means. Prior to
the effective date of his retirement, the member may revoke his election of
Option (A) and nomination of beneficiary. He may reelect, prior to the
effective date of his retirement, Option (A), and nominate a beneficiary as
provided in this division. Upon the death of a member who has an Option (A)
election in force, his beneficiary, if living, shall immediately receive the
same pension to which the beneficiary would have been entitled, had the member
retired the day preceding the date of his death, notwithstanding that he may
not have attained his voluntary retirement age. If a member has an Option (A)
and nomination of beneficiary, it shall continue in force, unless prior to the
effective date of his retirement, he elects to receive his pension as a
straight life pension or according to an option provided for in
§ 36.19(B).
   (B)   If any member, continuing in the employ of the city on or after the
date he acquires not less than one year of credited service, and not having an
Option (A) election in force as provided in division
(A) of this section, dies while in the employ of the city, and leaves a spouse,
the spouse shall immediately receive the same pension to which the beneficiary
would have been entitled if the member had done the following.
      (1) Retired the day preceding the date of his death, notwithstanding that
he may not have attained his voluntary retirement age.
      (2)   Elected Option (A) provided for in
§ 36.19(B).
      (3)   Nominated spouse as beneficiary.
(‘83 Code, § 36.31)
DISABILITY RETIREMENT
§ 36.35 DISABILITY INCURRED.
   Upon the application of a member or his department head, a member who
becomes totally and permanently incapacitated for duty in the service of the
city by reason of personal injury or disease may be retired by the Board. The
member may be retired if, after a medical examination of the member, made by or
under the direction of a medical committee consisting of three physicians, one
of whom shall be appointed by the Board, one by the member, and the third by
the two physicians so named, the medical committee certifies to the Board, by a
majority opinion in writing, the following.
   (A)   That the member is mentally or physically totally incapacitated for
duty in the service of the city.
   (B)   That incapacity will probably be permanent.
   (C)   That the member should be retired.
   (D)   If the physician appointed by the Board and the physician designated
by the member agree on the above, the requirement for the third physician’s
opinion is waived.
(‘83 Code, § 36.35) (Am. Ord. 08-002, passed 11-5-07)
Cross-reference:
   Total and permanent disability, see Charter, Sec.
14.12
§ 36.36 EARLY RETIREMENT DUE TO DISABILITY.
   (A)   Any member not covered by a collective bargaining agreement with one
or more years of credited service, who retires due to disability as provided in
§ 36.35, shall receive a pension equal to 2% of the member's average final
compensation multiplied by his years and fraction of a year of credited
service; however, no disability pension shall be less than 20% of the member's
average final compensation. Upon his retirement, he shall have the right to
elect an option provided for in
§ 36.19(B). (‘83 Code, § 36.36)
   (B)   Any member with less than ten years of credited service who retires
due to disability, as provided in
§ 36.35, and is receiving workmen's compensation benefits on account of a
disability arising out of and in the course of his city employment, shall have
his credited service increased to ten years. Upon his retirement, he shall have
the right to elect an option provided for in
§ 36.19(B). (‘83 Code, § 36.37)
§ 36.37 DISABILITY RETIRANT; DEATH.
   (A)   A disability retirant shall be given service credit for any period he
is in receipt of workmen's compensation benefits on account of a disability
arising out of and in the course of his employment by the city. Upon
termination of workmen's compensation benefits, the retirant's disability
pension shall be recomputed to include the additional service credit. During
the period a retirant is receiving a disability pension, his contributions to
the pension savings fund shall be suspended. (‘83 Code, § 36.38)
   (B)   In the event a disability retirant dies before he has received pension
payments aggregating an amount equal to his accumulated contributions to his
credit in the pension savings fund at the time of his retirement, the
difference between the accumulated contributions and the aggregate amount of
pension payments shall be paid from the pension accumulation fund to the person
or persons as he shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and
filed with the Board. If there is no designated person or persons surviving the
retirant, then the difference, if any, shall be paid to his legal
representative. No benefits shall be paid under this section on account of the
death of a retirant if he elected Option (A) or (B) provided for in
§ 36.19(B). (‘83 Code, § 36.39)
§ 36.38 MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS.
   (A)   At least once each year during the first five years following the
retirement of a member with a disability pension, and at least once in every
three-year period thereafter, the Board may require, and upon the retirant's
application shall require, any disability retirant who has not attained his
voluntary retirement age to undergo a medical examination to be made by or
under the direction of a physician designated by the Board. Should the retirant
refuse to submit to a medical examination in any such period, his disability
pension may be discontinued by the Board, and should refusal continue for one
year, all his rights in and to the pension may be revoked by the Board.
   (B)   If upon a medical examination of a retirant, the physician reports to
the Board that the retirant is physically able and capable of resuming
employment with the city, he shall be restored to active service with the city
and his disability pension shall be discontinued. A disability retirant who has
been or shall be returned to active service in the employ of the city shall
again become a member of the retirement system. His credited service at the
time of his retirement shall be restored to his credit. He shall be given
service credit for the period he was in receipt of workmen's compensation
benefits on account of his disability arising out of and in the course of his
employment with the city.
(‘83 Code, § 36.40)
RETIREMENT SYSTEM FUNDS
§ 36.50 PENSION SAVINGS FUND.
   (A)   The pension savings fund is continued. It shall be the fund in which
the contributions of members to the retirement system shall be accumulated and
from which refunds of accumulated contributions shall be paid as provided in
this chapter.
   (B)   The contributions of a member to the retirement system shall be 5% of
his annual compensations.
   (C)   The officer or officers responsible for making up the payroll shall
cause the contributions provided for in division (B) of this section to be
deducted from the compensation of each member on every payroll, for every
payroll period, beginning with the effective date of the retirement system, and
continuing so long as a member remains in the employ of the city. When
deducted, contributions shall be paid into the pension savings fund and
credited to the individual account of the member. Every member shall be deemed
to consent and agree to the deductions made and provided for herein, and
payment of his compensations less these deductions shall be a full and complete
discharge and acquittance of all claims and demands whatsoever for the services
rendered by the member during the period covered by the payment, except as to
benefits provided by the retirement system. The members' contributions shall be
made notwithstanding that the minimum compensation provided by law shall be
changed thereby.
   (D)   In addition to the contributions deducted from the compensations of a
member, he shall repay to the pension savings fund, in a manner approved by the
Board, all amounts he may have withdrawn from the fund, together with regular
interest thereon computed from the date of withdrawal to the date or dates of
repayment. No member shall be given credit for services rendered prior to the
date he withdraws any part of his accumulated contributions from the pension
savings fund until he has repaid in full all amounts he owes to the fund.
   (E)   Upon the retirement of a member, his accumulated contributions in the
pension savings fund shall be transferred to the pension reserve fund. Except
as otherwise provided in this chapter, at the expiration of three years from
the date an individual's membership is terminated, any balance of accumulated
contributions remaining in the pension savings fund, unclaimed by any
individual or his legal representative, shall be transferred to the pension
accumulation fund.
(‘83 Code, § 36.45)
§ 36.51 REFUND OF ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   Should any member cease to be an employee of the city before attaining
his voluntary retirement age for any reason other than his death or retirement,
or after his voluntary retirement age, and not be entitled to a pension, he
shall be paid all or part of his accumulated contributions in the pension
savings fund that he shall demand in writing on forms furnished by the Board.
   (B)   Should a member die before his retirement becomes effective, his
accumulated contributions in the pension savings fund at the time of his death
shall be paid to the person or persons as he has nominated by written
designation duly executed and filed with the Board. In the event there is no
designated person or persons surviving the member, his accumulated
contributions shall be paid to his legal representative.
   (C)   If any member dies without heirs and without having nominated a
beneficiary as provided in division (B) of this section, his accumulated
contributions in the pension savings fund at the time of his death may be used
to pay his reasonable burial expenses, provided that he leave no other estate
sufficient for such purpose.
   (D)   Refunds of accumulated contributions may be made in installments
according to rules and regulations as the Board may adopt from time to time.
   (E)   This division applies to distributions made on or after January 1,
1993. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary that would
otherwise limit a distributee's election under this division, a distributee may
elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the Board, to have any
portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible
retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover.
      (1)   Definitions.
         ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTION. An eligible rollover distribution is
any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the
distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include:
any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic
payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life
expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies)
of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a
specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent such
distribution is required under § 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code; and
the portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income
(determined without regard to the exclusion for net unrealized appreciation
with respect to employer securities).
         ELIGIBLE RETIREMENT PLAN. An eligible retirement plan is an individual
retirement account described in § 408(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, an
individual retirement annuity described in § 408(b) of the Internal Revenue
Code, an annuity plan described in § 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a
qualified trust described in § 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, that
accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. However, in the case
of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse, an eligible
retirement plan is an individual retirement account or individual retirement
annuity.
         DISTRIBUTEE. A distributee includes an employee or former employee. In
addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the
employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse who is the alternate
payee under a qualified domestic relations order, as defined in § 414(p) of the
Internal Revenue Code, or an eligible domestic relations order under Public Act
46 of 1991, being M.C.L.A. 38.1701 et seq., are distributees with regard to the
interest of the spouse or former spouse.
         DIRECT ROLLOVER. A direct rollover is a payment by the retirement
system to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee.
      (2)   If a distribution is one to which §§ 401(a)(11) and 417 of the
Internal Revenue Code do not apply, such distribution may commence less than 30
days after the notice required under § 1.411(a)-(c) of the Income Tax
Regulations is given, provided that the following occurs.
         (a)   The Board clearly informs the member that the member has a right
to a period of at least 30 days after receiving the notice to consider the
decision of whether or not to elect a distribution (and, if applicable, a
particular distribution option).
         (b)   The member, after receiving the notice, affirmatively elects a
distribution.
   (F)   This division shall apply to distributions made after December 31,
2001.
      (1)   For purposes of the direct rollover provisions in division (E) of
this section, an eligible retirement plan shall also mean an annuity contract
described in § 403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code and an eligible plan under §
457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code which is maintained by a state, political
subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or
political subdivision of a state and which agrees to account separately for
amounts transferred into such plan from the retirement system. The definition
of eligible retirement plan shall also apply in the case of a distribution to a
surviving spouse, or to a spouse or former spouse who is the alternate payee
under a qualified domestic relations order, as defined in § 414(p) of the
Internal Revenue Code, or an eligible domestic relations order under Public Act
46 of 1991, being M.C.L.A. 38.1701 et seq.
      (2)   For purposes of the direct rollover provisions in division (E) of
this section, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an eligible
rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of after-tax employee
contributions which are not includible in gross income. However, such portion
may be paid only to an individual retirement account or annuity described in §
408(a) or (b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or to a qualified defined
contribution plan described in § 401(a) or 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code
that agrees to account separately for amounts so transferred, including
separately accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible
in gross income and the portion of such distribution which is not so
includible.
(‘83 Code, § 36.46) (Am. Ord. 2002-007, passed 5-13-02)
§ 36.52 PENSION ACCUMULATION FUND.
   The pension accumulation fund is continued. It shall be the fund in which
the contributions made by the city to the retirement system shall be
accumulated.
(‘83 Code, § 36.47)
§ 36.53 MANAGEMENT OF FUND.
   (A)   Upon the basis of mortality and other tables of experience as the
Board shall from time to time adopt, and regular interest, the actuary shall
annually compute the city's contributions to the retirement system in the
manner set forth as follows.
      (1)   An amount which, if paid annually by the city during the future
service of members, will be sufficient, together with the expected net future
contributions of members, to provide reserves at the time of their retirements
for pensions based upon future service likely to be rendered by members.
      (2)   An amount which, if paid annually by the city over a period of
years to be determined by the Council, not to exceed 40 years, will be
sufficient, together with applicable fund balances, to provide reserves at the
time of members' retirements for pensions based upon their accrued service.
      (3)   An amount which, if paid annually by the city over the future
natural lifetime of retirants and beneficiaries, will be sufficient, together
with applicable fund balances, to provide reserves for pensions payable to the
retirants and beneficiaries.
   (B)   Each year, the Council shall appropriate the amounts of contributions
as determined in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), and (A)(3) of this section, and the
city shall pay the amounts into the pension accumulation fund during the
ensuing fiscal year.
   (C)   Upon termination of the retirement system or upon complete
discontinuance of contributions under the retirement system, the rights of all
members to benefits accrued to the date of such termination or discontinuance,
to the extent then funded, shall be nonforfeitable.
(‘83 Code, § 36.48) (Am. Ord. 2002-007, passed 5-13-02)
§ 36.54 TRANSFERS FROM FUND.
   Upon the retirement of a member, there shall be transferred from the pension
accumulation fund to the pension reserve fund an amount equal to the member's
pension reserve, less his accumulated contributions in the pension savings fund
at the time of his retirement.
(‘83 Code, § 36.49)
§ 36.55 PENSION RESERVE FUND.
   The pension reserve fund is continued. It shall be the fund from which all
pensions payable as provided in this chapter shall be paid. Should a disability
retirant be returned to service, his pension reserve, computed as of the date
of his return to service, shall be transferred from the pension reserve fund to
the pension savings fund and pension accumulation fund in the same proportion
as the original transfers were made. The amount transferred to the pension
savings fund shall be credited to the member's individual account therein.
(‘83 Code, § 36.50)
Cross-reference:
   Funds of retirement system, see Charter, Sec.
14.13
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 36.65 BOARD OF TRUSTEES; BOARD MEMBERSHIP; TERMS.
   (A)   The Retirement System Board of Trustees is continued. The Board shall
be vested with the power to administer, manage, and operate the retirement
system, and to make effective the provisions of this chapter.
(‘83 Code, § 36.05)
   (B)   The Board of Trustees shall consist of five trustees, as follows.
      (1)   Two members of the Council to be appointed by the Mayor by and with
the consent of the Council.
      (2)   A citizen who is a resident and taxpayer of the city, and who is
neither an official of the city nor eligible to participate in the retirement
system as a member or retirant, to be appointed by the Mayor by and with the
consent of the Council.
      (3)   A police officer or firefighter member to be elected by the police
officer and fire fighter members; and a member who is neither a police officer
nor firefighter member to be elected by the members who are neither police
officer nor fire fighter members.
   (C)   (1)   Such elections shall be held under such rules and regulations as
the Board shall adopt.
      (2)   After the first election, the regular term of the trustees provided
for in
§ 36.65(B)(2) and (3) shall be five years. The Council trustees shall serve at
the pleasure of the Mayor during their tenure of office.
(Am. Ord. 03-010, passed 2-24-03)
Cross-reference:
   Board of Trustees, see Charter, Sec.
14.02
   Duties of Board, see Charter, Sec.
14.03
§ 36.66 BOARD VACANCIES.
   In the event an elected member trustee is no longer employed by the city, he
shall vacate the office of trustee. If a vacancy occurs in the office of any
trustee, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term, in the same manner
as the office was previously filled, within 90 days after the date the vacancy
occurred.
(‘83 Code, § 36.07)
§ 36.67 ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS.
   (A) Organization.
      (1)   The Board shall elect from its members a Chairperson and Vice-
Chairperson.
      (2)   The City Clerk shall be Secretary of the retirement system and the
administrative officer of the system.
      (3)   The City Treasurer shall be Treasurer of the retirement system and
the custodian of its funds.
      (4)   The City Attorney shall be legal advisor to the Board.
      (5)   The Board shall appoint an actuary who shall be technical advisor
to the Board on matters regarding the operation of the retirement system on an
actuarial basis, and who shall perform such other duties as are required in
connection therewith.
      (6)   The Board shall employ such professional services as are required
for the proper operation of the retirement system. Compensations for services
provided for in this section shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
(‘83 Code, § 36.09)
   (B)   Meetings. The Board shall hold meetings regularly, at least once each
quarter year, and shall designate the time and place thereof. Three trustees
shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the
Board, and at least three concurring votes shall be necessary for a decision by
the trustees at any meeting of the Board. The Board shall adopt its own rules
of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. All meetings of the
Board shall be public. (‘83 Code, § 36.08)
§ 36.68 BOARD RECORDS.
   (A)   The Secretary shall keep, or cause to be kept, any data as shall be
necessary for an actuarial valuation of the retirement system. Each year, the
Board shall render a report to the Mayor and the Council showing the fiscal
transactions of the retirement system for the year ending the preceding June
30, the last actuarial valuation of the retirement system, and any other
reports as the Mayor or Council may from time to time require. (‘83 Code, §
36.10)
   (B)   The Board shall from time to time adopt such mortality and other
tables of experience as are necessary for the operation of the retirement
system on an actuarial basis. For purposes of adjusting any benefit or
limitation under § 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, the mortality table used
shall be the table prescribed by the United States Secretary of the Treasury in
accordance with § 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Internal Revenue Code.
(‘83 Code, § 36.11) (Am. Ord. 2002-007, passed 5-13-02)
§ 36.69 MANAGEMENT OF FUNDS.
   The Board shall be the trustees of the funds of the retirement system and,
pursuant to Public Act 314 of 1965, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 38.1132 et seq.,
shall have full power to invest and reinvest the funds subject to all terms,
conditions, limitations, and restrictions imposed by the state upon public
employee retirement systems in the making and disposing of their investments.
The Board shall have full power to hold, purchase, sell, assign, transfer, and
dispose of any securities and investments in which any of the funds of the
retirement system have been invested, as well as the proceeds of such
investments and any moneys belonging to the retirement system.
(‘83 Code, § 36.55) (Am. Ord. 2002-007, passed 5-13-02)
§ 36.70 ALLOWANCE OF REGULAR INTEREST.
   All interest and other earnings on monies and investments of the retirement
system shall be credited to the pension accumulation fund. The Board shall, at
the end of each fiscal year, allow regular interest computed on members'
individual balances in the pension savings fund at the beginning of the fiscal
year, and on the mean balance in the pension reserve fund. The amount of
interest so allowed and credited to the pension savings fund and pension
reserve fund shall be charged to the pension accumulation fund.
(‘83 Code, § 36.58)
§ 36.71 ERRORS.
   Should any change in the records result in any member, beneficiary, or
retirant receiving from the retirement system more or less than he would have
been entitled to receive had the records been correct, the Board shall correct
the error, and as far as practicable shall adjust the payment in such a manner
that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which the member, beneficiary,
or retirant was correctly entitled shall be paid.
(‘83 Code, § 36.59)
CHAPTER 37: UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION SYSTEM
Section
   
37.01   Establishment
   
37.02   Definitions
   
37.03   Employees covered
   
37.04   Officers, persons, and employees not covered
   
37.05   Payment of benefits; rates
   
37.06   Disqualifications
   
37.07   Ineligible terminations and separations
   
37.08   Determinations
   
37.09   Rules and procedures
   
37.10   Appeal Board; powers and duties
   
37.11   Appeal procedure
   
37.12   Extension period
   
37.13   Finances
   
37.14   False statements
   37.99   Penalty
§ 37.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is established an unemployment compensation system and benefit plan
for employees of the city, to be administered by the Clerk-Treasurer or
designee. This plan is established pursuant to the state Employment Security
Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 421.1 et seq.
(‘83 Code, § 38.01) (Ord. 74-011, passed 12-23-74)
§ 37.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. Person or firm designated by the Clerk-Treasurer.
   AVERAGE WEEKLY WAGE. With respect to a base period of employment, the amount
determined by dividing total wages paid by the city for credit weeks earned in
the employment of the city by the number of credit weeks chargeable to the city
as employer.
   BASE PERIOD. The period of 52 consecutive calendar weeks ending with the day
immediately preceding the first day of an individual's benefit year.
   BENEFIT YEAR. With respect to any individual the period of 52 consecutive
calendar weeks beginning with the first calendar week with respect to which the
individual, who does not already have a benefit year in effect, files a claim
for benefits under this chapter, provided that the individual has earned wages
of at least $25.01 in 14 or more calendar weeks within the base period. Each
week shall be a CREDIT WEEK.
   BENEFITS. The money payments payable to an eligible and qualified
individual, as provided in this chapter, with respect to unemployment.
   PART-TIME EMPLOYEE. A person who is employed for less than an 8-hour day or
less than a 40-hour week.
   SEASONAL EMPLOYEE. A person who is employed to work during a particular
seasonal period, or on a particular seasonal program.
   TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE. A person who is employed for a regular work day and/or
regular workweek, but not for more than a period of 150 work days.
   UNEMPLOYED. An individual shall be deemed unemployed with respect to any
week during which he performs no services and with respect to which no
remuneration is payable to him, or with respect to any week of less than full-
time work, if the remuneration payable to him is less than his weekly benefit
rate.
   WAGES. Remuneration paid for employment, but not including any employee
payment for life or health insurance, pension, equipment allowance, or similar
payment.
(‘83 Code, § 38.02) (Ord. 74-011, passed 12-23-74)
§ 37.03 EMPLOYEES COVERED.
   All individuals employed by the city are covered by this unemployment
compensation system, except officers, officials, employees, and persons
specifically excluded by § 38.04.
(‘83 Code, § 38.05) (Ord. 74-011, passed 12-23-74)
§ 37.04 OFFICERS, PERSONS, AND EMPLOYEES NOT COVERED.
   (A)   Officers, persons, and employees not covered by this unemployment
compensation system shall be as follows.
      (1)   Elected officials and those persons appointed to boards and
commissions.
      (2)   Persons providing contractual or consultive service to the city as
specialists, independent contractors, or employees thereof.
      (3)   Employees who are or were, at the time or their employment by the
city, students enrolled on a regular basis in high school, college, graduate
school, or any other school in which their primary status is clearly that of a
student; or any persons hired as students.
      (4)   Seasonal, temporary, and part-time employees as defined by this
chapter.
      (5)   Persons performing services where compensation is derived at least
50% from federal funds received under a specific federal program for which an
application was made, and whose employment is terminated due to discontinuance
of the federal funding.
      (6)   Students under the age of 18 regularly attending either a public or
private school below the college level, performing services where the
employment was part-time or within the vacation period of the school, or a part
of the school curriculum.
   (B)   Persons and employees not covered under this chapter as set forth in
divisions (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5), and (A)(6) of this section shall execute an
acknowledgment form that they are not entitled to any benefits under the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   A claimant to be eligible for benefits must be unemployed as defined,
and must make a claim for benefits in the manner prescribed by the
administrator and further must:
      (1)   Be able and available to perform full-time work which he is
qualified to perform by past experience or training, and of a character
generally similar to work for which he has earned wages;
      (2)   Be in compliance with registration and reporting requirements;
      (3)   Be seeking work.
(‘83 Code, § 38.06) (Ord. 74-011, passed 12-23-74)
§ 37.05 PAYMENT OF BENEFITS; RATES.
   (A)   Payment of unemployment benefits shall be based on a certification
from the Administrator to the Clerk-Treasurer. The certification shall contain
all information necessary for payment. A record of the benefits received by
each individual shall be maintained by the Administrator. (‘83 Code, § 38.04)
   (B)   Benefit payment shall begin with the effective date of unemployment,
and shall be calculated according to the following rules.
      (1)   The weekly benefit rate and amount of the weekly benefit payment
shall be determined in accordance with all of the provisions as set forth in
Section 27 of the Michigan Employment Security Act, and as set forth in the
Michigan Employment Security Act weekly benefit rate table in effect in the
week for which the individual is claiming benefits.
      (2)   The dependency class of a laid-off employee shall be determined as
provided by Section 27 of the Michigan Employment Security Act, as amended.
      (3)   The employees shall be entitled to three weeks of benefits for each
four credit weeks earned working for the city up to a maximum of 26 weeks of
benefits for 34 earned credit weeks, provided that the claimant has worked at
least 34 weeks in the 52 weeks preceding the week in which the claimant applied
for benefits. The minimum duration shall not be less than 10½ weeks if the
claimant worked 14 weeks and earned at least $25.01 in each week. Each eligible
individual shall be paid his weekly benefit rate with respect to the week for
which he earns or receives no remuneration or remuneration equal to less than
half his weekly benefit rate, or shall be paid half his weekly benefit rate
with respect to the week for which he earns or receives remuneration equal to
at least one-half but less than his weekly benefit rate.
      (4)   Any change in the rate of regular benefits and their duration that
would be mandatory to meet the requirements for equivalency with the Michigan
Employment Security Act shall become effective on the same day to change the
method of determination of amounts of benefit payments as provided in this
section.
(‘83 Code, § 38.03)
   (C)   Benefits shall be paid weekly at a time and place fixed by the
Administrator. All beneficiaries must report weekly to the Administrator's
office on designated days for weekly benefit checks and determination of
continuing eligibility. For continuing eligibility, a beneficiary must be
actively seeking work, and must be registered with the Michigan Employment
Security Commission. No beneficiary who shall refuse any reasonable bona fide
offer of employment shall receive any benefits after such refusal.
(‘83 Code, § 38.09)
(Ord. 74-011, passed 12-23-74; Am. Ord. 75-001, passed 1-3-75; Am. Ord. 77-002,
passed 3-7-77; Am. Ord. 77-003, passed 3-21-77)
§ 37.06 DISQUALIFICATIONS.
   A claimant is disqualified from receiving benefits if the Administrator
finds that an individual is unemployed due to an ineligible termination or
separation as specified in
§ 37.07, has left his work voluntarily or has accepted permanent full-time work
with another employer, has failed without just cause to apply for available
work, has failed to accept suitable work when offered, or has failed when
directed to return to his customary work.
(‘83 Code, § 38.07) (Ord. 74-011, passed 12-23-74)
§ 37.07 INELIGIBLE TERMINATIONS AND SEPARATIONS.
   An employee shall not be eligible for benefits under the unemployment
compensation system established by this chapter if the unemployment shall
result from any of the following.
   (A)   Retirement under any charter retirement system or any future
retirement system covering city employees.
   (B)   Discharge or suspension for misconduct connected with one's work, for
intoxication while at work, for absence due to imprisonment, or for an act of
assault, theft, or sabotage connected with his work.
   (C)   Resignation, including resignation in lieu of discharge.
   (D)   Leave of absence for any reason, whether voluntary or involuntary.
   (E)   Temporary separation made at the request of the employee.
   (F)   Participation or direct interest in a labor dispute including any
strike, unauthorized work stoppages, or other concerted action.
(‘83 Code, § 38.08) (Ord. 74-011, passed 12-23-74)
§ 37.08 DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   The Administrator shall promptly make a determination after an
application for benefits is filed as to whether the claimant is a covered
individual eligible and qualified to draw benefits based upon the available
information. The issuance of each benefit check shall be considered a
determination that the claimant receiving the check was a covered individual
eligible and qualified for benefits. If a claimant refuses work of fails to
apply for work or in any other way is or becomes disqualified or ineligible for
benefits, the Administrator shall promptly make a written determination of
disqualification or ineligibility and shall send the claimant notice thereof.
(‘83 Code, § 38.11)
   (B)   Upon the written request of any claimant within 15 days following any
determination or decision respecting qualification, eligibility, or rate of
benefits, the Administrator shall promptly review the prior determination and,
if necessary, may order a hearing thereon. Upon review with or without hearing,
the Administrator shall issue a redetermination affirming, modifying, or
reversing the prior determination and stating the reasons therefor. The
redetermination shall be final unless an appeal is filed as provided in
§ 37.10(A). (‘83 Code, § 38.12)
(Ord. 74-011, passed 12-23-74)
§ 37.09 RULES AND PROCEDURES.
   Rules and procedures including any necessary forms may be established by the
Administrator to administer the unemployment compensation system. The
Administrator may bring suit in the name of the city to recover any monies paid
upon a fraudulent or untrue application or claim.
(‘83 Code, § 38.10) (Ord. 74-011, passed 12-23-74)
§ 37.10 APPEALS BOARD; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   There is established an Unemployment Compensation Appeal Board, to
consist of three members appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City
Council to serve for a period of three years. Members of the first Board of
Appeals existing hereunder shall be appointed for the terms of one year, two
years, and three years respectively, and annually thereafter one member shall
be appointed for the term of office of three years. It shall be the duty of the
Board to review redeterminations and decisions of the Administrator pertaining
to the unemployment compensation system, provided that a claim of appeal is
filed within 15 days of a decision or redetermination. The time to file a claim
of appeal shall not begin until an employee has been notified in writing of his
right to appeal. (‘83 Code, § 38.13)
   (B)   The Appeal Board may on its own motion affirm, modify, set aside, or
reverse any decision or order on the basis of the evidence previously submitted
in a case, or may direct the taking of additional evidence, or may permit any
of the parties to a decision or order to initiate further appeals before it.
The Appeal Board shall promptly notify parties of its findings and decisions
and its reasons therefor, but it may omit the giving of any reasons if the
previous order, decision, or determination is affirmed without any alteration
or modification. (‘83 Code, § 38.14)
(Ord. 74-011, passed 12-23-74)
§ 37.11 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   The manner in which appeals to the Appeal Board shall be presented, the
reports thereon required from the interested party or parties, and the
procedure governing appeals shall be in accordance with rules prescribed by the
Appeal Board. A full and complete record shall be kept of all proceedings in
connection with an appeal. Staff, space, and such clerical service as is needed
shall be provided by the Administrator to the Appeal Board.
(‘83 Code, § 38.15) (Ord. 74-011, passed 12-23-74)
§ 37.12 EXTENSION PERIOD.
   Whenever the last day of the period to apply for redetermination, or to
appeal any decision, determination, or redetermination falls on a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday, the period shall run until the end of the next day
which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday.
(‘83 Code, § 38.16) (Ord. 74-011, passed 12-23-74)
§ 37.13 FINANCES.
   Financing shall be accomplished through the unemployment compensation system
fund, herewith established to account for related revenue and expenditures,
including payment of unemployment benefits. The Clerk-Treasurer shall recommend
to the City Council annual appropriations to be made for this activity;
however, no appropriations will be required after fund balance of $10,000 has
been accumulated in the unemployment compensation system fund.
(‘83 Code, § 38.17) (Ord. 74-011, passed 12-23-74)
§ 37.14 FALSE STATEMENTS.
   No person shall, with intent to deceive, make any false or untrue statements
or reports. In addition to criminal action based on any false or untrue
statements or reports, the Administrator may recommend disciplinary or other
action.
(‘83 Code, § 38.18) (Ord. 74-011, passed 12-23-74) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
CHAPTER 38: (RESERVED)
 CHAPTER 39: CITY POLICIES
Section
Smoking in Public Buildings
   
39.01   Purpose
   
39.02   Definitions
   
39.03   Non-applicability
   
39.04   Smoking prohibited
   
39.05   Designated smoking areas
   
39.99   Penalty
§ 39.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote public health by
reducing involuntary exposure to tobacco smoke in public places, in accordance
with the intent of Public Act 198 of 1986, being M.C.L.A. 333.12601 et seq.
(‘83 Code, § 40.01) (Ord. 87-002, passed - - 87)
§ 39.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the definitions of SMOKING, PUBLIC PLACE,
PUBLIC BODY, and MEETING, as set forth in Public Act 198 of 1986, being
M.C.L.A. 333.12601 et seq. are adopted.
(‘83 Code, § 40.02) (Ord. 87-002, passed - - 87)
§ 39.03 NON-APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall not apply to a room, hall, or building used for a private
function if the seating arrangements are under the control of the sponsor of
the function and not under the control of the city, or to a private enclosed
room or office occupied exclusively by a smoker, even if the room or enclosed
office may be visited by a nonsmoker.
(‘83 Code, § 40.03) (Ord. 87-002, passed - - 87)
§ 39.04 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   An individual shall not smoke in a public place or at a meeting of a public
body, except in a designated smoking area.
(‘83 Code, § 40.04) (Ord. 87-002, passed - - 87) Penalty, see
§ 39.99 
§ 39.05 DESIGNATED SMOKING AREAS.
   Smoking shall be permitted only in areas designated by a sign as required by
Public Act 198 of 1986, § 12605, being M.C.L.A. 333.12605.
(‘83 Code, § 40.05) (Ord. 87-002, passed - - 87) Penalty, see
§ 39.99 
§ 39.99 PENALTY.
   A person who violates this chapter shall be subject to a civil fine of not
more than $100 for a first violation and not more than $500 for a second or
subsequent violation.
(‘83 Code, § 40.99) (Ord. 87-002, passed - - 87)
CHAPTER 40: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
Section
   
40.01   Definitions
   
40.02   Advisory petition
   
40.03   Report of City Manager
   
40.04   Public hearing; notice
   
40.05   Resolution of determination
   
40.06   Special assessment roll
   
40.07   Objections; hearing
   
40.08   Corrections and changes
   
40.09   Contractual provision
   
40.10   Subordination of Special Assessment Tax Levies
   
40.11   Assessment district for street lighting and similar services
Cross-reference:
   Special Assessments, see Charter, Article VIII
§ 40.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHARTER. The Garden City Charter.
   COST. Includes the expense of survey, spreading of roll, notice,
advertising, printing, and all other costs incidental to the making of the
improvement.
   ENGINEER. The duly appointed and acting Engineer of the city.
   IMPROVEMENT. Any public betterment.
   LOT or PARCEL OF LAND. Any subdivision, lot, or portion thereof as
officially platted, or any unplatted parcel of land as may be described upon
any official records.
   OWNER. The last recorded title holder of any lot or parcel of land, or the
person whose name is listed last upon the city tax roll as owner of a certain
piece or parcel of land.
(‘83 Code, § 100.01) (Ord. 78-012, passed 5-1-78)
§ 40.02 ADVISORY PETITION.
   (A)   The Council, in order to ascertain whether or not a reasonable number
of property owners to be assessed desire any particular improvement to be made,
may request and receive a petition therefor, or may receive a petition
voluntarily presented; but in either event, a petition shall be advisory only.
(‘83 Code, § 100.02)
   (B)   All advisory petitions shall be addressed to the Council and contain a
brief description of the improvement sought to be made and shall be signed by
real property owners only, whose signatures shall be followed by a brief
description of the real property to be improved. The signatures on any
petitions shall be verified by the oath of one or more of the circulators of
the petition, before filing. (‘83 Code, § 100.03)
   (C)   Advisory petitions shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall check them
for signatures and correctness. If they are found to be in order he shall
present them to the Council at its next regular or special meeting called for
the purpose. (‘83 Code, § 100.04)
(Ord. 78-012, passed 5-1-78)
§ 40.03 REPORT OF CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   When, by the provisions of the Charter and the laws of the state, the
Council shall have powers to make a public improvement by special assessment,
they shall, by resolution, set forth the improvement intended to be made and
direct the City Manager to prepare a report with the assistance of the Engineer
containing any information they may request concerning the improvement. (‘83
Code, § 100.05)
   (B)   The City Manager shall request the Engineer to prepare or cause to be
prepared plans and specifications of the improvements to be made, an estimate
of the life of the improvement and of the cost thereof, and plats of the lands
affected thereby, and such other information as the Council may have requested.
(‘83 Code, § 100.06)
   (C)   The City Manager shall prepare his report and include in it a schedule
of all property affected by the proposed improvement, listing the assessed
valuation, tax delinquencies, whether land is vacant or improved, pertinent
information on any parcels as are owned by public authorities, and such other
information as the Council may have requested. He shall present it to the
Council along with the plans and specifications of the Engineer, together with
his recommendation as to what proportion of the cost should be paid by special
assessment and what part, if any, should be a general obligation of the
municipality, the number of installments in which the assessment should be
spread, and the lands which should be included in the special assessment
district. (‘83 Code, § 100.07)
(Ord. 78-012, passed 5-1-78)
§ 40.04 PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE.
   (A)   After the filing of the report and plans and specifications referred
to in
§ 40.03, the Council shall, by resolution, order the same filed with the Clerk,
and provide for a public hearing before them on the improvement to be made.
Notice of the hearing shall be given to each owner of or party in interest in
property in the special assessment district to be assessed, whose name appears
on the last local tax assessment record of the municipality, by mailing a
notice by first class mail addressed to each owner or party in interest at the
address shown on the tax records at least ten days before the date of the
hearing; and by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation
in the municipality, to be designated by the Council, or by posting notice
thereof in three places within the municipality, the publication or posting to
be not less than ten days prior to the date of hearing. (‘83 Code, § 100.08)
   (B)   At the time and place specified in the notice for the public hearing,
the Council shall meet and hear any person to be affected by the proposed
public improvement. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time by the
Council, and the Council may make any changes in the proposed work or
assessment which shall seem reasonable or proper in view of any objections, or
for any other reason which may appear to be for the best interests of the
municipality. However, if the improvements intended to be made are enlarged
upon or additions made to the district to be assessed, they shall not be done
until after another hearing is held pursuant to notice as required for original
hearings. (‘83 Code, § 100.09)
(Ord. 78-012, passed 5-1-78)
§ 40.05 RESOLUTION OF DETERMINATION.
   After the public hearing, the Council may, by resolution, determine to make
the improvement and defray the whole or any part of the cost of the improvement
by special assessment upon the property especially benefitted in proportion to
the benefits derived, or to be derived. By this resolution the Council shall
approve the plans and specifications for the improvement, determine the number
of installments in which assessments may be paid, determine the rate of
interest to be charged on installments (not to exceed 6% per annum), designate
the district or land and premises upon which special assessment shall be
levied, direct the Assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance
with the Council's determination, and designate the name or number by which the
assessment roll shall be known and referred to.
(‘83 Code, § 100.10) (Ord. 78-012, passed 5-1-78)
§ 40.06 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL.
   (A)   The Assessor shall thereupon prepare a special assessment roll,
including all lots and parcels of land within the special assessment district
designated by the Council, and assess to each lot or parcel of land a relative
portion of the whole sum to be levied against all the lands in the district as
the benefit to each lot or parcel of land bears to the total benefit to all
lands in the district. There shall also be entered upon the roll the amount
which has been assessed to the municipality at large. (‘83 Code, § 100.11)
   (B)   When the Assessor has completed the assessment roll, he shall attach
thereto, or endorse thereon, his certificate to the effect that the roll has
been made by him pursuant to a resolution of the Council (giving its date of
adoption) and that in making the assessments therein, he has, as near as may
be, according to his best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions
contained in the resolution and the Charter and the provisions of this chapter.
Thereupon, he shall file the special assessment roll with the Clerk, who shall
present it to the Council. (‘83 Code, § 100.12)
   (C)   Upon receipt of the special assessment roll, the Council shall order
it filed in the office of the Clerk for public examination, and shall by
resolution fix the time and place for public hearing when the Council will meet
and review the roll. Notice of the hearing shall be given to each owner of or
party in interest in property in the special assessment district to be assessed
whose name appears on the last local tax assessment records of the
municipality, by mailing a notice by first class mail addressed to the owner or
party in interest at the address shown on the tax records at least ten days
before the date of the hearing; and by publication at least once in a newspaper
of general circulation in the municipality, to be designated by the Council, or
by posting notice thereof in three public places within the municipality, the
publication or posting to be not less than ten days prior to the date of
hearing. (‘83 Code, § 100.13)
(Ord. 78-012, passed 5-1-78)
§ 40.07 OBJECTIONS; HEARING.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the special assessment roll may file
objections thereto in writing with the Clerk prior to the close of the hearing,
which written objections shall specify in what respect they deem themselves
aggrieved. (‘83 Code, § 100.14)
   (B)   The Council shall meet and review the special assessment roll at the
time and place appointed or at an adjourned date therefor, and shall consider
any written objections thereto. (‘83 Code, § 100.15)
   (C)   If, at or prior to final confirmation of any special assessment, more
than 50% of the number of owners of privately-owned real property to be
assessed for any improvement shall object in writing to the proposed
improvement, the improvement shall not be made by proceedings authorized by
this chapter, except by the affirmative votes of all of the members of the
Council; however, this section shall not apply to sidewalk construction. (‘83
Code, § 100.16)
(Ord. 78-012, passed 5-1-78)
§ 40.08 CORRECTIONS AND CHANGES.
   (A)   The Council may correct the roll as to any assessment or description
of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein. Any changes
made in the roll shall be noted in the Council minutes. (‘83 Code, § 100.17)
   (B)   After the hearing and review, the Council may confirm the special
assessment roll with such corrections as may have been made, if any, or may
refer it back to the Assessor for revision, or may annul it and any proceedings
in connection therewith. (‘83 Code, § 100.18)
   (C)   The Clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation upon each special
assessment roll, and upon confirmation the roll shall be final and conclusive.
(‘83 Code, § 100.19)
(Ord. 78-012, passed 5-1-78)
§ 40.09 CONTRACTUAL PROVISION.
   In the event that all persons or property owners to be affected by any
proposed improvement agree that the proposed improvement be made and that a
special assessment be levied in connection therewith, the municipality may, in
lieu of the foregoing procedure, enter into a written contract with all of the
persons or property owners affected thereby, which contract, when properly
approved and executed, shall operate as a complete special assessment
procedure, and the assessment shall be made in accordance with the contract.
(‘83 Code, § 100.20) (Ord. 78-012, passed 5-1-78)
§ 40.10 SUBORDINATION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT TAX LEVIES.
   A special assessment tax lien established under the provisions of the City
Charter or Chapter 41 of this Code may be subordinated by taxpayers when
refinancing a homestead mortgage, upon submission of proof of refinancing and
the approval of the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer may establish
guidelines, upon approval of the City Council, in order to facilitate taxpayers
seeking a tax lien subordination.
(‘83 Code, § 100.21) (Ord. 96-002, passed 2-19-96)
§ 40.11 ASSESSMENT DISTRICT FOR STREET LIGHTING AND SIMILAR SERVICES.
   All improvements consisting of the construction, installation, maintenance
and operation of systems, facilities and equipment for street lighting or other
similar services shall be accomplished pursuant to the improvement procedure
provisions provided under §§
40.03 to
40.08, both inclusive, of this chapter, except and provided, however, that
where such construction or installation is performed by the Detroit Edison
Company, or some other public utility company, and the cost thereof is not
charged to the city or the users of the service, then in such case:
   (A)   The report and recommendation of the City Manager, which may be
required under §
40.03, shall omit all information as to cost of construction and shall include
all other information required by said §
40.03, together with such schedules of existing rates and service charges as
may be submitted to the city by the Detroit Edison Company or other public
utility; and the Council, in acting on such report pursuant to §
40.05, shall consider only such matters as are required by this division;
   (B)   Neither the whole or any part of such cost of construction shall be
assessed against any property within the proposed special assessment district;
   (C)   The regular, approved rates for such service, as charged to the city,
less the amount thereof constituting a general obligation of the city, shall be
annually assessed upon the property especially benefitted, as provided in §§
40.05,
40.06,
40.07, and
40.08;
   (D)   All other sections of this chapter which are inconsistent with or
contrary to the intent of this section, are hereby made and declared to be
inapplicable to all assessments made under this section; and
   (E)   The Department of Public Services is hereby authorized to adopt
reasonable rules and regulations governing the administration of this section.
(Ord. 11-012, passed 9-12-11)
CHAPTER 41: MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS
Section
   
41.01   Definitions
   
41.02   Commencement of action
   
41.03   Issuance and service of citations
   
41.04   Contents of citations
   
41.05   Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau
   
41.06   Schedule of civil fines
§ 41.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. Public Act 236 of 1961, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 600.101 et seq.
   AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL. A police officer, building inspector, director of
public services, or designee, ordinance officer, or other personnel of the city
authorized by this Code or any ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction
citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices.
   BUREAU. The city Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau as established by
this chapter.
   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION. A civil action in which the defendant is
alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION NOTICE. A written notice prepared by an
authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the city Municipal
Ordinance Violations Bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed
for the violation by the schedule of civil fines under §
41.06, as authorized under Public Act 236 of 1961, §§ 8396 and 8707(6), being
M.C.L.A. 600.8396 and 600.8707(6).
(‘83 Code, § 41.01) (Ord. 94-011, passed 9-26-94)
§ 41.02 COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION.
   A municipal civil infraction may be commenced upon the issuance by an
authorized city official of a Uniform Law Citation directing the alleged
violator to appear in court, or a municipal civil infraction violation notice
directing the alleged violator to appear at the city Municipal Ordinance
Violations Bureau.
(‘83 Code, § 41.02) (Ord. 94-011, passed 9-26-94; Am. Ord. 18-004, passed 3-19-
18)
§ 41.03 ISSUANCE AND SERVICE OF CITATIONS.
   Uniform Law Citations shall be issued and served by authorized city
officials as follows.
   (A)   The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a
reasonable time after the citation is issued.
   (B)   The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be district
court.
   (C)   Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form
approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed
with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the city
and issued to the alleged violator as provided by § 8705 of the Act.
   (D)   A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized
city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in
the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and
if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and
signature of the official: “I declare under the penalties of perjury that the
statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge and belief.”
   (E)   An authorized city official who witnesses a person committing a
municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and
as completely as possible, original and required copies of a citation.
   (F)   An authorized city official may issue a Uniform Law Citation to a
person if the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction. If a Uniform Law Citation is
issued pursuant to division (F) of this section, and the Defendant denies
responsibility for the municipal civil infraction, further proceedings shall
not be held until a sworn complaint authorized by the city attorney is filed
with the court.
   (G)   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized
city official as follows.
      (1)   Except as provided by division (G)(2) of this section, an
authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the
alleged violator.
      (2)   If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or
occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does
not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served
upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the
copy of the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In
addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first-class mail to the owner
of the land, building or structure at the owner's last known address as
established on the city tax roll.
(‘83 Code, § 41.03) (Ord. 94-011, passed 9-26-94; Am. Ord. 18-004, passed 3-19-
18)
§ 41.04 CONTENTS OF CITATIONS.
   (A)   A uniform law citation shall contain the name and address of the
alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where the
alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the Municipal
Violations Bureau and court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall
be made.
   (B)   Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she
may do one of the following.
      (1)   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in
person or by representation, at or before the time specified for appearance and
pay the scheduled fine for the infraction in a manor set forth by §
41.05(F).
      (2)   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with
explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance, or in person, or by
representation and pay the scheduled fine for the infraction in a manor set
forth by §
41.05(F) or pay a reduced fine should the judge impose one in consideration of
Defendant's explanation.
      (3)   Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing
either of the following.
         (a)   Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a district
court judge or magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city.
         (b)   Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
         (c)   The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of
the following.
            1.   That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility
"with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator must
apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone or by representation within
the time specified for appearance, and obtain a scheduled date and time for an
appearance.
            2.   That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility,
the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone
or by representation within the time specified for appearance, and obtain a
scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is
specified on the citation.
            3.   That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal
hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city.
            4.   That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear
in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity
of being represented by an attorney.
            5.   That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in
person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
         (d)   The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the
failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the
citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor
and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on
the municipal civil infraction.
(‘83 Code, § 41.04) (Ord. 94-011, passed 9-26-94; Am. Ord. 18-004, passed 3-19-
18)
§ 41.05 MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU.
   (A)   Bureau established. The city hereby establishes a Municipal Ordinance
Violations Bureau ("Bureau") as authorized under § 8396 of the Act to accept
admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to
municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized
city officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed
by this Code or any chapter.
   (B)   Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The Bureau
shall be located at the City of Garden City Police Department and shall be
under the supervision and control of the City of Garden City Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police, subject to the approval of City Council, shall adopt rules
and regulations for the operation of the Bureau.
   (C)   Disposition of violations. The Bureau may dispose only of municipal
civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a
municipal civil infraction violation notice (as opposed to a Uniform Law
Citation) has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a
particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation
at the Bureau. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the city from
issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from
prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of
the Bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of
responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining
civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The Bureau shall not
accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the
offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event
shall the Bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of
any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation. No person shall be
required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the Bureau,
and may have the violation processed before a court of appropriate
jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at
the Bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's
rights, privileges and protection accorded by law.
   (E)   Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil
infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city
officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided
for citations as provided in §
40.03(F) and (G) of this chapter. In addition to any other information required
by this code or other ordinance, the notice of violation shall indicate the
time by which the alleged violator must appear at the Bureau, the methods by
which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of the
Bureau, the hours during which the Bureau is open, the amount of the fine
scheduled for the alleged violation, and the consequences for failure to appear
and pay the required fine within the required time.
   (F)   Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving
a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the Bureau and
pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in
the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by
mail, in person or by representation.
   (G)   Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid.
If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal ordinance
violation notice, and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the
civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the
violation are not paid at the Bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may
be filed with the district court and a copy of the citation may be served by
first-class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known
address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all
particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by §§ 8705 and 8709
of the Act, but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations
stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the
alleged violator how to respond to the citation.
(‘83 Code, § 41.05) (Ord. 94-011, passed 9-26-94; Am. Ord. 18-004, passed 3-19-
18)
§ 41.06 SCHEDULE OF CIVIL FINES.
   (A)   A schedule of civil fines payable to the Bureau for admissions of
responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices is
hereby established. The fines for the violations listed below shall be as
follows.
Code Section(s)* Offense Fine
Code Section  Offense                                                       Fine
(s)*
              Failure to comply with any provisions of §§
54.03 -       54.03 through                                                 $100
54.07         54.07, inclusive
Solid Waste   First repeat offense                                          $150
              Second or subsequent offense                                  $200
              Parking Commercial vehicles over 10,000 (GVWR) on public      $100
70.05         rights-of-way
              First repeat offense                                          $150
              Second or subsequent offense                                  $200
              Failure to comply with snow emergency requirements            $100
71.05         First repeat offense                                          $150
              Second or subsequent offense                                  $200
72.01;        Failure to comply with any provisions of §§
72.15 -       72.01 &                                                       $100
72.17         72.15 through
Motorcylces,  72.17, inclusive
bicycles,     First repeat offense                                          $150
skateboards,  Second or subsequent offense                                  $200
and skates
90.01(A)      Keeping/ housing of animals/fowl except animals commonly      $100
Domestic      classified as pets
Animals and   First repeat offense                                          $150
Fowl          Second or subsequent offense                                  $200
              Failure to comply with animal control regulations of §§
90.15 -       90.15 through                                                 $100
90.99         90.99, inclusive
Dogs and Cats First repeat offense                                          $150
              Second or subsequent offense                                  $200
91.01 -       Failing to comply with any provision of the NFPC and/or the   $200
91.03         IFC
National Fire First repeat offense                                          $250
Prevention
Code (NFPC)
and/or 2021
International
Fire Code     Second or subsequent offense                                  $300
(IFC) or any
subsequent
edition as
approved by
the ICC
92.01 -       Failure to comply with nuisance regulations of §§
92.99         92.01 through                                                 $200
Public        92.99, inclusive
Nuisances     First repeat offense                                          $250
              Second or subsequent offense                                  $300
93.09         Failure to comply with parking regulations in the city park   $100
Parking in    First repeat offense                                          $150
the City Park Second or subsequent offense                                  $200
94.16         Failure to pave driveway approach within one year of street   $100
Driveway      paving
Approach      First repeat offense                                          $150
              Second or subsequent offense                                  $200
92.46         Failure to comply with temporary storage or parking house
Temporary     trailers, recreational vehicles, boats, snowmobiles, other    $100
Storage or    utility trailers as required by the section
Parking of    First repeat offense                                          $150
Vehicles      Second or subsequent offense                                  $200
94.45 -       Failure to comply with the snow removal requirements of §§
94.50         94.45 through                                                 $100
Snow Removal  94.50, inclusive
on Streets    First repeat offense                                          $150
Sidewalks     Second or subsequent offense                                  $200
              Failure to comply with permit requirements and general        $100
154.037       regulations concerning fences
Fences        First repeat offense                                          $150
              Second or subsequent offense                                  $200
              Failure to comply with sign regulations of §§               $100
154.600 et    154.600 et seq., inclusive
seq.          First repeat offense                                          $150
              Second or subsequent offense                                  $200
                                                                            $100 plus
                                                                            double
              Failure to comply with comply with Building, Plumbing,        permit fee
              Mechanical or Electrical Code regulations of §§             if no
              151.01 through 151.04, inclusive                              original
                                                                            permit
                                                                            obtained
                                                                            $200 plus
                                                                            double
151.01 -                                                                    permit fee
151.04        First repeat offense                                          if no
                                                                            original
                                                                            permit
                                                                            obtained
                                                                            $300 plus
                                                                            double
                                                                            permit fee
              Second or subsequent offense                                  if no
                                                                            original
                                                                            permit
                                                                            obtained
                                                                            $100 plus
                                                                            double
                                                                            registration
              Failure to obtain rental registration certificate before      fee if no
              renting or leasing a dwelling                                 original
                                                                            rental
                                                                            registration
                                                                            certificate
                                                                            obtained
                                                                            $100 plus
                                                                            double
                                                                            registration
153.02                                                                      fee if no
Rental        First repeat offense                                          original
Registration                                                                rental
                                                                            registration
                                                                            certificate
                                                                            obtained
                                                                            $100 plus
                                                                            double
                                                                            registration
                                                                            fee if no
              Second or subsequent offense                                  original
                                                                            rental
                                                                            registration
                                                                            certificate
                                                                            obtained
              Failure to comply with zoning code regulations of §§
154.001 -     154.001 through                                               $200
154.488       154.488, inclusive
              First repeat offense                                          $300
              Second or subsequent offense                                  $400
 
* Including chapter(s), article(s), sub-section(s) or portions thereof, as
specified in this schedule of fines.
   (B)   A copy of the schedule, as amended from time to time, shall be posted
at the Bureau.
(‘83 Code, § 41.06) (Ord. 94-011, passed 9-26-94; Am. Ord. 18-004, passed 3-19-
18; Am. Ord. 19-001, passed 1-7-19; Am. Ord. 20-006, passed 11-23-20; Am. Ord.
23-005, passed 12-18-23)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER
      
51.   SEWERS
      
52.   WASTEWATER DISCHARGE CONTROL
      
53.   WATER AND SEWER RATES
      
54.   SOLID WASTE
      
55.   POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 50: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Service connections
   
50.03   Service connection fee schedule
   
50.04   Connection of water service
   
50.05   Hydrant use
   
50.06   Water emergency
   
50.07   Additional regulations
   
50.08   Damage to water facilities
Cross Connections
   
50.10   Cross connections
Water Meters
   
50.20   Meters required
   
50.21   Access required
   
50.22   Reimbursement for damage
   
50.23   Accuracy required
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works of the city.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The pipeline extending from the water main to the
building served or to the consumer’s system.
   WATER MAIN. That part of the city water distribution system located within
easement lines or streets and designed to supply more than one water
connection.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99; Am. Ord. 21-001, passed 1-25-21)
§ 50.02 SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   Service connections shall be installed by the building contractor upon
payment of the required connection fee and meter installation fee. All meters
and water connections shall be the property of the city. Connection fees and
meter installation charges shall be not less than the cost of materials,
installation costs, and overhead attributable to installation.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99)
§ 50.03 SERVICE CONNECTIONS FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   All service connection taps shall be installed by the building
contractor. The city shall levy a permit fee, charged in accordance with the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule in Chapter 12 of this Code, to cover inspection
costs, administrative costs, and installation of the meter and accessories. All
costs shall be borne by the property owner.
   (B)   In addition to division (A) above, rates for meters of sizes indicated
shall be at the city’s current purchase price.
   (C)   All property zoned for industry under the Zoning Code, for the purpose
of water service, shall be required to use a service pipe of a minimum diameter
of two inches.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99)
§ 50.04 CONNECTION OF WATER SERVICE.
   No person, other than an authorized employee of the Department, shall turn
on or off any water main gate valve or a water service, except that a
contractor may turn on a water service for testing his work (when it must be
immediately turned off), or upon receiving a written order from the Director.
However, upon written permit from the Director, water may be turned on for
construction purposes only, prior to the granting of a certificate of occupancy
for the premises, and upon payment of the charges applicable thereto.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see
§ 10.99 
§ 50.05 HYDRANT USE.
   (A)    No person, except an employee of the city in the performance of his/
her duties, shall open or use any fire hydrant, except in the case of extreme
emergency, without first securing a written permit from the Director of the
Department of Public Works. Any person found to be in violation of this mandate
may upon being found guilty of a misdemeanor violation, be jailed for a term
not to exceed 30 days or fined not to exceed $300, or both, in the discretion
of the court.
   (B)   Permits may be granted in the discretion of the Director, upon written
application in a form as prescribed and upon the applicant paying a deposit
equal to the cost of the hydrant meter apparatus. The permits shall be issued
for a period not to exceed 30 days. Maximum water consumption under any one
permit shall not exceed 8,000 cubic feet.
   (C)   All water shall be metered and will be billed to the permittee at the
most current rate applicable for the use of city water. A hydrant meter use
charge of $20 shall be added to the cost of the metered water. The city shall
provide a hydrant meter and wrench. In no case shall any hydrant be opened or
closed except with a hydrant wrench provided by the city.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99; Am. Ord. 21-001, passed 1-25-21)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99 
§ 50.06 WATER EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the amount of water being used is disproportionate to the amount of
water available for distribution, when other demands upon the available supply
are taken into consideration, the Director may declare that a water emergency
exists, and make and publish rules regulating or prohibiting sprinkling and
other nonessential uses of water from the city water distribution system. No
rules or regulations shall be effective until 24 hours after the publication
thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or other public
media. Any person violating such rule or regulation shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as prescribed in
§ 10.99 of this code.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see
§ 10.99 
§ 50.07 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   The Director may make and issue additional rules and regulations concerning
the water distribution system, connections thereto, meter installations and
maintenance, hydrants and water mains, and the appurtenances thereto, not
inconsistent herewith.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99)
§ 50.08 DAMAGE TO FACILITIES.
   No person, except an authorized employee of the city in the performance of
his duties, shall willfully or carelessly, break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, clog, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, building, or
equipment which is part of the city water distribution system.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see
§ 10.99 
CROSS CONNECTIONS
§ 50.10 CROSS CONNECTIONS.
   This section regulates cross connections with the public water supply
system, i.e., a connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances through
which water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants can enter the
public water supply system.
   (A)   The city adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules
of the Michigan Department ofEnvironment, Great Lakes and Energy, being
R325.11401 to R325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code.
   (B)   It is shall be the duty of the city to cause inspections to be made of
all properties served by the public water supply where cross connection with
the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and
reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as
established by the Garden City Water Department and as approved by the
Department of Environment, Great Lakes and Energy requirements.
   (C)   The representative of the city shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
system of the city for the purpose of inspection of the piping system or
systems thereof for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessees, or
occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any
pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property.
The refusal of such information or refusal of such access, when requested,
shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections.
   (D)   The city is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water
service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in
violation of this section exists and to take such other precautionary measures
deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the
cross connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of
this section.
   (E)   All testable backflow prevention devices shall be tested initially
upon installation to be sure that the device is working properly. Subsequent
testing of devices shall be conducted at a time interval specified by the city
and in accordance with Department of Environment, Great Lakes and Energy
requirements. Only individuals approved by the city shall be qualified to
perform such testing. That individual(s) shall certify the results of his/her
testing.
   (F)   This program covers all commercial and industrial users. A fee shall
be charged to the above users per the city’s consolidated fee schedule.
(Ord. 07-004, passed 4-2-07; Am. Ord. 21-001, passed 1-25-21)
WATER METERS
§ 50.20 METERS REQUIRED.
   (A)    All premises using water shall be metered, except as otherwise
provided by this code. All meters shall be installed by the Department. No
person, unless authorized by the Department of Public Works, shall break or
injure the seal or change the location of, alter, or interfere in any way with
any water meter.
   (B)   Master meters for multi-user buildings shall be installed as directed
by the Department of Public Services of the city, and the city shall bill the
owner for all water consumed on the premises as metered by the master meter.
Individual meters may be used if approved by the Public Service Director.
   (C)   The owner of existing properties shall have 90 days after formal
notification of the requirement for master meters to install the meters.
   (D)   Any use of non-metered water for the purpose of residential
construction shall be subject to a fee, charged in accordance with the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule in Chapter 12 of this Code, per single-family
residence, condominium, or apartment.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99; Am. Ord. 21-001, passed 1-25-21)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99 
§ 50.21 ACCESS REQUIRED.
   The Department shall have the right to shut off the supply of water to any
premises where the Department is not able to obtain access to the meter. Any
authorized employee of the Department shall, at all reasonable hours, have the
right to enter the premises where meters are provided for the purpose of
installing, reading, testing, removing, or inspecting same. No person, firm or
corporation shall hinder, obstruct, or interfere with an employee in the lawful
discharge of his duties in relation to the care and maintenance of a water
meter.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see
§ 10.99 
§ 50.22 REIMBURSEMENT FOR DAMAGE.
   Any damage which a meter may sustain resulting from carelessness of the
owner, agent, or tenant, or from neglect of any of them to properly secure and
protect the meter, as well as any damage which may be wrought by freezing, hot
water, or steam backing from a boiler, shall be paid by the owner of the
property to the city upon presentation of a bill therefor. In cases where the
bill is not paid, the water shall be shut off and shall not be turned on again
until all charges have been paid to the city.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see
§ 10.99 
§ 50.23 ACCURACY REQUIRED.
   (A)   A meter shall be considered accurate if, when tested, it registers not
to exceed 2% more or 5% less than the actual quantity of water passing through
it. If a meter registers in excess of 2% more than the actual quantity of water
passing throughout it, it shall be considered "fast." If a meter registers in
excess of 5% less than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it
shall be considered "slow."
   (B)   If any meter shall fail to register properly, the Department shall
estimate the consumption on the basis of former consumption records and bill
accordingly.
   (C)   A consumer may require that the meter be tested. If the meter is found
to be accurate or “slow,” a charge, in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule in Chapter 12 of this Code, will be made, and the bill will be
adjusted as provided in division (D) of this section. If the meter is found to
be "fast," or in some other way defective, it shall be repaired, no charge
shall be made, and the bill will be adjusted as provided in this chapter.
   (D)   If a meter has been tested at the request of a consumer and shall have
been determined to register "fast," the city shall credit the customer with a
sum equal to the percent “fast” multiplied by the amount of all bills incurred
by the customer within the six months prior to the test, and if the meter so
tested is determined to register "slow," the Department may collect from the
consumer a sum equal to the percent "slow" multiplied by the amount of all
bills incurred by the consumer for the six months prior to the test. When the
Department, on its own initiative, makes a test of a water meter, it shall be
done without cost to the consumer.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see
§ 10.99 
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Definitions
   
51.002   Unauthorized discharge prohibited
   
51.003   Private sewer systems
   
51.004   Sewer connection required
   
51.005   Damage to facilities
Use of the Public Sewers
   
51.015   Separate sewers required
   
51.016   Building sewers
   
51.017   Discharge prohibitions
   
51.018   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
51.019   Drainage restrictions
   
51.020   Unpolluted drainage; structural changes required
   
51.021   Declaration of nuisance
   
51.022   Special agreements
   
51.023   Right of entry
Pretreatment; Monitoring
   
51.035   Pretreatment facilities; maintenance
   
51.036   Control manhole
   
51.037   Measurements and tests
Permits; Fees
   
51.050   Building sewer permits and fees
   
51.051   Building sewer fee schedule
 
   
51.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOD or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in parts per million by weight.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building, and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works of the city.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food,
and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
   GARBAGE, PROPERLY SHREDDED. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been cut or shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial processes, as distinct
from sanitary sewage.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of water, either surface or ground water.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights, and is controlled by public authority.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage, and to which storm, surface,
and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangements of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm and surface runoff
water and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removed by
laboratory filtering.
   WATERCOURSE. Any channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99; Am. Ord. 21-001, passed 1-25-21)
§ 51.002 UNAUTHORIZED DISCHARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in an
unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage
or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage,
industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions or this chapter.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.003 PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (B)   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of §
51.004(A), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Director. A
county permit is also required for an on-site sewage disposal system (OSDS).
The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other
information as are deemed necessary by the Director. A permit and inspection
fee, charged in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in
Chapter 12 of this Code, shall be paid at the time the application is filed.
   (D)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Director.
   (E)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of
Public Health of the state, and shall be constructed and connected in
accordance with the plumbing regulations of the city. No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet.
   (F)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in division (E) of this
section, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
   (G)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
system facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
   (H)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer, or otherwise
limit his powers.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see §
51.999 
§ 51.004 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of
the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect the facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations
supplementary hereto, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do
so, provided that the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to uncover, make
connections with or openings into, use, alter, block, or disturb any public
sewer, manhole, catch basin, or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a
written permit from the Director.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.005 DAMAGE TO FACILITIES.
   No person, except an authorized employee of the city in the performance of
his duties, shall willfully or carelessly break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, clog, or tamper with any manhole, structure, appurtenance, building, or
equipment which is part of the city sewage system.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see §
51.999
USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 51.015 SEPARATE SEWERS REQUIRED.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.016 BUILDING SEWERS.
   (A)   The entire building sewer, from the public sewer to the building
drain, shall be maintained at all times in a sanitary manner by the owner, at
no expense to the city.
   (B)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Director, to meet all the
requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   All building sewer construction and the installation of pipes,
fittings, and appurtenances shall be done in accordance with the building
regulations of the city and such supplementary rules and regulations as the
Director may prescribe.
   (D)   The holder of a building sewer permit shall notify the Director when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connections shall be made in the presence of an authorized employee of the
Department.
   (E)   All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Director. Street
openings shall be subject to the requirements of
Ch. 94 of this code.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.017 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer.
   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F.
   (B)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million,
by weight, of fat, oil, or grease.
   (C)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
   (D)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
   (E)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, wood, sticks, grass clippings,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, cloth, feathers, tar, plastics, paunch manure, or
any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow
in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.
   (F)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 10.0,
or having an average pH higher or lower than 7.0, or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and
personnel of the sewage works.
   (G)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving
waters of a sewage treatment.
   (H)   Any water or wastes containing suspended solids of a character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle the materials
at the sewage treatment plant.
   (I)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.018 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   (1)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand,
and other harmful ingredients; except that the interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Director, and shall be located as to
be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
      (2)   Grease and oil interceptors shall be of substantial construction,
watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in
place, shall be gastight and watertight.
   (B)   Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at
all times.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.019 DRAINAGE RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, or occupant of any building in
the city to introduce new inflow resources to the separate sanitary sewer
system; construct new combined sewers except for replacement of existing
combined sewers where no prudent feasible alternative exists; and also that all
new construction tributary to the combined sewer system is designed to minimize
inflow contribution to the combined sewer system and that any new building
sanitary wastewater connection to a separate sanitary sewer shall not contain
footing drain and/or roof leader wastewater contributions.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.020 UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE; STRUCTURAL CHANGES REQUIRED
   It is the joint duty of the owner, lessee, and occupant of premises now
constructed to disconnect any existing water drainage connections as prescribed
in §
51.019 on or before June 1, 1969, so that water falling on the roofs of
buildings shall not be conducted directly into public sanitary sewers, and
shall not be conducted into any connecting basement drain or house footing
drainage line thereof. Existing connections shall be permanently scaled by
concrete or other suitable material in a manner approved by the enforcing
official. Roof drainage shall be permitted to flow upon the ground in such a
manner as to reach the public sewers or drains by ground surface drainage as
slowly as possible.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.021 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   The construction of drainage contrary to the provisions of §
51.020 is a public nuisance to be abated in the manner hereinbefore set forth.
It shall be the duty of the Department of Public Works to enforce the changes
throughout the city that are made necessary by §§
51.019 and
51.020.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99; Am. Ord. 21-001, passed 1-25-21) Penalty, see §
51.999 
§ 51.022 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   Nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city
for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see §
51.999 
§ 51.023 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Director and any authorized employee of the Department bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties
for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and
testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see §
51.999
PRETREATMENT; MONITORING
§ 51.035 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES; MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   (1)   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes
having a five-day Biochemical Oxygen Demand greater than 300 parts per million
by weight; or containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended
solids; or containing any quantity of substances described in §
51.017; or having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily
sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Director. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Director, the owner shall
provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to
reduce the Biochemical Oxygen Demand to 300 parts per million, and the
suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight; or reduce objectionable
characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in §
51.017; or control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes.
      (2)   Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating
to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the Director and of the State Department of Health, and no
construction of such facilities shall be commenced until approvals are obtained
in writing.
   (B)   Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner, at his expense.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.036 CONTROL MANHOLE.
   When required by the Director, the owner of any property served by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be accessible at all times to the Director, and shall
be constructed in accordance with the plans approved by the Director. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained
by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.037 MEASUREMENTS AND TESTS.
   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in §§
51.017 and
51.035(A) shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage, as published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in §
51.036, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event
that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the
point at which the building sewer is connected.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99) Penalty, see §
51.999
PERMITS; FEES
§ 51.050 BUILDING SEWER PERMITS AND FEES.
   (A)   All connections into a public sewer of the city shall be made only on
written authorization and permits issued by the Director or his designee. The
application for a permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city. A
permit and inspection fee shall be in the amount specified as passed by
resolution of the city and posted in the Department of Public Works of the
city.
   (B)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of the property. The owner shall
indemnify the city from all loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99; Am. Ord. 21-001, passed 1-25-21) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.051 BUILDING SEWER FEE SCHEDULE.
   Until the City Council shall otherwise provide by resolution, the schedule
of fees for that portion of the building sewer lying on public property
installed within the city shall be as follows.
   (A)   All sewer connection taps shall be installed by the building
contractor. All costs of installation shall be borne by the property owner. The
city shall levy a permit fee, charged in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule in
Chapter 12 of this Code, to cover inspection costs and administrative costs. In
addition to the above fee, a service charge shall consist of a capital charge
based upon a fee, in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in
Chapter 12 of this Code, per unit for sewer service. A unit shall be regarded
as a normal house service connection for a single-family residence.
   (B)   There shall be paid on behalf of any premises making a direct private
connection to any public water and/or sanitary sewer line which has not been
either privately constructed and paid for on behalf of the premises or publicly
financed at least in part by means of special assessments levied against the
property on which the premises are located, for the privilege of making use of
public water or sewer line as a water or sanitary sewer lateral, at the time of
application for a tap permit, a lateral benefit charge, as set forth in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule in
Chapter 12 of this Code.
   (C)   Building sewer installations made at premises outside the city shall
be 200% of the fees set forth above or as hereafter may be established for city
installations by City Council resolution.
   (D)   All property zoned for industry under the zoning code of this city,
for the purpose of sewer service, shall be required to use a service pipe of a
minimum diameter of eight inches. The minimum fee for such sewer service
connection based on the minimum size of an eight-inch service pipe shall be
charged in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in
Chapter 12 of this Code for industrially zoned property.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99)
§ 51.999 PENALTY
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is assigned shall be subject to the
provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, neglects, or
refuses to comply with, or who resists enforcement of, any of the provision of
§§
51.019 through
51.021, may be fined no more than $500 for each offense, or committed to the
county jail for not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court.
Each day on which a violation occurs shall be a separate offense.
   (C)   First offenses may be settled by pleading guilty and signing a waiver
of right to trial at the Traffic Violations Bureau of the city and paying a $5
fine; however, the defendant named in the complaint in the first offense shall
not be entitled to settle his case or enter his plea if it shall have been
necessary to issue a warrant for his arrest.
   (D)   In the event of a second violation being charged under this chapter,
the defendant named in the complaint shall appear before the District Court of
the City for trial, and shall not be entitled to settle the offense at the
Traffic Violations Bureau.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99)
CHAPTER 52: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Purpose
   
52.02   Authority
   
52.03   Definitions
   
52.04   Abbreviations
Industrial Wastewater Permit
   
52.15   Permit required
   
52.16   Application
   
52.17   Required information
   
52.18   Issuance
   
52.19   Permit conditions
   
52.20   Duration
   
52.21   Permit modification
   
52.22   Transfer prohibited
   
52.23   Small quantity dischargers
Wastewater Discharge
   
52.35   Discharge prohibitions
   
52.36   Monitoring facilities
   
52.37   Inspection, sampling and records
   
52.38   Confidential information
Administration; Fees
   
52.50   Delegation of authority
   
52.51   Industrial user fees
   
52.52   Statutes, laws and regulations
   
52.52   Enforcement
   
52.53   Review and appeal
   
52.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health and safety
by abating and preventing pollution through the regulation and control of the
quantity and quality of wastes admitted to or discharged into the wastewater
collection and treatment system of this city and Detroit POTW and to enable
this city and the City of Detroit as control authority to comply with all
applicable state and federal laws required by the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40
CFR 403).
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are as follows.
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will
interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge
or will pose a hazard to the health or welfare of people or to employees of
this city or the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department.
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will
pass through the system inadequately treated and into the receiving waters, the
atmosphere, the environment, or will otherwise be incompatible with the system.
      (3)   To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim wastewaters or
sludges from the system in an economical and advantageous manner.
      (4)   To provide for the recovery of costs from the users of the Detroit
POTW sufficient to administer regulatory activities and meet the costs of the
operation, maintenance, improvement, or replacement of the system.
   (C)   This chapter regulates the contributors to the Detroit POTW through
the issuance of wastewater discharge permits to certain users and the
enforcement of general requirements for all users, authorizes monitoring and
enforcement, and authorizes fees and penalties.
(‘83 Code, § 54.01) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89)
§ 52.02 AUTHORITY.
   By virtue of the obligations and authority placed upon this city and Detroit
by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act,
as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.); the Constitution of the State of Michigan;
M.C.L.A. §§ 324.3101 et seq., as amended; the Charter of the City of Garden
City; the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for
the Detroit POTW; the Federal District Court consent judgment pertaining to
U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al., C.A. No. 77-1100, as amended; the Urban
Cooperation Act of 1967, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 124.501 et seq.;
statutory provisions governing intergovernmental contracts set forth in Public
Act 35 of 1951, being M.C.L.A. §§ 124.1 through 124.4, as amended; and existing
or future contracts between the Board of Water Commissioners and the city, or
by virtue of common law usage of the system, this chapter shall apply to every
applicable user contributing, or causing to be contributed, pollutants or
wastewater to the Detroit POTW within the jurisdictional boundaries of the
city.
(‘83 Code, § 54.02) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89)
§ 52.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act of 1977, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER. Shall include the following.
      (1)   A corporate officer, if the industrial user is a corporation.
      (2)   A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively.
      (3)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
either of the above, if the representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates or is
the identified corporation, partnership, or proprietorship representative for
responding to discharge inquires or action
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of dissolved oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure five days at 20°C, expressed in terms of weight and concentration
(milligrams per liter (mg/1)) as measured by standard methods.
   BOARD. The Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit.
   CITY. The City of Garden City or the City Council of the City of Garden City
or their authorized representatives or employees, unless otherwise specified.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Shall include BOD, FOG, phosphorus, suspended solids,
and fecal coliform bacteria, plus other pollutants which do not exceed the
control authority's interference or pass- through limitations or the
limitations of this chapter.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A series of individual samples of equal volume or flow-
proportioned volume taken over a specified time period at specified intervals
which are combined into one sample or the equivalent of the foregoing as
determined by the Control Authority. The arrangement of the sample series shall
be tailored to the specific circumstances of the waste stream being tested and
shall reasonably reflect the characteristics of the waste stream at the time of
each individual sample.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY. The Detroit Water and Sewerage Department (DWSD) which
has been officially designated as such by the state under the provisions of 40
CFR 403.12 or authorized representatives or employees of the DWSD.
   COOLING WATER. The non-contact water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration, to which the only pollutant added is
heat.
   DAYS. For purpose of computing a period of time prescribed or allowed by
this chapter, consecutive calendar days.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly
into the waters of the state.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Detroit Department of Water and Sewerage or
the Director's Deputy.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The United States Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a
designation for authorized representatives or employees of the EPA.
   FATS, OIL OR GREASE or FOG. Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats,
waxes, oils, and any other non-volatile material of animal, vegetable, or
mineral origin that is extractable by solvent in accordance with standard
methods.
   FLOW PROPORTIONAL. A composite sample taken with regard to the flow rate of
the waste stream.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis
without regard to the variations in flow rate, but which shall reasonably
reflect the characteristics of the waste stream at the time of sampling.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction of pollutants from any
non-domestic source, regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act (33
USC 1317), into the POTW.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. A person who contributes, causes, or permits wastewater to
be discharged into the POTW from a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade, or
commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable single-family and
multi-family residential dwellings are specifically excluded.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The discharge into the POTW of any liquid, solid, or
gaseous waste or form of energy, or combination thereof, resulting from any
processes of industry, manufacturing, business, trade, or research, including
the development, recovery, or processing of natural resources.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge by a user which, alone or in conjunction with
discharges by other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW or its treatment
processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use, or disposal, and which
causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of
sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with the following
statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more
stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to
as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); and including state
regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act,
and the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1311) which applies to a specific class or
category of industrial users.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit
issued to a POTW pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342).
   NEW SOURCE. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which is
commenced after the publication of proposed national categorical pretreatment
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section.
   PASS-THROUGH. The discharge of pollutants through the POTW into navigable
waters in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of
the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation).
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, unit of
government, school district, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agent, or assigns.
   pH. The intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution calculated by
taking the negative base- term logarithm of the hydrogen ion activity. Activity
is deemed to be equal to concentration in moles per liter.
   POLLUTANT. Any substance or energy added or induced into the user's water
source.
   POLLUTION. The human-made or human-induced degradation or impairment of the
chemical, physical biological, or radiological integrity of water.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the removal of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing the pollutants into the POTW. The reduction, removal, or
alteration may be attained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, or
process changes by other means, except as prohibited by federal, state, or
local law, rules, and regulations.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirements
related to pretreatment other than a national categorical pretreatment standard
imposed on an industrial user.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer of any type controlled by a governmental entity.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. Treatment works as defined by
Section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), and as further defined herein. This
definition includes any publicly owned sewers that convey wastewater to the
Detroit POTW Treatment Plant.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the
POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater including recycling and
reclamation of wastewater.
   SERVICE AREA. Any area from which the wastewater is treated at the city of
Detroit POTW Treatment Plant.
   SIGNIFICANT USERS. Any industrial user of the POTW as defined herein who has
a discharge flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day, exclusive of
storm water and sanitary wastewater; or has discharges subject to the national
categorical pretreatment standards; or requires pretreatment to comply with the
specific pollutant limitations of this chapter; or has, in its discharge, toxic
pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act or other applicable
federal and state laws and regulations, which are in concentrations and volumes
that are subject to regulation under this chapter as determined by the control
authority; or is required to obtain a permit for the treatment, storage, or
disposal of hazardous waste pursuant to regulations adopted by the state or
adopted under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended, by the Federal
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and any amendments thereto, and who may
or does contribute or allow waste or wastewater into the POTW including, but
not limited to, leachate or runoff; or is found by the control authority to
have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on the POTW, the quality of sludge, the POTW's
effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the POTW.
   SLUG. Any pollutant released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or
concentration which will cause interference or pass-through at the POTW as
determined by the control authority.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION or SIC. A classification pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the
President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972, as amended.
   STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedure set forth in the latest edition,
at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution
Control Federal, or methods set forth in 40 CFR 136, Guidelines for
Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants. Where these two
references are in disagreement on procedures for the analysis of a specific
pollutant, the methods given in 40 CFR 136 shall be followed.
   STATE. The State of Michigan.
   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TOTAL). The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which
is removable by laboratory filtration or as measured by standard methods.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants designated as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency under the provisions of Section 307(a) of the Clean Water
Act, (33 USC 1317), or included in the Critical Materials Register promulgated
by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, or other federal or state
laws, rules, or regulations.
   UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with limits imposed under this chapter or with national
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable
control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the
extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless
or improper operation.
   USER. Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the POTW as defined herein.
   WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes of
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions,
whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to or permitted to enter
the POTW. Wastewater may also contain infiltration and inflow waters and
cooling water.
   WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS. Permits issued by the Control Authority or its
designated representative as set forth in §§
52.15 through
52.23 of this chapter.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
(‘83 Code, § 54.03) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89)
§ 52.04 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings.
      BOD   -   Biochemical Oxygen Demand
      CFR   -   Code of Federal Regulations
      EPA   -   Environmental Protection Agency
      FOG   -   Fats, Oil or Grease
      l   -   Liter
      mg      -   Milligrams
      mg/l   -   Milligrams per liter
      NPDES   -   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
      POTW   -   Publicly-Owned Treatment Works
      RCRA   -   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
      SIC   -   Standard Industrial Classification
      SWDA   -   Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq.
      TSS   -   Total Suspended Solids
      USC   -   United States Code
(‘83 Code, § 54.03) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89)
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PERMIT
§ 52.15 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for significant users to discharge into the POTW
without a wastewater discharge permit from the control authority except as
authorized by the control authority or in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
   (B)   All significant users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the
POTW shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with the
following procedures before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. Upon
determination that a permit is required, no connection to the POTW shall be
made and no discharge thereto shall occur until a permit is issued unless
otherwise authorized by the control authority for a period not to exceed 60
days. All existing significant users connected to or contributing to the POTW
shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with the procedures
prescribed in this subchapter. The control authority may require any non-
domestic user to fill out a questionnaire and submit it for the control
authority's use in determining whether the industrial user is a potential
significant user as well as to determine changes or lack of changes in the
user's facilities.
(‘83 Code, § 54.07(A)) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89) Penalty, see
§ 52.99 
§ 52.16 APPLICATION.
   The control authority may notify an industrial user of its belief that the
industrial user is, or may be, a significant user. Upon notification, the
industrial user shall complete and submit an application for a wastewater
discharge permit in the manner and form prescribed by the control authority.
Failure of the control authority to so notify an industrial user shall not
relieve any significant user of a duty to obtain a permit as required by this
chapter.
   (A)   Existing industrial users shall submit a completed application on the
form provided by the control authority within 60 days after being so directed
and provided a form by the control authority.
   (B)   Proposed new industrial users shall request an application form and
submit the completed application at least 90 days prior to start-up.
   (C)   An industrial user which becomes subject to a new or revised national
categorical pretreatment standard and which has not previously submitted an
application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by this chapter shall
apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 90 days after the promulgation
of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. The control
authority may also initiate this action.
   (D)   A separate application shall be required for each separate location.
(‘83 Code, § 54.07) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89) Penalty, see
§ 52.99 
§ 52.17 REQUIRED INFORMATION.
   In support of the application, the industrial user shall submit, in units
and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information.
   (A)   Corporate or individual name, any assumed name(s), federal employer
identification number, address, and location of the discharging facility.
   (B)   Name and title of the authorized representative of the industrial user
who shall have the authority to bind the industrial user financially and
legally.
   (C)   All SIC numbers of all processes at this location according to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, issued by the Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972, as amended.
   (D)   Actual or proposed wastewater constituents and characteristics for
each parameter listed in the permit application form. The parameters shall
include those applicable pollutants having numeric limitations and those
pollutants limited by national categorical pretreatment standards or
regulations for applicable industries. For each parameter, the expected or
experienced maximum and average concentrations during a one-year period shall
be provided. For industries subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards or requirements, the date requested herein shall be separately shown
for each categorical process waste stream. Combined waste streams proposed to
be regulated by the combined waste stream formula shall also be identified.
Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in
40 CFR, Part 136, as amended, (where 40 CFR, Part 136 does not include a
sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the
EPA publication, Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial
Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April, 1977, and amendments or revisions
thereto) or with any other sampling and analytic procedures, where appropriate
and applicable, approved by the EPA; the name and address of the laboratory
performing the analytical work.
   (E)   A listing and description of activities, facilities and plant
processes on the premises. Those processes which are subject to national
categorical pretreatment standards or requirements shall be so designated. As
pertains to division (D) above, identification of which pollutants are
associated with each process.
   (F)   Restricted to only those pollutants referred to in division (D) above,
a listing of raw materials and chemicals that are either used in the
manufacturing process or could yield the pollutants referred to in division (D)
above. Any user claiming immunity from having to provide this information for
reasons of national security shall furnish acceptable proof of immunity.
   (G)   A description of typical daily and weekly operating cycles for each
process in terms of starting and ending times for each of the seven days of the
week.
   (H)   Average and maximum 24-hour wastewater flow rates, including daily,
monthly and seasonal variations, if any; list each national categorical process
waste stream flow rate and the cooling water, sanitary water and storm water
flow rates separately for each connection to the POTW; list each combined waste
stream.
   (I)   A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by the
size, location, elevation and points or places of discharges into the POTW;
also a flow schematic showing which connections receive each national
categorical process waste stream and which connections receive storm water,
sanitary water or cooling water; also show which lines handle each combined
waste stream. This schematic shall be cross-referenced to the information
furnished in division (H) above.
   (J)   Each product produced by type, amount, process, or processes and rate
of production as pertains to processes subject to production based limits under
the national categorical standards or requirements only.
   (K)   A statement regarding whether or not the requirements of this chapter
and the national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements are being
met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and
maintenance work and/or additional construction is required for the industrial
user to meet the applicable standards and requirements.
   (L)   Basic information on the spill containment program and the program for
the prevention of accidental discharges for each of the pollutants referred to
in division (D) above. The information provided shall include the approximate
average and maximum quantities of substances kept on the premises in the form
of raw materials, chemicals and/or wastes therefrom and the containment
capacity for each. Only substances which are in a form which could readily be
carried into the POTW and which constitute a concentration of 5% or greater on
a dry weight basis in the raw material, chemical solution or waste material are
required to be reported. Volumes of less than 55 gallons or the equivalent
thereof need not be reported unless lesser quantities could cause pass-through
or cause interference with the POTW.
   (M) Proposed or actual hours of operation of each pretreatment system for
each production process.
   (N)   A schematic and description of each pretreatment facility. Identify
whether each pretreatment facility is of the batch type or continuous process
type.
   (O)   If other than DWSD potable water, the industrial user's source of
intake water together with the types of usage and disposal method of each water
source and the estimated wastewater volumes from each source.
   (P)   If additional construction and/or operation and maintenance procedures
will be required to meet the requirements of this chapter and the national
categorical standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide any
additional construction and/or implement the required operation and maintenance
procedures.
   (Q)   Any other information as may reasonably be required to prepare and
process a wastewater discharge permit.
(‘83 Code, § 54.07(B)) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89) Penalty, see
§ 52.99 
§ 52.18 ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, the control authority shall review the
application, determine and so notify the industrial user of any of the
following.
      (1)   The industrial user is not required to have a wastewater discharge
permit.
      (2)   The application is incomplete or the information only partially
satisfies the information and data required by 40 CFR 403.12(a) and (b) or the
control authority, and that additional information and data are required, which
shall be promptly furnished.
      (3)   The industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge
permit.
   (B)   The control authority may withhold issuance of a permit to a
significant user which has not submitted an adequate or timely report to the
control authority in accordance with the baseline reporting requirements of 40
CFR 403.12(a) and (b). If the control authority determines an industrial user
is required to have a wastewater discharge permit and has evaluated and
accepted the data furnished, the industrial user will be notified accordingly
by certified mail. The notification shall contain a copy of the proposed
permit, so marked, for the industrial user's review. An industrial user may
contest the determination of the control authority, any term or condition of
wastewater discharge permit including modifications thereof, by filing a
request for reconsideration in accordance with the procedures set forth in
§ 52.54 of this chapter. In the event of such request, the contested terms and
conditions of the proposed permit shall be stayed pending the control
authority's review of contested issues. If the permit is not contested or if
the industrial user fails to respond within 20 days after receipt of the
proposed permit, the permit may be issued as proposed. A permit shall be issued
upon resolution by the control authority of any contested terms or conditions.
Only one facility location shall be included in each permit.
(‘83 Code, § 54.07(D)) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89) Penalty, see
§ 52.99 
§ 52.19 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be deemed to contain all provisions of
this chapter, other applicable laws, rules, regulations, user charges and fees
established without repetition therein. Permits may also contain the following.
   (A)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents or
characteristics if more restrictive than or supplemental to the numeric limits
enumerated in
§ 52.35 of this chapter or the applicable national categorical pretreatment
standards.
   (B)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
   (C)   Requirements for installation, operation and maintenance of discharge
sampling manholes and monitoring facilities by the industrial user.
   (D)   Restrictions on which of the user's discharge waste streams are to be
allowed to be discharged at each point of connection to the POTW.
   (E)   Specifications for industrial user monitoring programs which may
include sampling locations, frequency and type of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule.
   (F)   Requirements for the prevention of accidental discharges and the
containment of spills.
   (G)   Restrictions based on the information furnished in the application.
   (H)   Compliance schedules; the following conditions shall apply to these
schedules.
      (1)   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of upgraded or additional pretreatment facilities,
or to the implementation of additional operation and maintenance procedures
required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment
requirements and standards (that is, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary
plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction, and the like).
      (2)   No increment referred to in division (A) shall exceed nine months.
      (3)   Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report
to the control authority including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress to be met on that date and, if not, the date on
which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for
delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the
established schedule. In no event shall more than 75 days elapse between each
progress report to the control authority.
      (4)   The compliance schedule embodied in an industrial user's wastewater
discharge permit shall be binding until the expiration and fulfillment of the
schedule or until the permit is modified. Changes to the compliance schedule
which are acceptable to the control authority shall be incorporated into the
wastewater discharge permit by modification thereof. Any deviations from the
compliance schedule may result in the industrial user being found in violation
of this chapter.
   (I)   Reporting requirements; in addition to the above, shall be as follows.
      (1)   All permittees shall submit a report to the control authority in
the prescribed form, or an alternative approved form indicating the status of
compliance with all conditions enumerated or referred to in the wastewater
discharge permit or made applicable to the permit by this chapter. The reports
shall be submitted at six-month intervals, unless required more frequently, on
a schedule to be established by the control authority for each permittee.
Except for permittees subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or
requirements, a permittee who has demonstrated consistent compliance with a
permit for a period of one year or more (which contains no compliance
schedule), may request in writing whether all requirements of the permit are
being met and what progress is being made on work under compliance schedules.
The report shall also contain projections of compliance for the next six
months. At a minimum, the report shall also contain a dated and signed
analytical report of at least one representative discharge sample taken during
the period since the last report. If the control authority has sampled the
permittee's effluent since the last report, the control authority's analytical
report may be substituted for that of the permittee. The analytical report
shall show the concentration of each substance for which there is specific
limitation in the permit. The report shall be signed and dated by the
authorized representative of the industrial user.
      (2)   Permittees subject to national categorical pretreatment standard or
requirements shall submit compliance reports at the times and intervals
specified by the federal regulations and the control authority. Compliance
reports shall be submitted to the control authority no later than 90 days
following the final compliance date for a standard, and at six-month intervals
thereafter on the schedule established by the control authority for each
permittee as hereinabove stated. New sources shall commence reporting at the
time of initial discharge into the system. The reports shall be on a form
prescribed by the control authority or on an approved alternative form and
shall indicate the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge
from each regulated process which are limited by national categorical
pretreatment standards and the records of each day's flow for each process unit
in the industrial user's facility which is regulated by pretreatment standards.
The combined waste stream formula may be used for reporting purposes after the
initial information has been furnished to the control authority, provided there
have been no changes to the elements composing the combined waste stream. These
reports shall contain the results of sampling of the discharge and analysis of
pollutants contained therein cross- referenced to the related flow or
production and mass as required to determine compliance with the applicable
national categorical pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall
be as prescribed in the applicable general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR
403) or by the control authority, whichever is more stringent. All sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with applicable regulations. Where 40
CFR 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant
in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the EPA publication, Sampling and Analysis Procedures
for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April, 1977, and
amendments and revisions thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical
procedures approved by the EPA for these purposes. The report shall state
whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance practices and/or
pretreatment construction is necessary to bring the industrial user into
compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards. This report shall be
signed, dated and certified by an authorized representative of the industrial
user or a registered professional engineer.
   (J)   Other requirements reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
   (K)   To the extent the control authority seeks to impose restrictions in a
permit which are more restrictive than established in this chapter, the control
authority shall provide written documentation to substantiate the necessity of
such greater restriction for protection against pass-through, interference, or
violation of the NPDES permit.
(‘83 Code, § 54.07(E)) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89)
§ 52.20 DURATION.
   Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five
years. A permit may be issued for a lesser period of time or may be stated to
expire on a specific date; however, permits shall not be issued for a period
less than one year. Existing permittees shall apply for permit re-issuance a
minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of existing permits on a form
prescribed by the control authority. Upon timely application for re-issuance of
a permit in accordance with this section by a permit holder, the expired permit
shall be automatically extended until modified or reissued by the control
authority.
(‘83 Code, § 54.07(F)) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89)
§ 52.21 PERMIT MODIFICATION.
   The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the
control authority during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements
as identified in
§ 52.35 are amended or other just cause exists. Just cause for a permit
modification includes, but shall not be limited to the following.
   (A)   Material or substantial changes to an industrial user's facility or
operation or changes in the characteristics of the industrial user's effluent.
It shall be the industrial user's duty to request an application form and apply
for a modification of the permit within 30 calendar days of the change,
provided the information previously submitted and unchanged need not be
resubmitted by the permittee. Failure of the industrial user to so apply shall
be considered a violation of this chapter. The control authority may also
modify the permit of its own initiative based on its findings or reasonable
belief of the above.
   (B)   Change(s) in Detroit's NPDES permit.
   (C)   Embodiment of the provisions of a conciliation agreement, court
settlement or order.
   (D)   Any changes necessary to allow Detroit to fulfill its role as control
authority.
   (E)   An industrial user's non-compliance with portions of an existing
permit.
   (F)   A change of conditions within the POTW.
   (G)   A finding of interference or pass-through attributable to the
industrial user.
   (H)   Amendments to, or promulgation of, national categorical pretreatment
standards or requirements. Permittees shall request an application form and
apply to the control authority for a modified permit within 90 days after the
promulgation of a new or revised national categorical pretreatment standard to
which the industrial user shall be subject. Information submitted pursuant to
this division shall be confined to that information related to the newly
promulgated or amended national categorical pretreatment standard or
requirement. However, information previously submitted need not be duplicated,
insofar as the previously submitted information continues to be current and
applicable. The control authority may also initiate this action. The industrial
user shall be informed of any proposed change in its permit at least 60 days
prior to the proposed effective date of the change for any change initiated by
the control authority, unless the change is the result of any enforcement
action taken pursuant to this chapter.
(‘83 Code, § 54.07(G)) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89)
§ 52.22 TRANSFER PROHIBITED.
   Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific person as defined
herein for a specific discharge. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a different person, new owner, new
industrial user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the
written approval of the control authority. It shall be the permit holder's duty
to notify the control authority of any change within 30 days of the change. The
control authority may revoke a permit if it determines that an unreported
change has occurred. The control authority may require the application for a
new or modified permit if a change takes place. Any succeeding person shall
comply with the terms and conditions of any existing permit which the control
authority allows to be retained.
(‘83 Code, § 54.07(H)) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89) Penalty, see
§ 52.99 
§ 52.23 SMALL QUANTITY DISCHARGERS.
   (A)   Industrial users whose maximum daily discharge does not contain more
than the following quantities of the listed pollutants, as expressed in pounds,
may on a pollutant-by-pollutant basis apply to the control authority for an
exemption from the concentration limitations set forth in
§ 52.35(B) and (C) of this chapter for each pollutant. Industrial users granted
such an exemption shall comply with the following poundage limitations.
Pollutant Daily Limit (pounds)
Pollutant       Daily Limit (pounds)
FOG             1.2
Phosphorous (P) 0.25
Arsenic (As)    0.0002
Cadmium (Cd)    0.001
Copper (Cu)     0.005
Cyanide (Cn)    0.003
Lead (Pb)       0.007
Mercury (Hg)    0.00002
Nickel (Ni)     0.007
Silver (Ag)     0.0008
Chromium (Cr)   0.009
Zinc (Zn)       0.03
   (B)   Upon application by an industrial user who has obtained approval to
discharge under the foregoing poundage limitations, the control authority may
on a pollutant-by-pollutant basis grant an exemption from various wastewater
discharge permit requirements described in §§
52.15 through 52.13 of this chapter. No exemptions may be granted to industrial
users subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements.
(‘83 Code, § 54.07(I)) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89) Penalty, see
§ 52.99 
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE
§ 52.35 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   General pollutant prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to
be contributed to the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater
which will cause interference or pass-through. These general discharge
prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not the user is subject
to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, state, or
local pretreatment standards or requirements. In addition, industrial users
shall not contribute the following substances to the POTW.
      (1)   Any liquid, solid, or gas which, by reason of its nature or
quantity, is sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances,
to cause fire or explosion, or to be injurious in any other way to persons, the
POTW, or the operation of the POTW.
      (2)   Any solids or viscous substance, in concentrations or quantities
which are sufficient to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other
encumbrance to the operation of the POTW, such as but not limited to grease,
animal guts or tissues, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood,
feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, cement, spent lime, stone or marble dust,
metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, strings, fibers, spent
grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt residues, residues
from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding
or polishing wastes, or tumbling and deburing stones.
      (3)   Unless more strictly limited in this chapter, any wastewater having
a pH less than 5.0 or more than 10.0 if the equivalent calcium carbonate
alkalinity exceeds 300 mg/l or more than 10.5 if the equivalent calcium
carbonate alkalinity is 300 mg/l or less. If an industrial user wishes to have
a pH limit of 10.5, he shall monitor both pH and alkalinity.
      (4)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
concentration or quantity either singly or by interaction with other pollutants
to cause interference or pass-through or constitute a hazard to humans or
animals.
      (5)   Any liquid gas or solid or form of energy which either singly or by
interaction with other waste is sufficient to create a public nuisance or
hazard to life or is sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their
maintenance and repair.
      (6)   Any substance which is sufficient to cause the POTW's effluent or
any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scum, to be
unsuitable for reclamation processing where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and
reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause
the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria guidelines
or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act with criteria guidelines
or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Federal Clean Air Act, the Federal Toxic Substances
Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge method being used.
      (7)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate the consent
judgement in U.S. EPA v City of Detroit, et. al. C.A. No. 77-1100, or the
Detroit's National Pollutant Elimination System permit.
      (8)   Any wastewater having objectionable color not removed in the POTW
treatment process such as, but not limited to, dye waste and vegetable tanning
solutions.
      (9)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into a public sewer which
exceeds 150° F (66°C) or which will cause the influent at the waste treatment
plant to rise above 140° F (60º C).
      (10)   Any pollutant which constitutes a slug.
      (11)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
      (12)   Any floating fats, oil, or grease which are sufficient to cause
interference with or pass through the POTW.
      (13)   Any solid materials having a specific gravity greater than 1.2 or
a cross-section dimension of one-half inch or greater which are sufficient to
cause interference with the POTW.
   (B)   Specific pollutant prohibitions. No industrial user shall discharge
wastewater containing in excess of the following limitations.
      (1)   Compatible pollutants.
         (a)   Any fats, oil, or grease (FOG) in concentrations greater than
2000 mg/l based on the average of all samples collected within a 24-hour
period.
         (b)   Any total suspended solids (TSS) in concentrations greater than
10,000 mg/l based on a composite sample.
         (c)   Any biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in concentrations greater
than 10,000 mg/l based on a composite sample.
         (d)   Any phosphorus in concentrations greater than 500 mg/l based on
a composite sample.
      (2)   Non-compatible pollutants. No industrial user shall discharge
wastewater containing in excess of the following.
Pollutant  Discharge limit
Pollutant                                                  Discharge limit
Total Arsenic (As)                                            1.0 mg/l
Total Cadmium (Cd)                                            2.0 mg/l
Total Copper (Cu)                                             3.0 mg/l
Total Cyanide (Cn)                                            1.5 mg/l
Total Lead (Pb)                                               1.0 mg/l
Total Mercury (Hg)                                            0.0005 mg/l
Total Nickel (Ni)                                             5.0 mg/l
Total Silver (Ag)                                             1.0 mg/l
Total Chromium (Cr)                                           25.0 mg/l
Total Zinc (Zn)                                               12.0 mg/l
Aroclor 1260 Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCB)                   0.0005 mg/l
Total Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCB)                          0.001 mg/l
Phenolic (4AAP) compounds which cannot be removed by the POTW
treatment plant as determined by the EPA approved method or   0.5 mg/l
amendments thereto.
      (3)   Iron discharges. Commencing on or before July 1, 1988, no
industrial user classified as a significant user shall discharge wastewater
containing total iron in excess of 1000 mg/l based on a composite sample.
Industrial users having total iron discharge concentrations greater than 1000
mg/l shall submit a compliance schedule by July 1, 1987, for achieving the 1000
mg/l limitation by July 1, 1988. This limitation shall not apply to the
discharge of internal circulating water from heat exchangers during the
cleaning cycle.
   (C)   National categorical pretreatment standards. National categorical
pretreatment standards and requirements promulgated pursuant to the Act by the
effective date of this chapter shall be met by affected dischargers provided,
however, that if a more stringent standard or requirement is applicable
pursuant to this chapter, state law or regulation, then the more stringent
standard requirement shall be controlling. The control authority may, by rule
or regulation require compliance with national categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements promulgated after the effective date of this
chapter. Affected dischargers shall comply with the applicable reporting
requirements under 40 CFR 403 and as established by the control authority.
      (1)   Intake water adjustment. Industrial users seeking an adjustment of
national categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of
pollutants in their intake water must comply with the requirements of 40 CFR
403.15. Upon notification of approval by the U.S. EPA, the adjustment shall be
applied by modifying the permit accordingly.
      (2)   Modification of national categorical pretreatment standards. The
control authority may apply to the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, or
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, whichever is applicable, for
authorization to grant removal credits in accordance with the requirements and
procedures of 40 CFR 403.7. Authorization may only be granted when the POTW
Treatment Plant can achieve consistent removal for each pollutant for which a
removal credit is being sought, provided that any limitation on the pollutant
(s) in the NPDES permit are neither being exceeded nor pose the prospect of
being exceeded as a result of the removal credit being granted. Should this
authorization be given to the control authority, any industrial user desiring
to obtain this credit shall make an application to the control authority
consistent with the provisions of 40 CFR 403.7 and this chapter. Any credits
which may be granted under this provision may be subject to modification or
revocation as specified in 40 CFR 403.7 or as determined by the control
authority. A prerequisite to the granting of any removal credit may be that the
industrial user pay a surcharge based on the amounts of pollutants removed by
the POTW, the surcharge being based on fees or rates which the Board may
establish and, when appropriate, revise from time to time. Permits shall
reflect or be modified to reflect any credit granted pursuant to this section.
   (D)   Dilution prohibited. No user shall increase the use of processed water
or, in any way, dilute or attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the
limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or in
any other pollutant-specified limitations or requirement imposed by this
chapter. Combining in-plant waste streams or modulating the release of
pollutants upstream of the sampling point prior to the point of discharge into
the public sewer shall not be construed as dilution except as otherwise
restricted by national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (E)   Hauled-in wastewater. Unloading liquid or solid waste from hauling
vehicles directly into the POTW with or without the benefit of pretreatment is
prohibited unless the person proposing to unload the waste has applied for and
received a permit from the control authority for unloading the waste in
accordance with the Board's rules pertaining thereto. The discharger shall be
subject to applicable terms, conditions, surcharges, fees or rates as
established by the Board. The control authority may establish specific
limitations for sludge from municipally-owned or operated POTW treatment plants
which are different than the specific limitations in this chapter.
   (F)   Right of revision. The city reserves the right to establish different
or more stringent limitations or requirements of discharges to the POTW.
   (G)   Accidental discharges. Each industrial user shall provide protection
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated
by this chapter. Facilities and measures to prevent and abate accidental
discharges shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or industrial user's
cost or expense. All significant users shall submit to the control authority
detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide
protection against accidental discharges. All existing significant users shall
complete and submit a plan within 180 days of the effective date of this
chapter. New significant users shall submit such a plan prior to the time they
commence discharging.
   (H)   Notification requirements. Within one hour of becoming aware of a
discharge into the POTW which exceeds or does not conform with federal, state,
control authority, or city laws, rules, regulations, or permit requirements and
the degree exceeded appears to be more than twice the allowable concentration,
the industrial user shall telephone the control authority at its control center
and notify the control authority of the discharge. The notification shall
include the name of the caller, location and time of discharge, type of
wastewater, estimated concentration of excessive or prohibited pollutants and
estimated volume. Within five calendar days after the discharge, the industrial
user shall submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the
discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences. When required by the control authority, the industrial user's
wastewater discharge permit shall be modified to include additional measures to
prevent future occurrences. Notification shall not relieve the industrial user
of any expense, loss, damages, or other liability which may be incurred as a
result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other environmental impairment
or any other damage to person or property. However, notification received
pursuant to this division or information obtained by the exploitation of
notification shall not be used against any individual in any criminal case,
except a prosecution for perjury or for giving a false statement. Immunity
shall not bar the criminal prosecution of non-natural persons nor shall it bar
the pursuit of administrative or civil remedies against any person.
   (I)   Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to contact in
the event of an actual or potential excessive or prohibited discharge.
   (J)   Recovery of costs. Any user discharging in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter which produces a deposit of obstruction, or causes
damage to or impairs the POTW, or causes Detroit to violate its NPDES permit,
shall be liable for any expense, loss, damage, penalty, or fine incurred
because of the violation or discharge. Prior to assessing costs, the control
authority shall notify the user of its determination that the user's discharge
was the proximate cause of the damage, obstruction, impairment, or violation of
Detroit's NPDES permit, and the intent to assess the costs to the user. Any
notice shall include written documentation which substantiates the
determination of proximate cause and breakdown of cost estimates. Failure to
pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this chapter. The charge
shall be in addition to, not in lieu of, any penalties or remedies provided
under this chapter, other ordinances, statues, regulations, or at law or in
equity.
   (K)   Variance. The Director may grant a variance from the limitations set
forth in divisions (A) and (B) of this chapter in accordance with rules adopted
by the control authority which set forth the guidelines, standards, procedures,
fees, and charges by which a person may be granted such a variance. A variance
shall not be granted to a user if it would result in a violation of an
applicable national categorical pretreatment standard or allow a prohibited
discharge (violate 40 CFR 403.5) or cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with
its NPDES permit. A user requesting a variance shall have the burden of showing
that any guidelines or standards adopted by the Board have been met before a
variance may be granted. The Board may adopt fees or charges for reviewing a
variance application which shall be paid by a user upon applying for a
variance.
(‘83 Code, § 54.05) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89; Am. Ord. 21-001, passed 1-25-
21)  Penalty, see
§ 52.99 
§ 52.36 MONITORING FACILITIES.
   Significant users shall provide, operate, and maintain at their own expense
a sampling manhole or special structure to facilitate monitoring, inspection,
sampling, and flow measurement of their discharge by the control authority and
the industrial user, and to enable the control authority to conduct other
monitoring and sampling as required for determining compliance with discharge
requirements, limits, and standards as provided by this chapter. The sampling
manhole should be situated on the industrial user's premises in a location
readily accessible to the control authority. It shall be the responsibility of
the industrial user to obtain any necessary approvals from the city or other
government entities which may be required by the location and construction of
monitoring facilities in the public street or sidewalk area. This construction
shall only occur when another location would be impractical or cause undue
hardship upon the industrial users. In no case shall the location be obstructed
by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near the
sampling or monitoring manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and
preparation of samples for analysis. The facility and any permanently installed
sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition at the expense of the industrial user. Whether
constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring
facilities shall be provided in accordance with the control authority's
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications.
(‘83 Code, § 54.08) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89) Penalty, see
§ 52.99 
§ 52.37 INSPECTION, SAMPLING AND RECORDS.
   For purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, the control
authority may inspect the establishment, facility, or other premises of the
industrial user. The control authority shall have ready access to the
industrial user's premises to engage in inspection, sampling, compliance
monitoring and/or metering activities. Each inspection activity shall be
commenced and completed at reasonable times, within reasonable limits, and in a
reasonable manner. The control authority shall, upon arrival at the industrial
user's premises, inform the industrial user or the industrial user's employees
that sampling and/or inspection is commencing, and that the industrial user has
the right to observe the inspection and/or sampling. While performing work on
private properties, the control authority and the city shall observe all
reasonable safety, security and other reasonable rules applicable to the
premises established by the industrial user. Representatives of the control
authority shall bear proper credentials and identification and shall be
accompanied by a representative of the industrial user, at the industrial
user's option. The control authority shall have no authority to inquire into
any process beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the POTW. However, employees or representatives shall not be
restricted from viewing any of the facility site. The control authority may
take photographs of facilities subject to this chapter unless specifically
prohibited by the industrial user upon request to be permitted to take
photographs. Where an industrial user has security measures in force, the
industrial user shall make prompt and necessary arrangements with the security
personnel so that upon presentation of appropriate credentials, the control
authority will be permitted to enter immediately for the purposes of performing
their specific responsibilities. Significant users shall sample and analyze
their discharges in accordance with the provisions of their permits. The
control authority may request the samples to be split for the control
authority's independent analysis. Industrial users shall maintain records of
all information from monitoring activities required by this chapter or by 40
CFR 403.12(n). Industrial users shall maintain the records for no less than
three years. This period of record retention shall be extended during the
course of any unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by
the industrial user or the operation of Detroit's industrial pretreatment
program or when requested by the control authority, EPA, or the state.
Industrial users shall, upon the request of the control authority, furnish
information and records relating to discharges to the POTW. Industrial uses
shall make the records readily accessible at all reasonable times, and allow
the control authority to copy the records. In the event the control authority
obtains samples, and analyses are made of the sample, a copy of the results of
the analyses shall be promptly furnished to the owner, operator, or agent in
charge of the premises upon written request by the industrial user's authorized
representative. When requested by the industrial users, the control authority
shall leave a portion of any sample of the user's discharge taken from any
sampling point on or adjacent to the premises for the user's independent
analysis. In case of disputes arising over shared samples, the portion taken
and analyzed by the control authority shall be controlling unless proven
invalid. In the event a grab sample of the industrial user's discharge is
obtained and analyzed by the control authority and found to contain
concentrations of pollutants which are two or more times greater than the
numeric limitations for composite samples as listed in § 54.35(B) of this
chapter, the industrial user shall be required to provide a written report
describing the cause of greater concentration, and a description of the means
by which the concentration may be held to values of less than two times the
composite sample concentration limitation in the future.
(‘83 Code, § 54.09) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89) Penalty, see
§ 52.99 
§ 52.38 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information and data on an industrial user obtained from written
reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs
and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agencies without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests
and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the control authority that
the release of the information would divulge information, processes or methods
of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user.
All claimed confidential information must be clearly marked “Confidential.”
When requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of a report
which disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available
for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request
to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, State Disposal System
permit and/or the Pretreatment programs, provided, however, that the portions
of report shall be available for use by any local, state, or federal agency in
judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information. Information accepted by the control authority as
confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency until and
unless a ten-day notification of intent to transmit is first given to the
industrial user.
   (B)   All information with respect to an industrial user on file with the
control authority shall be made available upon request by that user or the
user's authorized representative during normal business hours.
(‘83 Code, § 54.10) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89)
ADMINISTRATION; FEES
§ 52.50 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   The Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, as the state approved control
authority, is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter on behalf of the city. The city shall enter into a contract with the
Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, which shall set forth the terms and
conditions of delegated authority, consistent with this chapter, and shall
allow the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to perform the specific
responsibilities as control authority, pursuant to state and federal law.
(‘83 Code, § 54.04) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89)
§ 52.51 INDUSTRIAL USER FEES.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs
from industrial users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees shall be
sufficient to meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement, or
replacement of the system or as provided by law, contractual agreement, or
Board action.
   (B)   Charges and fees shall include but not be limited to the following.
      (1)   Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing, operating,
maintaining, or improving the control authority's industrial waste control and
pretreatment programs.
      (2)   User fees based on volume of waste and concentration or quantity of
specific pollutants in the discharge.
      (3)   Other fees deemed necessary to carry out the requirements contained
herein or as may be required by law.
(‘83 Code, § 54.06) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89)
§ 52.52 STATUTES, LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
   Unless otherwise provided, any reference in this chapter to a code standard,
rule, regulation, or law enacted, adopted, established, or promulgated by any
private organization, or any element or organization of government other than
the city shall be construed to apply only to the code, standard, rule,
regulation, or law in effect or existence upon the date of enactment of this
chapter.
(‘83 Code, § 54.11) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89)
§ 52.53 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violations. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any user to do
any of the following.
      (1)   Fail to completely and/or accurately report the wastewater
constituents and/or characteristics of the industrial user's discharge.
      (2)   Fail to report significant changes in the industrial user's
operations or wastewater constituents and/or characteristics.
      (3)   Refuse reasonable access to the industrial user's premises or waste
discharge for the purpose of inspection or monitoring.
      (4)   Fail to comply with any condition or requirement of the industrial
user’s wastewater discharge permit.
      (5)   Fail to comply with any limitation, prohibition, or requirement of
this chapter, including any rule, regulation, or order issued hereunder;
however, if an industrial user acts in full accordance with a compliance
schedule approved and incorporated into the industrial user's wastewater
discharge permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, that industrial
user shall be deemed to be in compliance schedule. Industrial users acting in
full compliance with wastewater discharge permits issued prior to the effective
date of this chapter shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements
of this chapter and the permits shall remain in effect and be enforceable under
this chapter until the expiration date of the permit or until a superseding
permit is issued, whichever occurs first. Industrial users shall comply with
national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements on the date
specified in the federal regulations, regardless of compliance schedules.
   (B)   Upsets. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with limits imposed under this chapter or national
categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of division (B)(1) are
met.
      (1)   An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or
other relevant evidence that the following are true.
         (a)   An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the
specific cause(s) of the upset.
         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures.
         (c)   The industrial user has submitted the following information to
the department, orally or in writing, within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be
provided within five days).
            1.   A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance.
            2.   The period of noncompliance including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue.
            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
      (2)   In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
      (3)   The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to
the extent necessary to maintain compliance with this chapter upon reduction,
loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an
alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the
situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the
treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
   (C)   Emergency suspensions and orders. The control authority may order
suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater
discharge permit where suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the control
authority, to stop any actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present an imminent or significant hazard to the health or welfare of persons
or to the environment, interferes or may interfere with the POTW, or cause or
may cause Detroit to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Any person
notified of a suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or
the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily
with the suspension or revocation order, the control authority shall take such
steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection or services, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or
danger to any individual or the environment. In the event these steps are
taken, the director shall immediately notify the industrial user in writing of
the action and the specific recourse available and shall provide the industrial
user with an opportunity for a hearing before the Director or his designated
representative within ten days of the action. The control authority shall
notify the city of this hearing within ten days of the action. The control
authority shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the sewer or
wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying
discharge. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement to the
control authority within 15 days of the occurrence describing the causes of the
harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence.
   (D)   Notice of violation. Except in the case of an actual or threatened
discharge as specified in division (B) of this section, whenever the control
authority has reason to believe that any industrial user has violated or is
violating this chapter, the control authority shall serve upon the industrial
user a written notice stating the nature of the violation.
   (E)   Notice of control authority action. The city or designated department
thereof, shall be notified by the control authority of any enforcement activity
taken within its boundaries.
   (F)   Administrative actions. Whenever the Director has reasonable grounds
to believe that sewage, wastes, or other wastes of any kind are being or have
been discharged into the wastewater system of the Board in violation of this
chapter, wastewater discharge permit or any prohibition, limitation, or
requirement contained herein, the Director may, except in the case of emergency
or flagrant violation, by conferences, notices, or cooperation, endeavor to the
fullest extent possible to have the industrial user eliminate or remedy the
violation.
      (1)   Conferences. The control authority may order any person who
violates this chapter to attend a conference wherein the control authority may
endeavor to eliminate or remedy the violation by establishing an enforceable
compliance schedule. The notice of violation shall be served at least ten days
before the scheduled conference and shall set forth the date, time, and place
thereof. The conference shall be conducted by a representative of the control
authority. The industrial user shall present a plan and schedule for achieving
compliance with this chapter. The conference attendees may agree upon a
compliance schedule which sets forth the terms and conditions and time period
or schedule for full compliance. Nothing contained herein shall require the
control authority to accept or agree to any proposed plan to schedule or
prevent the control authority from proceeding with a show cause hearing as set
forth in division (F)(2) below. Should the attendees agree to a compliance
schedule, the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit shall be modified
accordingly. An industrial user must exhibit good faith and expeditious efforts
to comply with this chapter and any procedures, requirements, and agreements
hereunder.
      (2)   Show cause hearing. The control authority may order any industrial
user who violates this chapter, or allows a violation to occur, to show cause
before the control authority why a proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. A notice shall be served on the industrial user specifying the time and
place of a hearing before the control authority regarding the violation, the
reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and
directing the industrial user to show cause before the control authority why
any proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, at least ten days before the hearing, with copies sent to the city.
Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation or authorized
representative.
         (a)   Hearing proceeding. A representative of the control authority
shall conduct the show cause hearing and take the evidence, and may do the
following.
            1.   Issue, in the name of the Board, notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of the witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearings.
            2.   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the Director
for action thereon.
         (b)   At any show cause hearing held pursuant to this chapter,
testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically.
      (3)   Actions. After a show cause hearing has been conducted, an order
may be issued to the industrial user by the control authority directing any of
the following actions.
         (a)   Immediate compliance with the industrial user's wastewater
discharge permit or with any applicable limitation, condition, restriction, or
requirement of this chapter or applicable local, state, or federal law or
regulation.
         (b)   That pretreatment of waste by installation of adequate treatment
equipment or proper operation and maintenance of existing treatment equipment
be accomplished within a specified time period. Sewer or wastewater treatment
service may be discontinued upon failure to comply.
         (c)   Submission of compliance reports on effluent quality and
quantity as determined by self-monitoring and analysis during a specified time
period.
         (d)   Submission of periodic reports on effluent quality and quantity
determined by self- monitoring analysis throughout the final period set by a
compliance date.
         (e)   Control of discharge quantities.
         (f)   Payment of costs for reasonable and necessary inspection,
monitoring, and administration of the industrial user's activities by the
control authority during compliance efforts.
         (g)   Any other orders as are appropriate, including, but not limited
to, immediate termination of sewer or wastewater treatment services or
revocation of wastewater discharge permit or orders directing that following a
specified time period, sewer or wastewater treatment service will be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or operation and
maintenance practices have been employed.
      (4)   Public participation. A list of all industrial users which were the
subject of enforcement proceedings pursuant to
§ 52.52 of this chapter during the 12 previous months shall be annually
published by the control authority in the largest daily newspaper, published in
the municipality in which the POTW is located, summarizing the enforcement
actions taken against the industrial users during the same 12 months whose
violations remained uncorrected 45 or more days after notification of
noncompliance over that 12-month period, or which involve failure to accurately
report noncompliance, or required the control authority to use its emergency
authorities. All industrial users identified in a proposed publication shall be
provided a copy of that proposed notice at least 30 days before publication and
provided with an opportunity to comment as to its accuracy.
(‘83 Code, § 54.12) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89) Penalty, see
§ 52.99 
§ 52.54 REVIEW AND APPEAL.
   The following procedures control the course of reconsideration and appeal to
the control authority with respect to the construction, application, or
enforcement of this chapter, and may be used if informal methods do not achieve
satisfaction.
   (A)   Any permit applicant, permit holder, authorized industrial wastewater
discharger, or other discharger adversely affected by any decision, act, or
determination made by or on behalf of the control authority by the Director or
his authorized representative in interpreting or implementing the provisions of
this chapter or any permit issued thereunder, with the exception of any
decision, determination, or order made following a show cause hearing pursuant
to this chapter, may file with the control authority a written request for
reconsideration. The request shall be received at the control authority's
General Offices within 20 days of the date of the occurrence of the control
authority's action or decision to dispute. All requests shall set forth the
requestor's name and address, along with a brief statement of the reasons it is
requesting and the factual basis for the request. Requests shall be filed in
triplicate and sent by certified mail to the General Offices of the control
authority.
   (B)   The control authority shall notify the applicant within 15 days after
receipt of any request for reconsideration of the time and place for hearing
upon the request. The hearing shall be conducted by the Director or his
authorized representative not less than ten days and not more than 30 days
after mailing the notice. The hearing may be continued for a reasonable time
for good cause shown, at the discretion of the Director. The hearing shall be
held as an informal consultation and conference at which the requestor, in
person or by counsel, shall present his argument, evidence, data, and proof in
connection with the issue submitted. The parties shall not be bound by legal
rules of evidence. The hearing shall be recorded and the requestor shall be
provided with a transcript thereof upon request and upon payment of the cost
thereof. The decision of the Director shall be made known to the requestor by
certified mail within 30 days after the hearing.
   (C)   The requestor may appeal the ruling of the Director on the request for
reconsideration of any order or decision issued following a show cause hearing
pursuant to this chapter by filing a request for an appearance before the
Board. The procedures for appearance before the Board will be determined by the
Board, and the requestor will be notified of these procedures within 30 days
after such a request is filed.
   (D)   The filing of a request for reconsideration or for appeal and
appearance before the Board shall stay any action by the control authority,
unless the action is immediately necessary to prevent pass- through,
interference, or other significant harm to the POTW.
(‘83 Code, § 54.13) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any user who violates any provision of this chapter, including the
failure to pay any fees, charges, or surcharges imposed hereby, or any
condition or limitation of a permit issued pursuant thereto or who knowingly
makes any false statements, representations, or certification to any
application, record, report, plan, or other document filed or required to be
maintained pursuant to this chapter or wastewater discharge permit, or who
tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device required
under this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500 per day for each violation, or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both. The control authority is
hereby authorized to seek, through its counsel, prosecution of criminal charges
against any person violating any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes
into the POTW contrary to the provisions of this chapter, permit, or order
issued thereunder, the city or the control authority may commence a civil
action to enjoin the discharge or to enforce compliance with its ordinance,
permit, or order issued thereunder, in the Circuit Court for Wayne County or
other appropriate court. Upon a proper showing of a violation of its ordinance,
permit, or order issued thereunder, a permanent or temporary injunction may be
granted without bond. The control authority or the city may also seek
additional legal and/or equitable relief. Instituting suit in this circuit
court does not constitute an exclusive election of remedies and does not
prohibit the control authority or the city from commencing action in federal
court for discharges believed to be in violation of this chapter, state and
federal requirements pursuant to the Clean Water Act, Detroit's NPDES permit,
or other applicable laws or requirements. The control authority may also
recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporters' fees, and other
unusual expenses related to enforcement activities or litigation against the
person found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations,
and permits issued hereunder.
(‘83 Code, § 54.99) (Ord. 89-009, passed 8-21-89)
CHAPTER 53: WATER AND SEWER RATES
Section
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Basis of charges and rates; water and sewage disposal service
   
53.03   Water supply rates
   
53.04   Sewage disposal rates
   
53.05   Billing
   
53.06   Discontinuance of service; lien
   
53.07   Service to the city
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure,
five days at 20°C. Expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams
per liter (mg/l)), as measured by standard methods.
   DEPARTMENT. The City Department of Public Works.
   DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Sewage derived principally from sanitary conveniences of
dwellings, business buildings, institutions and the like, and which does not
exceed the limits of normal strength and sewage.
   EXCESS SEWAGE. Quantities of sewage and wastes delivered to the Wayne County
Interceptor which exceed the quantity of potable water purchased from the city.
Excess sewage is normally the result of infiltration of ground water and inflow
of storm water into the wastewater system.
   FOG. Fats, oils, or grease in the waste expressed in terms of milligrams per
liter (ppm).
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction of non-domestic
pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307 (b) or (c) of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Pub. L. 92-500, as amended, into the
public waste treatment system.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any liquid, solid, or gaseous waste or form of energy or
combination thereof resulting from any business, trade, or research, including
the development, recovery, or processing of natural resources.
   mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
   NORMAL STRENGTH SEWAGE. Sewage or wastes, the concentration of which does
not exceed BOD of 275 mg/l, and fats, oils, and grease which do not exceed 100,
mg/l, which have a pH between 6.5 and 9.5 and which do not contain a
concentration of other constituents which will interfere with the normal sewage
treatment process.
   P.   Phosphorous in the waste expressed in terms of milligrams per liter
(ppm).
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, public or private corporation, or
public agency or instrumentality.
   POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt or industrial, municipal, or
agricultural waste discharged into water.
   PREMISES. Each lot or parcel of land, building, or premises having any
connection to the water supply or sewage disposal systems of the city.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public
utility.
   SEWER-DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The sum of the applicable sewer user charge,
surcharges, and debt service charges.
   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The sum of the applicable sewer user charge,
surcharges, and debt service charges.
   SEWER USER. The recipients of services provided by the wastewater system,
including premises which are connected to and discharge sewage or wastes into
the system and shall consist of the following classes.
      (1)   COMMERCIAL USER. A user whose premises are privately owned and used
to perform and/or sell services and /or products for profit (e. g., retail and
wholesale stores, restaurants, motels, gasoline stations) and discharge
primarily domestic sewage.
      (2)   GOVERNMENT USER. A user whose premises are publicly-owned
facilities performing government office building, post office, library, school)
and discharge only domestic sewage.
      (3)   INDUSTRIAL USER. A user whose premises are privately-owned and used
for manufacturing a product from raw or purchased material and discharges
wastewater used in any way in the manufacturing process in addition to domestic
sewage.
      (4)   INSTITUTIONAL USER. A user whose premises are owned by a non-profit
organization pursuant to Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended (e.g., churches, hospitals) and discharge primarily domestic sewage.
      (5)   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user whose premises are domiciles for single or
multiple-family use and discharge only domestic sewage.
   SEWER USER CHARGE. A charge based on thousands of cubic feet, or fractions
thereof, levied on users of the wastewater system for user's proportionate
share of the cost of operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the
system.
   SEWER USER SURCHARGE. A charge imposed on a user of the wastewater system
who discharges sewage or wastes in excess of normal strength.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of,
or is suspended in water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which is removable
by laboratory filtering as measured according to standard methods.
   WASTEWATER or SEWAGE. Spent water which may be a combination of the liquid
and water- carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial
plants, institutions, or other land uses, including drainage water
inadvertently present in the waste.
   WASTEWATER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. All costs, direct and indirect,
inclusive of all expenditures attributable to administration, replacement,
treatment and collection of sewage and wastes on a continuing basis in
conformance with the NPDES permit, and other applicable regulations.
   WASTEWATER REPLACEMENT COSTS. Expenditures and costs for obtaining and
installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during
the service life of the wastewater system to maintain the capacity and
performance for which the system was designed and constructed.
   WASTEWATER SYSTEM or SEWER SYSTEM. Any part, or all, of the property,
structures, equipment, sewers, materials, or appurtenances used in conjunction
with the collection and disposal of wastewater, including the publicly-owned
treatment works ( POTW).
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99; Am. Ord. 21-001, passed 1-25-21)
§ 53.02 BASIS OF CHARGES AND RATES; WATER AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SERVICE.
   (A)   Water service and sewer disposal service rates shall be based on water
consumption as measured by a meter installed on the premises of the water
supply customer by the Department. Sewage disposal service rates shall be based
on water consumption as determined by the meter installed on the premises of
the sewage disposal customer. No free water service or sewage disposal service
shall be furnished to any person or property.
   (B)   Rates and charges for the use of the sewage disposal system of the
city shall be based upon the methodology in the User Charges System approved by
the Department of Environment, Great Lakes and Energy. Revisions to the rates
and charges for water service and sewage disposal service shall be established
by resolution of the City Council which shall be enacted apart from the
published ordinances as necessary to ensure sufficiency of revenue in meeting
operation, to meet operational, maintenance and replacement costs, as well as
debt service.
   (C)   User charges hereby established for operational, maintenance and
replacement costs shall be subject to annual review. User charges shall be the
same for all customers of the system regardless of geographical boundaries
subject to §
53.03(C).
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99; Am. Ord. 13-008, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 14-002,
passed 6-9-14; Am. Ord. 15-002, passed 6-1-15; Am. Ord. 16-003, passed 6-6-16;
Am. Ord. 21-001, passed 1-25-21)
§ 53.03 WATER SUPPLY RATES.
   (A)   Consumption base rate: $69.75 per 1,000 cubic feet of water.
   (B)   Annual fixed user charges, in addition to those in division (A) above:
$78.43.
   (C)   Service outside city. Water service rates charged for water service
outside the city shall be 100% of the rates and charges set forth in divisions
(A) and (B) above, or as may hereafter be established for city water service by
City Council resolution.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99; Am. Ord. 00-001, passed 7-17-00; Am. Ord. 01-007,
passed 7-2-01; Am. Ord. 03-001, passed 9-9-02; Am. Ord. 03-012, passed 6-2-03;
Am. Ord. 05-002, passed 3-7-05; Am. Ord. 06-011, passed 6-5-06; Am. Ord. A-08-
002, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 08-006, passed 6-23-08; Am. Ord. A09-009, passed
5-15-09; Am. Ord. 11-007, passed 6-20-11; Am. Ord. 12-004, passed 6-25-12; Am.
Ord. 13-008, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 14-002, passed 6-9-14; Am. Ord. 15-002,
passed 6-1-15; Am. Ord. 16-003, passed 6-6-16; Am. Ord. 18-018, passed 7-1-18;
Am. Ord. 19-008, passed 5-20-19; Am. Ord. 20-002, passed 5-4-20; Am. Ord. 21-
006, passed 5-17-21; Am. Ord. 22-003, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord. 23-002, passed 5-
8-23; Am. Ord. 24-004, passed 5-20-24; Am. Ord. 25-003, passed 6-23-25)
§ 53.04 SEWAGE DISPOSAL RATES.
   (A)   Consumption base rate, including excess sewage: $77.09 per 1,000 cubic
feet.
   (B)   Annual fixed user charges: $78.43.
   (C)   RV annual fixed construction charges: $20.03.
   (D)   Sewage disposal rates outside the city. Charges for sewage disposal
service to premises outside the city shall be 100% of the rates and charges set
forth in divisions (A) and (B) above or as may hereafter be established for
sewage disposal service by City Council resolution.
   (E)   Industrial Waste Control (IWC) charge. All non-residential users shall
pay an IWC charge based on meter size. This is a flat rate without regard to
consumption. Rates shall be based on meter size as prescribed by the wholesale
supplier.
   (F)   Industrial waste surcharge. Commercial and industrial users who
discharge wastes into the public wastewater system in excess of the strength of
normal sewage shall be charged a surcharge which reflects their equitable share
of the costs of wastewater treatment. The surcharge shall be determined as
follows.
      (1)   Purpose and objective. This section has as its purpose the
protection of public health and safety, and because of the widely varying
quality characteristics of the sewage discharged by different users of the
public sewer and the publicly-owned treatment works, it is the objective of
this section to impose sewage charges which reflect the cost of treating sewage
strength factors as well as sewage volume. These charges to commercial and
industrial users will be in the form of a payment called a surcharge and will
reflect industries equitable costs of wastewater treatment in excess of the
strength of the domestic sewage. Sewage charge will be based on a volume rate
and surcharge based on volume of discharge and the strength of BOD, suspended
solid, phosphorous, fats, oil and grease or other pollutants present in the
wastewater. In the event other pollutants are required to be surcharged under
this subchapter, authorized variances, or by special arrangements with the
owner of the publicly-owned treatment works, the rules and regulations adopted
herein will apply, the rules and regulations being on file with the City Clerk.
      (2)   Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to and in accordance
with the requirements of Federal Law Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1231 et seq. and
applicable Federal Regulations, the requirements of the Settlement Agreement in
U.S. v City of Detroit, et al, Civil Action #7-71111.
      (3)   Industrial waste pollutant strength surcharges. It is ordained that
the Schedule of Industrial Waste Pollutant Strength Surcharges is hereby
adopted and made effective for users of the wastewater system of the city. The
surcharges are to be computed as follows.
            Computation of Industrial Waste Pollutant Strength Surcharge
   The industrial waste pollutant strength surcharge shall be computed in
accordance with the following formula.
   SC = 0.0624 V a(BOD-275) + b(TSS-350)+c(P-12)+d(FOG-100)
In which the following apply.
   SC = Pollutant strength surcharge fee in dollars for the billing period in
Mcf (1000 cubic feet).
   V = Volume of waste discharged in the billing period in Mcf (1000 cubic
feet).
   BOD = Five-day biochemical oxygen demand of the waste expressed in
milligrams per liter (ppm).
   TSS = Total suspended solids in the waste expressed in milligrams per liter
(ppm).
   P = Phosphorus in the waste expressed in milligrams per liter (ppm).
   FOG = Fats, oils, and grease expressed in milligrams per liter (ppm).
   a, b, c, d = Surcharge rates, $/pound for treating BOD, TSS, P, and FOG
respectively.
   0.0624 = Factor which converts Mcf to MM lbs.
   a = $.254.285/pound.
   b = $324.341/pound.
   c = $3.7293.862/pound.
   d = $.221/2.55/pound.
      (4)   Compliance required. In accordance with the basic service agreement
between the city, the county, and the Wayne County Board of Public Works or
other properly designated agent of the county named pursuant to M.C.L.A. §§
46.171 through 46.185, and M.C.L.A. §§ 123.71 et seq., this
section provides that any person, firm, or corporation discharging wastewater
into the publicly-owned sewer system shall comply with the standards, rules and
regulations controlling the quality or quantity of discharge or wastewater into
the system. The standards, rules, and regulations shall be established from
time to time by the county or its designated agent.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99; Am. Ord. 99.008, passed 8-30-99; Am. Ord. 00-001,
passed 7-17-00; Am. Ord. 01-007, passed 7-2-01; Am. Ord. 03-001, passed 9-9-02;
Am. Ord. 03-012, passed 6-2-03; Am. Ord. 03-013, passed 6-16-03; Am. Ord. 05-
002, passed 3-7-05; Am. Ord. 06-011, passed 6-5-06; Am. Ord. A08-002, passed 8-
20-07; Am. Ord. 08-006, passed 6-23-08; Am. Ord. A09-009, passed 5-15-09; Am.
Ord. 11-007, passed 6-20-11; Am. Ord. 12-004, passed 6-25-12; Am. Ord. 13-008,
passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 14-002, passed 6-9-14; Am. Ord. 15-002, passed 6-1-15;
Am. Ord. 16-003, passed 6-6-16; Am. Ord. 18-018, passed 7-1-18; Am. Ord. 19-
008, passed 5-20-19; Am. Ord. 19-009, passed 8-5-19; Am. Ord. 20-002, passed 5-
4-20; Am. Ord. 21-006, passed 5-17-21; Am. Ord. 22-003, passed 5-9-22; Am. Ord.
23-001, passed 1-9-23; Am. Ord. 23-002, passed 5-8-23; Am. Ord. 24-004, passed
5-20-24; Am. Ord. 25-003, passed 6-23-25) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.05 BILLING.
   (A)   All meters shall be read and all water service and sewage disposal
service shall be billed and collected no less than quarterly (every three
months) or more often. All bills shall be immediately due and payable, and may
be paid without penalty by the due date shown thereon.
   (B)   The charges set forth in §§
53.03 and
53.04 shall be effective as to bills paid on or before the due date, which date
shall be clearly marked upon the face of the bill. The bill shall be mailed to
the customer at least 14 calendar days prior to the due date. If a bill is not
paid on or before the due date, a penalty of 10% shall be added to the amount
thereof.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99; Am. Ord. 13-008, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 14-002,
passed 6-9-14; Am. Ord. 15-002, passed 6-1-15; Am. Ord. 16-003, passed 6-6-16)
§ 53.06 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICES; LIEN.
   (A)   The City Treasurer is authorized to enforce the payment of charges for
water supply and sewage disposal service to any premises by discontinuing
either the water supply service or the sewage disposal service to the premises,
or both; and an action of assumpsit may be instituted by the city against the
customer. Service shall be discontinued to any premises when the customer shall
be in arrears 60 days or more in paying any water supply or sewage disposal
service charge.
   (B)    The charges for water supply and sewage disposal service, which under
the provisions of Public Act 94 of 1933, being M.C.L.A. §§ 141.101 through
141.138, as amended, are made a lien on the premises to which furnished, are
recognized to constitute a lien; and the City Treasurer shall annually, on
April 1, certify all unpaid charges for services furnished to any premises
which, on March 31 preceding, have remained unpaid for a period of 90 days to
the City Assessor, who shall place the same, together with an additional
penalty equaling 25% of the amount, on the next tax roll of the city. The
charges so assessed shall be collected in the same manner as general city
taxes. In cases where the city is properly notified in accordance with Public
Act 94 of 1933 that a tenant is responsible for water supply or sewage disposal
service charges, no service shall be commenced or continued to the premises
until there has been deposited with the City Treasurer a sum sufficient to
cover three times the average quarterly bill for the premises as estimated by
the City Treasurer, the deposit to be in no case less than $100.
   (C)   Where the water supply or sewage disposal service to any premises has
been discontinued to enforce the payment of water supply or sewer disposal
service charges, services shall not be recommenced until all delinquent charges
have been paid, and a deposit made in the case of tenants, and a turn-on fee,
charged in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in Chapter 12 of this
Code, is paid to the city.
   (D)   In any other case where, in the discretion of the City Treasurer, the
collection of charges for water supply or sewage disposal service may be
difficult or uncertain, he may require a similar deposit. Deposits may be
applied against any delinquent water supply or sewage disposal service charges,
and the application thereof shall not affect the right of the City Treasurer to
discontinue the water supply and/or sewage disposal service, to any premises
for any delinquency thereby satisfied. No deposit shall bear interest, and the
deposit, or any remaining balance thereof, shall be returned to the customer
making the same when he shall request in writing a discontinuation of water
supply and sewage disposal service.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99 ; Am. Ord. 08-001, passed 8-20-07 )
§ 53.07 SERVICE TO THE CITY.
   The city shall pay the same water supply and sewage disposal service rates
as would be paid by a private customer for the same service. All charges for
service shall be payable quarterly from the current funds of the city, or from
the proceeds of taxes which the city, within constitutional limits, is herein
authorized and required to levy in amounts sufficient for that purpose.
(Ord. 99-007, passed 8-2-99)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or entity that violates any provision of §§
53.02 through
53.05 may, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more
than 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 13-008, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 18-018, passed 7-1-18; Am. Ord. 24-004,
passed 5-20-24)
CHAPTER 54: SOLID WASTE
Section
Garbage and Rubbish
   
54.01   Definitions
   
54.02   Collection schedule
   
54.03   Receptacles
   
54.04   Owner responsibility
   
54.05   Construction sites
   
54.06   Excessive or uncollectible refuse; accumulation
   
54.07   Unlawful transportation
   
54.08   Nonconforming sites
   
54.09   Collection rates
Solid Waste
   
54.20   Purpose
   
54.21   Definitions
   
54.22   Generators of solid waste
   
54.23   Collection and disposal of solid waste
GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
§ 54.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASHES. The residue of combustion of any fuel such as wood, coal, coke,
charcoal, or any like substance.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Includes, but not limited to, businesses, rental
residential units (in excess of two units), cooperatives, apartment-style
condominiums (in excess of two units), row houses, apartments, churches, etc. ;
Am. Ord. 06-006, passed 2-27-06)
   CONSTRUCTION RUBBISH. All rubbish and debris resulting from excavation,
construction, remodeling, or altering of buildings or structures of any kind.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works.
   GARBAGE. All waste animal, fish, fowl, fruit, or vegetable matter incident
to the use and storage of foods for human consumption, including spoiled food
found within the limits of the city, but excluding food containers.
   REFUSE. Any of the foregoing items of waste herein defined.
   RUBBISH. All miscellaneous waste material resulting from housekeeping and
ordinary mercantile enterprises. Rubbish is further classified as domestic
rubbish or commercial rubbish, depending upon its source.
   YARD WASTES. General yard and garden waste materials, including branches,
twigs, shrub clippings, weeds, and leaves.
(‘83 Code, § 53.01) (Ord. 81-010, passed 5-4-81; Am. Ord. 81-08B, passed 8-3-
81; Am. Ord. 06-006, passed 2-27-06; Am. Ord. 21-001, passed 1-25-21)
§ 54.02 COLLECTION SCHEDULE.
   The Director shall establish a schedule for the collection of refuse
throughout the city. The Director shall change the schedule whenever a change
is deemed necessary. Notice of any change shall be published at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city.
(‘83 Code, § 53.02) (Ord. 81-010, passed 5-4-81; Am. Ord. 81-08B, passed 8-3-
81; Am. Ord. 15-004, passed 6-29-15)
§ 54.03 RECEPTACLES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of owners, proprietors, or persons in charge of
every dwelling, house, store, manufacturing establishment, office building, or
other building in the city to place or cause to be placed all refuse
accumulating on the premises in suitable containers or receptacles provided by
the owner or other person. All garbage or rubbish placed outside of buildings,
whether it be on public or private property, shall be placed in secured plastic
bags or suitable covered containers, size to be determined by the Director.
   (B)   All garbage and rubbish shall be secured in plastic bags or water-
tight containers, tapered in such a manner as to be larger in diameter at the
top than at the bottom, with covers sufficiently tight- fitting to keep out
water and to prevent disturbance by animals and the entrance of insects. All
garbage and rubbish receptacles that have not been provided by the city shall
be not less than five nor more than 32 gallons in capacity. All garbage and
rubbish containers shall be equipped with handles by which they may be lifted.
The combined weight of any refuse container and its contents shall not exceed
50 pounds. The containers shall not be so small as to require an excessive
number of containers for each household.
   (C)   All bulk refuse accumulated in residential, commercial, or
manufacturing buildings, such as cardboard containers, wood crates, and similar
refuse, shall be flattened and tied in bundles or packed in suitable containers
of a size that may be readily handled by one collector, and in no case shall
any bundle or container be larger than three by three by four feet. Brush and
tree limbs shall be cut into lengths not exceeding four feet and tied into
bundles which can be readily handled by an individual collector. Tree limbs
exceeding four inches in diameter will not be collected by the city.
   (D)   (1)   Yard waste will be picked up April 1 through December 15 and
cannot be mixed with garbage or rubbish at any time. Christmas tree pickup
begins the day after Christmas and through January 15.
      (2)   During the yard waste collection period, the following containers
for curbside yard waste collection shall be required:
         (a)   A 32-gallon refuse container with a “yard waste” recycling
sticker provided by the Department of Public Services; or
         (b)   Kraft-type brown paper bag specifically designed for yard waste.
      (3)   Marked cans and bags should be placed at the curb for pickup on the
same day as regular refuse collection. Yard waste placed in improper containers
or mixed with regular refuse will not be collected. When set out for
collection, yard waste shall be separated from regular refuse approximately
five feet.
   (E)   Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
(‘83 Code, § 53.03) (Ord. 81-010, passed 5-4-81; Am. Ord. 81-08B, passed 8-3-
81; Am. Ord. 15-004, passed 6-29-15; Am. Ord. 18-005, passed 3-19-18) Penalty,
see §
10.99 
§ 54.04 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant, or person in charge of
any dwelling, house, store, or other business establishment, manufacturing
company, or other building where refuse accumulates to provide suitable
receptacles, and to cause to be placed therein refuse or other waste materials
created or accumulated on the premises owned or controlled by him. It shall be
the further duty of the owner, occupant, or other person to locate any garbage
or rubbish receptacles within the property lines in the back or side yard so
located as to not adversely affect adjoining properties. It shall be the
further duty of the owner, occupant, or other person in charge to place or
cause to be placed, on the days scheduled for the collection of refuse from the
premises, the receptacles containing refuse at the curb line in front of the
building. Refuse containers shall not be set out for collection prior to 5:00
p.m. preceding the day of collection, and after the receptacles are emptied
they shall be removed from the street by 12:00 noon the next day. In case an
alley is located at the rear or side of developed property in a business or
manufacturing zone, refuse receptacles shall be placed in the alley or at such
other location as may be designated by the Director. (‘83 Code, § 53.04)
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant, or person in charge of
any apartment buildings or multiple dwellings where refuse accumulates, to
provide dumpster-type receptacles, as provided below, and cause to be placed
therein refuse or other waste materials created or accumulated on the premises
owned or controlled by him.
 
1 - 4 apartment unit                  One 2-yard dumpster
5 - 8 apartment unit                  One 4 yard dumpster
For each additional 2 apartment units 2 yards of additional dumpster capacity
 
   (C)   For those sites where a dumpster-type receptacle cannot be
accommodated or alternative refuse containers can adequately provide for the
refuse or other waste accumulated, the property owner may request a waiver from
the specific dumpster size requirements identified above. Such request shall be
made in writing to the Director of Public Service. Any granted waiver from
these requirements may be revoked by the Director of Public Service upon
finding that the type of refuse receptacles provided do not adequately contain
the refuse or other waste materials created or accumulated on the premises.
   (D)   Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
(Ord. 72-024, passed 9-18-82; Am. Ord. 81-010, passed 5-4-81; Am. Ord. 81-08B,
passed 8-3-81; Am. Ord. 06-007, passed 2-27-06; Am. Ord. 15-004, passed 6-29-
15; Am. Ord. 18-005, passed 3-19-18) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 54.05 CONSTRUCTION SITES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner, contractor, or other person
responsible for construction work to remove from the premises within a
reasonable time after completion of the construction work, all surplus
construction material and refuse building material. The material shall be
removed outside the city limits or disposed of within the city in accordance
with the directions of the Director.
   (B)   Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
(‘83 Code, § 53.06) (Ord. 81-010, passed 5-4-81; Am. Ord. 81-08B, passed 8-3-
81; Am. Ord. 18-005, passed 3-19-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.06 EXCESSIVE OR UNCOLLECTIBLE REFUSE.
   (A)   Any commercial or manufacturing establishment, which by nature of its
operations creates an unusual amount of waste material, shall arrange for the
removal and disposition of same. (‘83 Code, § 53.07)
   (B)   No person shall place in his receptacle for collection any material
that might either endanger the collection personnel or that would be
detrimental to the normal operation of incineration, such as gaseous, solid, or
liquid poisons, dead animals, ammunition, explosives, concrete, dirt, or any
material that possesses heat sufficient to ignite any other collected
materials. (‘83 Code, § 53.08)
   (C)   No paper, lawn cuttings, rakings, leaves, weeds, ashes, or any other
refuse material whatsoever shall be thrown or swept into any street, gutter,
ditch, intake, catch basin, manhole, sewer, alley, vacant lot, park, greenbelt,
or other property whether public or private. It shall be the duty of every
tenant, lessee, owner, or occupant of any property at all times to maintain the
premises in a clean and orderly condition, permitting no deposit or
accumulation of materials other than those ordinarily attendant upon the day-
to-day use for which the premises are legally intended. It shall be unlawful to
bury any animal or vegetable wastes anywhere within the city, and it shall be
unlawful to deposit, throw, or leave refuse on the premises of any other
person. (‘83 Code, § 53.09)
   (D)   Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in this
section.
(Am. Ord. 18-005, passed 3-19-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.07 UNLAWFUL TRANSPORTATION.
   (A)   No person shall transport, cart, carry, or convey through or over any
street, alley, or public place of the city any refuse or other waste materials,
except under written regulations or with the written consent of the Director.
This section shall not apply to refuse or waste materials accumulating on
property owned or controlled by him and then only by approved methods of
conveyance.
   (B)   Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
(‘83 Code, § 53.10) (Ord. 81-010, passed 5-4-81; Am. Ord. 81-08B, passed 8-3-
81; Am. Ord. 18-005, passed 3-19-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.08 NONCONFORMING SITES.
   (A)   Every multiple dwelling, store, manufacturing establishment, office
building, or other than single family residence which violates or does not
conform to the provisions for trash enclosure standards as set forth in
Chapter 154, Zoning, shall be required to conform when there is a change in use
or ownership, or a building permit has been issued for the site that violates
or does not conform to the provisions for a trash enclosure.
   (B)   Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
(‘83 Code, § 53.11) (Ord. 81-010, passed 5-4-81; Am. Ord. 15-004, passed 6-29-
15; Am. Ord. 18-005, passed 3-19-18) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 54.09 COLLECTION RATES.
   (A)   Services for city pick up of rubbish and garbage shall be charged in
accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in
Chapter 12 of this Code.
      (1)   Residential and commercial curb-side or alley pick-up, one time per
week, not to exceed five 20 gallon containers per week other than grass and
leaves separated for composting.
      (2)   Commercial container service: one two-yard dumpster will be
provided, and collected one time per week.
   (B)   Commercial or industrial establishments that generate more than two
cubic yards of refuse per week shall be responsible for arranging private
disposal of anything in excess of the two cubic yards per week disposed of by
the city contractor. If such arrangements are with the city’s contracted
service provider, the cost of service provided in division (A)(2) shall be
deducted by the provider from any charges to the establishment. If any other
provider is arranged, all costs (including those provided in division (A)(2))
shall be borne by the establishment. The selection of the city’s contracted
service provider shall be at the city’s sole discretion.
(‘83 Code, § 53.12) (Ord. 81-016, passed 7-20-81; Am. Ord. 88-021, passed 6-20-
88; Am. Ord. 90-006, passed 5-7-90; Am. Ord. 91-004, passed 6-3-91; Am. Ord.
93-021, passed 11-9-93; Am. Ord. 06-008, passed 2-27-06; Am. Ord. 11-008,
passed 6-20-11)
SOLID WASTE
§ 54.20 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City of Garden City is one of the constituent members of the
Central Wayne County Sanitation Authority (the “Authority”). The Authority
disposes of solid waste originating within the territorial limits of its
constituent members.
   (B)   The city and the Authority have entered into a Solid Waste Disposal
and Service Agreement (the “Agreement”) which prescribes their respective
rights and obligations with respect to solid waste disposal services to be
performed by the Authority, and to assure an adequate supply of solid waste,
all in furtherance of the purpose of protecting the public health and the
general welfare of the people in the city as required and authorized by the
Constitution and Public Act 641 of 1978 [now repealed]. Pursuant to the
Agreement, the city has agreed to deliver or cause to be delivered to the
Authority substantially all solid waste originating within its territorial
limits and to pay or cause to be paid to the Authority for disposal thereof
certain rates which the Authority estimates will be sufficient to pay the
expenses of the operation, maintenance, and administration of facilities of the
Authority and the principal and interest requirements on all outstanding bonds
of the Authority. Pursuant to the Agreement, the city is obligated to enact an
ordinance regulating the collection and disposal of solid waste originating
within its territorial limits.
(‘83 Code, § 55.01) (Ord. 93-001, passed 1-4-93; Am. Ord. 15-004, passed 6-29-
15)
§ 54.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT 641. Michigan Public Act 641 of 1978, as amended.
   ACT 641 PLAN.  The Wayne County Solid Waste Management Plan approved by the
Wayne County Board of Commissioners, by two-thirds of the cities, villages and
townships in Wayne County and by the Director of the MDNR, pursuant to the
requirements and provisions of Act 641, and any updates thereof and any
amendments thereto adopted in accordance with Act 641.
   AGREEMENT. The Solid Waste Disposal and Service Agreement entered into
between the Authority and the city as of the first day of April, 1992.
   AUTHORITY. The Central Wayne County Sanitation Authority, a Michigan public
corporation organized and existing under Public Act 179 of 1947, as amended,
being M.C.L.A. 123.301 through 123.310.
   CITY. The City of Garden City.
   CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION DEBRIS. Non-hazardous wastes generated from
construction and demolition activities, including but not limited to concrete,
asphalt, wood, metal and plaster.
   DISPOSAL FEE. The fee or fees established by the Authority pursuant to the
Agreement for receiving, storing, processing and/or disposing of solid waste at
the plant.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any material or substance which by reason of its
composition or characteristics is hazardous waste as defined in the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq., as amended, replaced or superseded, and the
regulations implementing the same; or material the disposal of which is
regulated by the Toxic Substance Control Act, 15 USC 2601 et seq., as amended,
replaced or superseded, and the regulations implementing the same; or special
nuclear or by-products material within the meaning of the Atomic Energy Act of
1954; or hazardous waste as defined in Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 324.11101 et seq., as amended, and as identified in administrative rules
promulgated from time to time pursuant to the provisions of the Act by the
Director of the Department of Natural Resources.
   INDUSTRIAL SPECIAL WASTE. Non-hazardous wastes generated by industrial
users, which, due to their size or composition, require special handling and/or
disposal procedures, including but not limited to foundry, sand, incinerator/
boiler bottom ash, fly ash, sludges, scrap pallets and other wastes from
manufacturing processes which require special handling and/or disposal
procedures, or industrial facilities that are owned at the date of adoption of
this chapter or at any time thereafter by persons that own a landfill licensed
under Public Act 641 of 1979 and Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§
324.11101 et seq., as amended; are in Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)
major group codes 20 through 39; and manufacture, process or otherwise use a
toxic chemical listed pursuant to Title III of the Superfund Amendments and the
Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA), section 313 (40 CFR 372).
   NON-BURNABLE RUBBISH. Material which, due to its nature or size, cannot be
economically processed by the plant, and shall include all cans, drums or
similar containers used for paint, oil, lacquers, turpentine, cleaning fluids
and the like; ashes, cinders, sand, earth, discarded metal furniture, pipe,
structural steel, stoves, refrigerators, automobile parts; explosives,
chemicals, radioactive material and similar material; highly combustible
materials such as gasoline, kerosene, paint thinners, asphalt or tar, as well
as products impregnated with the above and similar types of liquids or
compounds; and materials such as lumber, scrap wood, cartons, crates, tree
trimmings and other combustible materials in lengths over three feet.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, public or private corporation, partnership,
trust, public or private agency or any other entity, or any group of such
persons.
   PLANT. The incinerator plant of the Authority and the site therefor and all
other properties (as the same may from time to time exist) used or useful in
connection therewith.
   PREMISES. Any area used for residential, commercial, or industrial purposes,
separately or in combination to which a separate street address, postal address
or box, tax roll description, or similar identification has been assigned or is
in use by a person having control of the area.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Include the following commingled and/or pre-sorted
materials that are separated from solid waste prior to the collection of solid
waste from a site of generation and left at the site of generation or at a
drop-off center for collection; high grade paper, glass, metal, plastic,
aluminum, newspaper, corrugated paper and yard clippings.
   REGULATIONS. The rules and regulations concerning the collections and
processing or disposal adopted by the City Council pursuant to
§ 54.23.
   SITE OF GENERATION. Any premises in the city in or on which solid waste is
generated by a person.
   SOLID WASTE. Garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, solid commercial and
solid industrial waste, and animal waste; provided, however, that this
definition shall not include hazardous waste, recyclable materials, industrial
special waste, construction/demolition debris, non-burnable rubbish, lead acid
batteries, municipal sludges, human body waste, liquid or other waste regulated
by statute, ferrous or non-ferrous scrap directed to a scrap metal processor or
to a re-user of ferrous or non-ferrous products, slag or slag products directed
to a slag processor or to a re-user of slag or slag products, sludges and ashes
managed as recycled or non-detrimental materials appropriate for agricultural
or silvicultural use pursuant to a plan approved by the Director of the MDNR,
materials approved for emergency disposal by the Director of the MDNR and fly
ash or other ash produced from the combustion of coal when used as set forth in
Section 7(1) of Act 641.
   SOLID WASTE HAULER LICENSE. A license issued to a waste hauler pursuant to
the provisions of
§ 54.23(D).
   WASTE HAULER. Any person other than the city engaged in the business of
collecting and transporting, delivering and disposing of solid waste
originating within the city.
   YARD CLIPPINGS. Fallen leaves, cut grass, lake weeds or other organic debris
that can be converted to humus.
(‘83 Code, § 55.01) (Ord. 93-001, passed 1-4-93)
§ 54.22 GENERATORS OF SOLID WASTE.
   All solid waste from any site of generation intended for collection shall be
stored and placed for pick-up and collection at the times and in the manner
provided in the regulations.
(‘83 Code, § 55.03) (Ord. 93-001, passed 1-4-93) Penalty, see
§ 10.99 
§ 54.23 COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE.
   (A)   No person shall dispose of any solid waste originating within the city
other than by means of the city or a waste hauler duly licensed by the city for
that purpose.
   (B)   Commencing on April 1, 1993, all solid waste originating within the
city shall be collected and delivered to the plant or other facility designated
from time to time by the city, consistent with the direction of the Authority
pursuant to the Agreement.
   (C)   Unless the contract between the waste hauler and the city or the
license from the city provides that the city shall pay disposal fees directly,
a waste hauler shall pay the disposal fee established by the authority in
accordance with the agreement. Except as otherwise permitted by the authority,
a waste hauler shall be required to maintain a credit balance in its account
with the authority sufficient to cover disposal fees for any solid waste
delivered to the plant or elsewhere in accordance with the agreement. The
obligation to pay the disposal fee pursuant to this chapter shall be absolute
and unconditional whether or not the delivered solid waste is processed or
disposed of, in whole or in part, at the plant or elsewhere.
   (D)   No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting,
delivering, or disposing of solid waste originating within the city without
first obtaining a solid waste hauler license. Solid waste hauler licenses shall
be issued upon application to the Clerk on forms provided thereof and upon
payment of the required fees as may be established by resolution of the City
Council from time to time. It shall be an express condition of each solid waste
hauler license that the waste hauler shall comply with all provisions of this
chapter and all applicable provisions of other ordinances or resolutions
adopted by the city.
   (E)   Waste haulers shall comply with the Act 641 Plan and all applicable
federal and state laws, statutes, rules and regulations (including but not
limited to Act 641 and administrative rules promulgated pursuant to Act 641) in
the collection, transportation, delivery, and disposal of solid waste. Waste
haulers shall also comply with all rules and regulations adopted from time to
time by the authority for the administration and operation of the plant and
other facilities.
   (F)   A waste hauler shall not knowingly collect or deliver hazardous waste
to the plant or any other facility designated from time to time by the city
consistent with the direction of the authority pursuant to the agreement.
   (G)   Except as provided for in division (A) of this section, no person,
firm, partnership, corporation, or association shall for hire or reward
collect, transport or dispose of any solid waste as defined in
§ 54.21 within the city without first having obtained an annual license
therefor as provided for in division (D) of this section.
   (H)    It shall be unlawful to operate a solid waste hauler's vehicle
hereunder or permit the same to be operated unless the licensee shall first
have deposited with the City Clerk a policy or a certificate of insurance
covering all vehicles of any kind used hereunder, the policy to be issued by an
insurance company licensed to do business in Michigan in the minimum amount of
$500,000 for one person injured in an accident and $1,000,000 for all other
persons injured in an accident. The licensee shall also obtain and keep in full
force and effect insurance to protect the public against risk or loss from
liability, including damage to property and injury to person in a sum of not
less than $300,000 per occurrence caused by the sections or operations of the
licensee, its officers, employees, and agents. Other insurance, such as
Worker's Compensation insurance, may be required of all licensees.
   (I)   No solid waste hauler licensee shall dispose of collected solid waste
other than by means of licensed solid waste transporting units and at disposal
are/facilities licensed pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 299.402 et seq., and as required
by division (B) of this section.
(‘83 Code, § 55.04) (Ord. 93-001, passed 1-4-93; Am. Ord. 93-013, passed 4-19-
93) Penalty, see §
10.99 
CHAPTER 55: POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
   
55.01   Purpose
   
55.02   Definitions
   
55.03   Applicability
   
55.04   Exemptions
   
55.05   Liability
   
55.06   Designation of stormwater authority; powers and duties
   
55.07   Contents of post-construction stormwater management plan
   
55.08   Standards for post-construction stormwater management plan (stormwater
plan) approval
   
55.09   Stormwater management plan and BMP construction plans
   
55.10   Review procedures
   
55.11   Review fees
   
55.12   Offsite stormwater management
   
55.13   Revisions of plan
   
55.14   Drains under the jurisdiction of the Drain Commissioner
   
55.15   As-built certification
   
55.16   Notice of construction commencement
   
55.17   Construction inspections by the city or its representatives
   
55.18   Maintenance agreement
   
55.19   Maintenance inspections
   
55.20   Stormwater management easements
   
55.21   Stop work order
   
55.22   Failure to comply; completion
   
55.23   Emergency measures
   
55.24   Cost recovery for damage to storm drain system
   
55.25   Collection of costs; lien
   
55.26   Effect of approval on remedies
 
   
55.99   Penalty
§ 55.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general
health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in the city, and the
watersheds to which it drains, and to comply with the city’s National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit and other applicable federal and
state regulations.
   (B)   This chapter seeks to meet that purpose by minimizing the negative
impacts of increased stormwater discharges from new land development and
redevelopment through the following objectives:
      (1)   To minimize increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes from
identified land development and redevelopment;
      (2)   To minimize nonpoint source pollution;
      (3)   To minimize the deterioration of existing watercourses, culverts
and bridges, and other structures;
      (4)   To encourage water recharge where geologically favorable conditions
exist;
      (5)   To maintain the ecological integrity of stream channels;
      (6)   To minimize the negative impacts of development on downstream
channel stability;
      (7)   To preserve and protect water supply facilities and water resources
by controlling increased flood discharges, stream erosion, and runoff
pollution;
      (8)   To reduce the adverse impact of changing land use on water bodies
and, to that end, this chapter establishes minimum standards to protect water
bodies from degradation resulting from changing land use where stormwater
management controls are insufficient to meet water quantity and quality goals;
      (9)   To ensure that storm drains and stormwater BMPs are adequate to
address stormwater management needs within a proposed development, and for
protecting downstream landowners from flooding and degradation of water
quality. The procedures, standards, and recommendations set forth in this
chapter and the current Wayne County Stormwater Control Program are designed
for these purposes;
      (10)   To ensure that all stormwater facilities necessary for a proposed
development will have an appropriate governmental unit responsible in
perpetuity for performing maintenance or for overseeing the performance of
maintenance by a private entity;
      (11)   To facilitate the integration of stormwater management and
pollution control with other ordinances, programs, policies, and the
comprehensive plans of the city;
      (12)   To establish legal authority to carry out all of the inspection
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person proposing or implementing the development or
redevelopment of land.
   BMP or BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE. Any practice, or combination of practices
and design criteria that comply with the current Wayne County Stormwater
Control Program, or equivalent practices and design criteria that accomplish
the purposes of this chapter (including, but not limited to, minimizing
stormwater runoff and preventing the discharge of pollutants into stormwater),
as determined by the City Engineer and/or, where appropriate, the standards of
Wayne County.
   CHANNEL. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks
that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
   CONVEYANCE FACILITY. A storm drain, pipe, swale, or channel.
   DESIGN ENGINEER. Registered professional engineer responsible for the design
of the stormwater management plan.
   DETENTION.  A system designed to capture stormwater and release it over a
given period of time through an outlet structure at a controlled rate. The
goals of this BMP are to control peak discharge rates and provide gravity
settling of pollutants.
   DEVELOPED or DEVELOPMENT. The installation or construction of impervious
surfaces on a development site that require, pursuant to state law or local
ordinance, city approval of a site plan, site condominium, special land use,
planned unit development, land division, private road, or other approvals
required for the development of land or the erection of buildings or
structures; provided, however, that, for the purposes of this chapter only,
DEVELOPED or DEVELOPMENT shall not include the actual construction of, or an
addition, extension, or modification to, an individual single-family or a two-
family detached dwelling that disturbs less than one acre.
   EGLE. Environment, Great Lakes & Energy, State of Michigan.
   ENGINEERED SITE GRADING PLAN. A signed and sealed drawing or plan and
accompanying text prepared by a engineer registered in the State of Michigan
that shows alterations of topography, alterations of watercourses, flow
directions of stormwater runoff, and proposed stormwater management and
measures, having as its purpose to ensure that the objectives of this chapter
are met.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. A plan designed to minimize the
accelerated erosion and sedimentation runoff at a site during construction.
   GRADING. Any stripping, excavating, filling, or stockpiling of soil, or any
combination thereof, and the land in its excavated or filled condition.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface that does not allow stormwater runoff to
slowly percolate into the soil.
   INFILTRATION. The percolation of water into the ground, expressed in inches
per hour.
   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any activity that changes the volume or peak flow
discharge of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the
grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill
materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any
activity that bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any
natural or man-made watercourse.
   MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT. A binding agreement that establishes the terms,
measures, and conditions for the maintenance of stormwater systems and
facilities.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT. The permit issued to the city by EGLE for point source discharges of
stormwater from municipal separate storm sewer systems.
   NON-STRUCTURAL MEASURE. A stormwater control and treatment technique that
uses natural processes, restoration or enhancement of natural systems, or
design approaches to control runoff and/or reduce pollutant levels. Such
measures are used in lieu of or to supplement structural practices on a land
development site.
   OFFSITE FACILITY. All or part of a drainage system that is located partially
or completely off the development site that it serves.
   PEAK RATE OF DISCHARGE. The maximum rate of stormwater flow at a particular
location following a storm event, as measured at a given point and time in
cubic feet per second (CFS).
   PERMANENT STORMWATER BMP. A stormwater best management practice (BMP) that
will be operational after the construction phase of a project, and that is
designed to become a permanent part of the site for the purposes of managing
stormwater runoff.
   PLAN. Written narratives, specifications, drawings, sketches, written
standards, operating procedures, or any combination of these that contain
information pursuant to this chapter.
   POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (STORMWATER PLAN). Drawings and
written information prepared by a engineer registered in the State of Michigan
that describe the way in which accelerated soil erosion and/or stormwaterflows
from a particular site are proposed to be controlled, both during and after
construction, having as its purpose to ensure that the objectives of this
chapter are met.
   RECEIVING STREAM OR CHANNEL. The body of water or conveyance into which
stormwater runoff is discharged.
   RECHARGE.  The replenishment of underground water reserves through
percolation.
   REDEVELOPMENT.  A change to a previously existing, improved property,
including but not limited to, the demolition or building of structures,
filling, grading, paving, or excavating, but excluding ordinary maintenance
activities, remodeling of buildings that involves demolition or changes to the
exterior site footprint, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or
improvements that do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff
or cause additional nonpoint source pollution.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their representatives,
agents, or assigns that is named on a stormwater maintenance agreement as
responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of one or more stormwater
BMPs.
   RETENTION. A holding system for stormwater, either natural or man-made, that
does not have a direct outlet to adjoining watercourses or wetlands.
   RUNOFF. That part of precipitation that flows over the land.
   SEDIMENT. Mineral or organic particulate matter that has been removed from
its site of origin by the processes of soil erosion, is in suspension in water,
or is being transported.
   STORMWATER BMP. Any facility, structure, channel, area, process or measure
that serves to control stormwater runoff in accordance with the purposes and
standards of this chapter.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN MANUAL. The current Wayne County standards
document that provides a detailed explanation of the design criteria and
specific constructed approaches for achieving compliance with the this chapter.
   STREAM BUFFER. An area of land at or near a streambank, wetland, or
waterbody that has intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and
biological processes it performs, or is otherwise sensitive to changes that may
otherwise result in significant degradation to water quality.
   WATERCOURSE. Any natural or man-made waterway or other body of water having
reasonably well-defined banks, rivers, streams, creeks, brooks, and channels,
whether continually or intermittently flowing, as well as lakes and ponds.
   WATERSHED. An area of land draining to a common outlet otherwise known as a
drainage or catchment area.
   WETLANDS.  As defined by Michigan’s Wetlands Statute, Part 303, Wetlands
Protection, of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA
451, as amended.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.03 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter shall be applicable to all land development, including,
but not limited to, site plan, plot plan and plat applications, as well as any
grading applications. In addition, this chapter shall be applicable to public
improvement projects that disturb one acre or more. The City Engineer may waive
the channel protection requirements, water quality requirements and/or flood
control requirements of §
55.08(D) of this chapter for:
      (1)   Projects that are within areas of the city’s sewer collection
system that are served by combined sewers; or
      (2)   Projects that disturb less than one acre and are not part of a
larger common plan of development or sale that would disturb one acre or more.
   (B)   The procedures and standards set forth in this chapter, and the
policies, procedures, and design data specified in the current Wayne County
Stormwater Control Program provide the minimum standards to be adhered to by
developers, and in no way limit the authority of the city to adopt or publish
and/or enforce higher standards as a condition of approval of developments.
   (C)   No site plan, plot plan, or plat shall be approved until approval by
the City Engineer that the development or redevelopment meets all:
      (1)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures consistent with
city requirements;
      (2)   Requirements for an approved post-construction stormwater
management plan (stormwater plan) as outlined in §
55.07 of this chapter; and
      (3)   Related land development regulations.
   (D)   In order to ensure completion of construction of the permanent
stormwater BMPs specified in the applicant’s stormwater plan as outlined in §§
55.07 and
55.08 of this chapter, a completion bond must be provided to the city, in
conjunction with the site plan or plot plan submitted, consistent with the city
code. The value of the completion bond must be in an amount equivalent to the
value of the permanent stormwater BMPs specified in the approved stormwater
plan. Consistent with §
55.10(G) of this chapter, the completion bond will be released by the city
following final verification of the construction by a professional engineer
registered in the State of Michigan.
   (E)   For an existing stormwater basin constructed prior to the effective
date of this chapter, an approved stormwater plan must be secured prior to any
significant expansion, repair, or maintenance of the stormwater basin.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the requirements of §
55.03, a stormwater plan shall not be required for activities protected by the
Right To Farm Act 93 of 1981.
   (B)   The installation or removal of individual manufactured homes within a
manufactured home park are exempted from the requirements of this chapter. This
exemption shall not be construed to apply to the construction, expansion, or
modification of a manufactured home park.
   (C)   Plats that have received preliminary plat approval and other
developments with final land use approval prior to the effective date of this
chapter are exempted from the requirements of this chapter, where such
approvals remain in effect.
   (D)   Any emergency projects that are immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property, or natural resources, are exempted from the
requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Linear construction projects, such as pipeline or utility line
installation, that do not result in the installation of any impervious cover,
as determined by the City Engineer, are exempted from the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.05 LIABILITY.
   Any person who undertakes or causes to be undertaken any land development
shall ensure that soil erosion, sedimentation, increased pollutant loads and
changed water flow characteristics resulting from the activity are controlled
so as to minimize pollution of receiving waters. The requirements of this
chapter and other applicable city ordinances are minimum standards, and a
person’s compliance with the same shall not relieve that person from the duty
of enacting all measures necessary to minimize pollution of receiving waters to
the maximum extent practicable.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22) Penalty, see §
55.99
§ 55.06 DESIGNATION OF STORMWATER AUTHORITY; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Engineer shall administer and enforce this chapter, and may
furnish additional policy, criteria and information, including specifications
and standards and/or establishment of a permitting program, for the proper
implementation of the requirements of this chapter. The City Engineer may
provide this information in the form of a stormwater management policies and
procedures manual and/or stormwater management program standards.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements specified in the current Wayne
County’s Stormwater Control Program, the City Engineer may require more
restrictive stormwater design measures and additional BMPs as long as the
minimum current county standards are met.
   (C)   Representatives of the City Engineer shall have the right to enter
upon any land for the purposes of making an inspection or acquiring information
to determine whether or not the property conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.07 CONTENTS OF POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   The stormwater management plan (stormwater plan) shall utilize, to the
maximum extent practicable, site planning and design techniques that reduce
runoff rates, volumes, and pollutant loads. These techniques include, but are
not limited to, minimization and/or disconnection of impervious surfaces;
development design that reduces the rate and volume of runoff; restoration or
enhancement of natural areas such as riparian areas, wetlands, and forests; and
distributed practices that intercept and treat runoff from developed areas.
   (B)   The stormwater plan shall be presented as follows:
      (1)   Through plans, illustrations, reports, and calculations, the
stormwater plan shall display the required information specified in the current
Wayne County Stormwater Control Program;
      (2)   The stormwater plan must be sufficiently detailed to specify the
type, location, and size of stormwater management facilities;
      (3)   If it is proposed to develop a parcel in two or more phases, the
stormwater plan shall be prepared and submitted for the total project;
      (4)   The stormwater plan shall be prepared in accordance with the
requirements outlined in the design manual. All plans shall be signed and
sealed by a civil engineer registered in the State of Michigan.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.08 STANDARDS FOR POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (STORMWATER
PLAN) APPROVAL.
   (A)   All developments requiring a stormwater plan shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained to prevent flooding, minimize stream channel
impacts, protect water quality, and achieve the purposes of this chapter, as
stated above. The city has adopted performance standards to meet the objectives
of managing the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff from a site as
described below and in the current Wayne County Stormwater Control Program.
   (B)   Designers may select any combination of stormwater BMPs that meet the
performance standards provided the selections:
      (1)   Comply with the requirements identified in this chapter and the
current Wayne County Stormwater Control Program;
      (2)   Comply with all other local, county, state, or federal
requirements; and
      (3)   Do not conflict with the existing, local stormwater management and
watershed plans.
   (C)   The particular facilities and measures required onsite shall take into
consideration the natural features, upland areas, wetlands, and watercourses on
the site; the potential for onsite and offsite adverse stormwater impacts,
water pollution, and erosion; and the size of the site.
   (D)   The following onsite stormwater management concepts must be followed.
      (1)   Natural topography and site drainage shall be preserved and site
grading shall be minimized to the maximum extent reasonably achievable
considering the nature of the development.
      (2)   The preferred conveyance strategy is to transport, wherever
possible, untreated and treated runoff in conveyance facilities open to the
atmosphere (e.g. swales, vegetated buffer strips, energy-dissipating
structures, and the like), rather than through enclosed pipes, so as to
decrease runoff velocity, allow for natural infiltration, allow suspended
sediment particles to settle, and to remove pollutants.
      (3)   Watercourses shall not be deepened, widened, dredged, cleared of
vegetation, straightened, stabilized, or otherwise altered without applicable
permits or approvals from the City Engineer, relevant county agencies and the
applicable state department(s).
      (4)   The stormwater plan and associated BMPs must demonstrate compliance
with required volume and channel protection criteria by providing retention as
necessary to meet volume and peak flow limits consistent with the requirements
of the design manual. Specific details for achieving compliance with the volume
and channel protection criteria are outlined in the design manual.
      (5)   The stormwater plan and associated BMPs must demonstrate compliance
with required water quality criteria by providing treatment of total suspended
solids (TSS) or by providing retention to achieve the same criteria for maximum
TSS concentrations in the stormwater discharge from the site, with either
approach being consistent with the requirements of the design manual. Specific
details for achieving compliance with the water quality criteria are outlined
in the design manual.
      (6)   The stormwater plan and associated BMPs must demonstrate compliance
with required peak flow rate and flood control criteria by providing stormwater
detention and/or retention consistent with the requirements of the design
manual. Specific details for achieving compliance with the peak flow rate and
flood control criteria are outlined in the design manual.
      (7)   Under certain conditions, the city, upon recommendation by the City
Engineer, may impose the following additional restrictions on stormwater
discharges.
         (a)   Peak discharge may be further restricted when it can be shown
that a probable risk to downstream structures or unique natural areas exists,
or that existing severe flooding problems could be further aggravated.
         (b)   Measures shall be imposed to protect against ground or surface
water pollution where the nature of the soils or bedrock underlying a
stormwater management structure constitutes a substantial risk of
contamination, such as might be the case in limestone formations. Special
provisions to be followed in these cases will be provided by the City Engineer.
   (E)   Stormwater offsets may be considered in accordance with the provisions
provided in the current Wayne County Stormwater Control Program, where water
quantity or water quality BMPs required by this chapter cannot be fully
accommodated onsite.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22) Penalty, see §
55.99
§ 55.09 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN AND BMP CONSTRUCTION PLANS SUBMISSION.
   (A)   The stormwater management plan (stormwater plan) and the associated,
proposed BMP construction plans and specifications shall be submitted for
review in accordance with the site plan submittal requirements of the city
code.
   (B)   The BMP construction plans and specifications shall be prepared in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the current Wayne County
Stormwater Control Program.
   (C)   The BMP construction plans and specifications shall be prepared,
signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Michigan,
who shall certify that the design of all stormwater BMPs meet the requirements
of this chapter.
   (D)   No substantive changes shall be made to an approved stormwater plan
without review and written approval by the City Engineer. Additional supporting
data and a formal plan resubmittal will be required for a thorough review of
the stormwater plan and BMP construction plans and specifications to ensure
that changes to the plan will comply with the requirements of this chapter. No
site construction changes shall be made from the approved plan until the City
Engineer approves the changes and issues a formal plan amendment.
   (E)   Compliance with the requirements of this chapter does not eliminate
the need for the proprietor to obtain required permits and approvals from
county and state agencies.
   (F)   For site condominiums, complete master deed documents (including
"exhibits" drawings) must be submitted for the city’s review and approval prior
to recording.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.10 REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (A)   All stormwater management plans and BMP construction plans and
specifications shall be subject to review and approval by the City Engineer in
order to ensure conformance with the requirements of this chapter and the
associated current Wayne County Stormwater Control Program.
   (B)   Upon submission of a stormwater management plan (stormwater plan) and
BMP construction plans and specifications, as provided herein, the plan shall
be reviewed by the City Engineer and a written response prepared and submitted
to the city planning office. If the proposed plan is not sufficient as
originally submitted, the City Engineer will notify the applicant in writing,
setting forth the reasons for withholding a recommendation for approval, and
stating the changes necessary to obtain approval. Failure of the owner to
ultimately demonstrate that the project meets requirements, as determined by
the city, shall be reason to deny approval of the stormwater plan and BMP
construction plans and specifications.
   (C)   Before approval of the final stormwater BMP construction plans, copies
of all necessary wetland, floodplain, inland lakes and streams, erosion control
or other needed state, federal, or local permits relating to stormwater
management have been provided by the applicant for the city’s files.
   (D)   A satisfactory maintenance agreement in accordance with §
55.18 of this chapter that assures long-term maintenance of all drainage
improvements will be in place before approval of the stormwater plan and BMP
construction plans and specifications. Documentation of the maintenance
agreement will be submitted and approved by the City Engineer.
   (E)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control permit shall not be issued
under the city code unless the detailed stormwater plan and BMP construction
plans and specifications meet the standards of this chapter and the associated
current Wayne County Stormwater Control Program.
   (F)   For developments that will result in disturbance of five or more acres
of land, a complete notice of coverage for construction-phase stormwater must
be submitted to EGLE, Water Resources Division, to have the discharge
authorized under a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination system permit.
   (G)   The applicant will make arrangements acceptable to the City Engineer
for inspection during construction and for final verification of the
construction of all permanent stormwater BMPs by a professional engineer
registered in the State of Michigan. Following final verification of the
construction by a registered professional engineer, the completion bond
required consistent with §
55.03(D) of this chapter will be released by the city.
   (H)   Electronic files of the as-built storm drains and stormwater BMPs will
be submitted by the applicant, or his or her engineer, to the City Engineer,
along with the final plan for existing systems, or upon completion of system
construction for new systems.
   (I)   Complete development agreements (including deed restrictions) must be
submitted to the city for review and approval prior to recording.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.11 REVIEW FEES.
   The City Council shall establish application fees and escrow requirements by
resolution. Fees and escrow account payments shall be sufficient to cover
administrative and technical review costs anticipated to be incurred by the
city, including the costs of onsite inspections.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.12 OFFSITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.
   Requirements for offsite stormwater management may be considered in
accordance with the provisions provided in the current Wayne County Stormwater
Control Program.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.13 REVISION OF PLAN.
   If it becomes necessary to alter a development or earth change proposal
after the stormwater plan has been approved, a revised stormwater plan must be
submitted, reviewed, and approved in accordance with the procedure set forth
above. The revised plan must be signed and sealed by a professional engineer
registered in the State of Michigan. All requirements and standards for
stormwater plans shall apply.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.14 DRAINS UNDER THE JURISDICTION OF THE DRAIN COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   Drainage districts will not be altered when designing development
drainage, except as provided under Section 433 of Act 40, Public Act 1956, as
amended.
   (B)   Existing county drain easements will be indicated on the stormwater
plan as well as the final stormwater BMP construction plans, and will be
designated as “Wayne County Drain” or the appropriate inter-county drain as
applicable. County drain easements prior to 1956 were not required by statute
to be recorded immediately; therefore, it may be necessary to check the
permanent records of the drain office to see if a drain easement is in
existence on the subject property.
   (C)   A permit will be obtained from the appropriate county drain office
prior to discharging into, tapping or crossing any county or inter-county
drain. The permit must be obtained prior to final plan approval.
   (D)   Proposed relocations of county drains will be processed through the
County Drain Permit Office.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.15 AS-BUILT CERTIFICATION.
   An as-built certification for stormwater BMPs must be provided to the City
Engineer prior to final approval of the development. The certification should
include all of the requirements noted in the design manual.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.16 NOTICE OF CONSTRUCTION COMMENCEMENT.
   The applicant must notify the City Engineer before the commencement of
construction. In addition, the applicant must notify the City Engineer in
advance of the construction of critical components of the stormwater practices
shown on the approved stormwater BMP construction plans and specifications. The
city may, at its discretion, issue verbal or written authorization to proceed
with critical construction steps, such as installation of permanent stormwater
BMPs, based on stabilization of the drainage area and other factors.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.17 CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS BY THE CITY OR ITS REPRESENTATIVES.
   The City Engineer, or his or her representatives, may conduct periodic
inspections of the stormwater practices shown on the approved stormwater BMP
construction plans and specifications, and especially during critical
installation and stabilization steps. All inspections shall be documented in
writing. The inspection shall document any variations or discrepancies from the
approved plan, and the resolution of such issues.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.18 MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Purpose of the maintenance agreement. The purpose of the maintenance
agreement is to provide the means and assurance that perpetual, long-term
maintenance of stormwater BMPs shall be provided for and undertaken. A
maintenance agreement shall be submitted to the city, for review by the City
Engineer, and his or her designee, and shall be subject to approval consistent
with the approved stormwater management plan and BMP construction plans and
specifications.
   (B)   Responsible party.
      (1)   The responsible party named in the recorded stormwater maintenance
agreement shall maintain in good condition, and promptly repair and restore all
structural and non-structural stormwater BMPs, and all necessary access routes
and appurtenances. Such maintenance, repair and restoration shall be in
accordance with the approved stormwater BMP construction plans and
specifications, and the stormwater maintenance agreement.
      (2)   The responsible party shall make records of installation and of all
maintenance and repairs and shall retain the records for at least five years.
These records shall be made available to the city during inspection of the
practice and at other reasonable times upon request.
   (C)   Maintenance agreement provisions.
      (1)   The maintenance agreement shall provide for routine, emergency, and
long-term maintenance of all stormwater BMPs.
      (2)   The maintenance agreement shall be binding on all subsequent owners
of land served by the stormwater BMPs and shall be recorded in the office of
the appropriate County Register of Deeds prior to the effectiveness of the
approval of the city.
      (3)   If it has been found by the city, following notice and an
opportunity to be heard by the property owner, that there has been a material
failure or refusal to undertake maintenance as required under this chapter,
and/or as required in the approved maintenance agreement as required hereunder,
the City Engineer shall then be authorized, but not required, to hire an entity
with qualifications and experience in the subject matter to undertake the
monitoring and maintenance as so required. In which event, the property owner
shall be obligated to advance or reimburse payment (as determined by the city)
for all costs and expenses associated with such monitoring and maintenance,
together with a reasonable administrative fee. The maintenance agreement
required under this chapter shall contain a provision spelling out this
requirement and, if the applicant objects in any respect to such provision or
the underlying rights and obligations, this objection shall be resolved prior
to the commencement of construction of the proposed development on the
property.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.19 MAINTENANCE INSPECTIONS.
   The City Engineer, or his or her representatives, may conduct periodic
inspections for all stormwater practices constructed as part of the approved
BMP construction plans and specifications. All inspections will be documented
in writing. The inspection shall document any maintenance and repair needs and
any discrepancies from the stormwater maintenance agreement.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22) Penalty, see §
55.99
§ 55.20 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Necessity of easements for onsite stormwater BMPs. Stormwater
management easements shall be provided in a form required by the City Engineer,
and recorded as directed as part of the approval of the city to assure:
      (1)   Access for inspections;
      (2)   Access to stormwater BMPs for maintenance purposes;
      (3)   Preservation of primary and secondary drainageways that are needed
to serve stormwater management needs of other properties.
   (B)   Easements for offsite stormwater BMPs. The owner shall obtain
easements assuring access to all areas used for offsite stormwater management,
including undeveloped or undisturbed lands.
   (C)   Recording of easements, Easements shall be recorded with the
appropriate County Register of Deeds, based on jurisdiction and according to
county requirements.
   (D)   Recording prior to building permit issuance. The applicant must
provide the City Engineer with evidence of the recording of the easement prior
to final subdivision plat or condominium approval or other applicable final
construction approval.
   (E)   Right-of-entry. The easements must contain a provision granting the
city and its representatives the right of entry for the purposes of inspecting
all stormwater BMPs at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner. This
includes the right to enter a property when the city has a reasonable basis to
believe that a violation of this chapter is occurring or has occurred, and to
enter when necessary for the abatement of a public nuisance or the correction
of a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22) Penalty, see §
55.99
§ 55.21 STOP WORK ORDER.
   Where there is work in progress that causes or constitutes, in whole or in
part, a violation of any provision of this chapter, the city is authorized to
issue a stop work order so as to prevent further or continuing violations or
adverse effects. All persons to whom the stop work order is directed, or who
are involved in any way with the work or matter described in the stop work
order, shall fully and promptly comply therewith. The city may also undertake,
or cause to be undertaken, any necessary or advisable protective measures so as
to prevent violations of this chapter or to avoid or reduce the effects of
noncompliance herewith. The cost of any protective measures shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the property upon which the work is being done,
and the responsibility of any person carrying out or participating in the work,
and shall be a lien upon the property.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22) Penalty, see §
55.99
§ 55.22 FAILURE TO COMPLY; COMPLETION.
   In addition to any other remedies, should any owner fail to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, the city may, after the giving of reasonable notice
and opportunity for compliance, have the necessary work done, and the owner
shall be obligated to promptly reimburse the city for all costs of such work.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22) Penalty, see §
55.99
§ 55.23 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
   When emergency measures are necessary to moderate a nuisance, to protect
public safety, health and welfare, and/or to prevent loss of life, injury or
damage to property, the city is authorized to carry out or arrange for all such
emergency measures. Property owners shall be responsible for the cost of such
measures made necessary as a result of a violation of this chapter, and shall
promptly reimburse the city for all such costs.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22) Penalty, see §
55.99
§ 55.24 COST RECOVERY FOR DAMAGE TO STORM DRAIN SYSTEM.
   A discharger shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city as the
result of causing a discharge that produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes
damage to, or impairs a storm drain or receiving waters, or violates any of the
provisions of this chapter. Costs include, but are not limited to, those
penalties levied by the Environmental Protection Agency or EGLE for violation
of an NPDES permit, attorney fees, and other costs and expenses,
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22) Penalty, see §
55.99
§ 55.25 COLLECTION OF COSTS; LIEN.
   Costs incurred by the city and/or Wayne County pursuant to this chapter
shall be a lien on the premises that shall be enforceable in accordance with
Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended from time to time. Any such
charges that are delinquent for six months or more may be certified annually to
the City Treasurer, who shall enter the lien on the next tax roll against the
premises, and the costs shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in
the same manner as provided for in the collection of taxes assessed upon the
roll and the enforcement of a lien for taxes. In addition to any other lawful
enforcement methods, the city or the appropriate Drain Commissioner shall have
all remedies authorized by Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.26 EFFECT OF APPROVAL ON REMEDIES.
   The approval or disapproval of any post-construction stormwater management
plan shall not have any effect on any remedy of any person at law or in equity.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
§ 55.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, any person violating any
provision of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil
infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than $500, plus costs, damages,
expenses, and other sanctions as authorized under Chapter 87 of the Revised
Judicature Act of 1961 and other applicable laws, including, without
limitation, equitable relief. The city is authorized to issue municipal civil
infraction citations to any person alleged to be violating any provision of
this chapter. Each day a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a
separate offense and shall make the violator liable for the imposition of a
fine for each day. The rights and remedies provided for in this section are
cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. An admission
or determination of responsibility shall not exempt the offender from
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person who neglects or fails to comply with a stop work order
issued under §
55.21 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment in the county jail
for not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, and that person
shall also pay such costs as may be imposed in the discretion of the court.
   (C)   Any person who aids or abets a person in a violation of this chapter
shall be subject to the sanctions provided in this section.
(Ord. 22-002, passed 4-11-22)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES, SNOWMOBILES AND TOY VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Adoption by reference of the Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan cities,
townships and villages
   
70.02   Adoption by reference of provisions of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code
   
70.03   Adoption by reference of the Motor Carrier Safety Act
   
70.04   Citations
   
70.05   Penalty, traffic regulations
Driving While Intoxicated; Liability
   
70.20   Purpose
   
70.21   Liability; responsible party
   
70.22   Additional responsibility
Driver and Vehicle Guidelines
   
70.35   Bus, truck or truck trailer; safety standards
   
70.36   Private driver qualifications
   
70.37   Medical examiner’s certificate
   
70.38   Commercial drives employed on or before June 10, 1984
   
70.39   Bus drivers
   
70.40   Drivers of farm vehicles
   
70.41   Mechanics
   
70.42   Utility, telephone and cable TV employees
   
70.43   Motor vehicles, truck tractor and semi-trailers
   
70.44   Exceptions to federal regulations concerning commercial vehicles
   
70.45   Hour limitations of driving
   
70.46   Duty activities; records
   
70.47   Transportation of property or passengers; exceptions
   
70.48   Adoption of federal regulations
   
70.49   Violations
Weight Restrictions for Commercial Vehicles
   
70.60   Load limitations
   
70.61   Inspection for excessive loads
   
70.62   Violations
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF THE UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE FOR MICHIGAN CITIES,
TOWNSHIPS AND VILLAGES.
   The Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan Cities, Townships, and Villages as
promulgated by the Director of the Michigan Department of State Police pursuant
to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, 1969 PA 306, M.C.L.A. 24.201 et
seq. and made effective October 30, 2002, is hereby adopted by reference. All
references in said Uniform Traffic Code to a “governmental unit” shall mean the
City of Garden City.
(Ord. 03-008, passed 2-3-03; Am. Ord. 13-013, passed 8-12-13)
§ 70.02 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF PROVISIONS OF THE MICHIGAN MOTOR VEHICLE CODE.
   The following provisions of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, Public Act 300
of 1949, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 et seq. are hereby adopted by
reference:
   (A)   Chapter I (Words and Phrases Defined): M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 - 257.82.
   (B)   Chapter II (Administration, Registration): M.C.L.A. §§ 257.223,
257.225, 257.226b, 257.228, 257.243, 257.244, 257.252a-g, 257.255, 257.256.
   (C)   Chapter III (Operator’s and Chauffeur’s License): M.C.L.A. §§
257.310e, 257.311, 257.312, 257.312a, 257.312e, 257.3315, 257.319d, 257.324,
257.325, 257.326, 257.328.
   (D)   Chapter VI (Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws): M.C.L.A. §§
257.601 - 257.601b, 257.602 - 257.606, 257.610, 257.611 - 257.616, 257.617a -
257.622, 257.624a - 257.624b, 257.625 (except felony provisions), 257.625a,
257.625c, 257.625m, 257.626 - 257.626b, 257.627 - 257.627b, 257.628, 257.629b,
257.631 - 257.632, 257.634 - 257.645, 257.647 - 257.655, 257.656, 257.656 -
257.662, 257.667 - 257.675d, 257.676 - 257.682b, 257.683 - 257.710e, 257.716 -
257.724, 257.726, 257.726a, 257.726b.
   (E)   Chapter VII (License Offenses): M.C.L.A. §§ 257.904 - 257.904a,
257.904e, 257.905.
(Ord. 03-008, passed 2-3-03; Am. Ord. 13-013, passed 8-12-13)
§ 70.03 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF THE MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY ACT.
   The Motor Carrier Safety Act, Act 181 of the Public Acts of 1963, as
amended, M.C.L.A. §§ 480.11 - 480.22, is hereby adopted by reference.
(Ord. 13-013, passed 8-12-13)
§ 70.04 CITATIONS.
   The M.C.L. section number shall be used as the section number for purposes
of issuing a citation for violation of the State Act sections adopted by
reference.
(Ord. 13-013, passed 8-12-13)
§ 70.05 PENALTY, TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, Misdemeanor and civil infraction penalties
for violation of the adopted by reference Act 300 of the Public Acts of 1949,
as amended shall be as provided in Act 300 of 1949, as amended.
   (B)   As allowed by Act 7 of the Public Acts of 2012, a violation of §
257.625(1)(c) of Act 300 of 1949, as amended, (M.C.L.A. 257.625(1)(c)) shall be
punishable by one or more of the following:
      (1)   Community service of not more than 360 hours.
      (2)   Imprisonment for not more than 180 days.
      (3)   A fine of not less than $200 or more than $700.
   (C)   Unless otherwise provided, any person, corporation, partnership or any
other legal entity who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and may be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more
than 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court.
   (D)   Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
(Ord. 13-013, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 18-006, passed 3-19-18)
DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED; LIABILITY
§ 70.20 PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds that a significant number of motor vehicle crashes
and arrests within the city involve persons who were operating a motor vehicle
while under the influence of intoxicating liquor and/or controlled substance
(s). The City Council also finds that in such motor vehicle crashes, as
described, there exists a greater likelihood of personal injury and property
damage. The City Council also finds that as a result of these incidents, a
greater financial burden is being placed upon the resources of the city and its
police, fire, and public service departments resources by persons who are
operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor and/
or controlled substance(s) or while impaired.
(‘83 Code, § 70.07) (Ord. 93-011, passed 4-19-93)
§ 70.21 LIABILITY; RESPONSIBLE PARTY.
   (A)   Any person who, while under the influence of intoxicating liquor and/
or controlled substance(s) or while their ability to do so is impaired by
either the consumption of intoxicating liquor or the use of controlled
substance(s), or any combination thereof, shall operate a motor vehicle in a
manner which results in an emergency response, shall be liable to the city for
the expenses of the emergency response provided.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, it shall be presumed that the driver
involved was under the influence of intoxicating liquor or his ability to
operate was impaired if a chemical analysis of his/her blood, breath or urine
indicates the concentration of ethyl alcohol in his/her blood was .07% or
greater, by volume.
(‘83 Code, § 70.09) (Ord. 93-011, passed 4-19-93)
§ 70.22 ADDITIONAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   This section shall serve to fix responsibility and place liability on the
driver for expenses incurred. The liability shall be the expenses incurred. The
liability shall be civil in nature and shall not be construed as an enhancement
or enlargement of any penalty imposed by a judge subsequent to a finding of
criminal liability, including any fines, costs, state judgement fee or costs of
probation and/or alcohol awareness programs assessed as part of a criminal
penalty.
(‘83 Code, § 70.10) (Ord. 93-011, passed 4-19-93)
DRIVER AND VEHICLE GUIDELINES
§ 70.35 BUS, TRUCK OR TRUCK TRAILER OPERATORS; SAFETY METHODS.
   (A)   A person shall not drive, and an individual, partnership, association,
corporation, or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court shall not
employ, engage, hire, or contract for hire any person to operate, drive, or
maintain any bus, truck, truck tractor, or trailer, or certain other motor
vehicles unless the person meets the qualifications as set forth by this
chapter, the motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, Public Act 181 of 1963, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. 480.11 through 480.19 and the Department of State
Police under the authority of the act.
   (B)   An individual, partnership, association, corporation, or their lessees
or receivers appointed by any court shall not operate any truck, truck tractor,
or trailer or permit any person to drive any bus, truck, or truck tractor, or
certain other motor vehicles which does not meet driver or operator safety
standards, safety standards for equipment and devices on buses, trucks, truck
tractors or trailers, or certain other motor vehicles, and the loading and
unloading thereof as set forth in this chapter, and the Motor Carrier Safety
Act of 1963, Public Act 181 of 1963, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 480.11 through
480.19 and rules promulgated by the Department of State Police.
(Ord. 98-003, passed 1-5-98) Penalty, see
§ 70.99 
§ 70.36 PRIVATE DRIVER QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   A person shall not drive a motor vehicle unless he or she is qualified
to drive a motor vehicle. A motor carrier shall not require or permit a person
to drive a motor vehicle unless that person is qualified to drive a motor
vehicle.
   (B)    Except as provided in this chapter of the Motor Carrier Safety Act of
1963, Public Act 181 of 1963, as amended, as person is qualified to drive a
motor vehicle if he or she:
      (1)   Meets one or more of the following:
         (a)   Is at least 18 years old when transporting intrastate property
or passengers, except as provided in subdivisions (b) and (c).
         (b)   Is at least 16 years of age when acting as a farm vehicle driver
as defined in 49 CFR 390.5.
         (c)   Is at least 21 years old when transporting hazardous materials
in a quantity that requires the vehicle to be marked or placarded pursuant to
the provisions of 49 CFR 100 to 180 in a cargo tank as defined in 49 CFR 100 to
180 in a cargo tank as defined in 49 CFR 171.8 with a gross vehicle weight of
more than 40,000 pounds.
      (2)   Can read and speak the American-English language sufficiently to
converse with the general public, to understand highway traffic signs and
signals in the English language, to respond to official inquiries, and to make
entries on reports and records.
      (3)   Can, by reason of experience or training, or both, safely operate
the type of motor vehicle he or she drives.
      (4)   Can, by reason of experience or training, or both, determine
whether the cargo being transported, including baggage in a passenger-carrying
motor vehicle, has been properly located, distributed, and secured in or on the
motor vehicle he or she drives.
      (5)   Is familiar with methods and procedures for securing cargo in or on
the motor vehicle he or she drives.
      (6)   Is physically qualified to drive a motor vehicle in accordance with
49 CFR 391.41 to 391.49.
      (7)   Has an appropriate valid license issued only from one state or
jurisdiction.
      (8)   Has prepared and furnished the motor carrier that employs him or
her with a list of violations or the certificate as required by 49 CFR 391.27.
      (9)   Is not disqualified to drive a motor vehicle under 49 CFR 391.15.
      (10)   Has successfully completed a driver's road test and has been
issued a certificate of driver's road test in accordance with 49 CFR 391.31, or
has presented an operator’s license or a certificate of road test which the
motor carrier that employs him or her has accepted as equivalent to a road test
in accordance with 49 CFR 391.33.
      (11)   Has taken a written examination and has been issued a certificate
of written examination in accordance with 49 CFR 391.35, or has presented a
certificate of written examination which the motor carrier that employs him or
her has accepted as equivalent to a written examination in accordance with 49
CFR 391.37.
      (12)   Has completed and furnished the motor carrier that employs him or
her with an application for employment in accordance with 49 CFR 391.21.
(Ord. 98-003, passed 1-5-98) Penalty, see
§ 70.99 
§ 70.37 MEDICAL EXAMINER'S CERTIFICATE.
   A person shall not drive a motor vehicle unless he or she is physically
qualified to do so and, except as provided by this chapter or the Motor Carrier
Safety Act of 1963, Public Act 181 of 1963, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 480.11
through 480.19, has on his or her person the original, or a photographic copy,
of a medical examiner's certificate that he or she is physically qualified to
drive a motor vehicle.
(Ord. 98-003, passed 1-5-98) Penalty, see
§ 70.99 
§ 70.38 DRIVERS EMPLOYED ON OR BEFORE JUNE 10, 1984.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter and 49 CFR 391.21 relating to
applications for employment, 49 CFR 391.23 relating to investigations and
inquiries, 49 CFR 391.31 relating to road tests, and 49 CFR 391.35 relating to
written examinations, do not apply to a driver who has been a regularly
employed driver of an intrastate motor carrier of property for a continuous
period which began on or before June 10, 1984, as long as he or she continues
to be a regularly employed driver of that motor carrier. Such a driver is
qualified to drive a motor vehicle if he or she fulfills the requirements of
§ 70.36(B)(1) through (10).
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter pertaining to an intrastate driver's
medical qualifications do not apply to any driver who:
      (1)   Has been a regularly employed driver of the motor carrier for a
continuous period which began on or before June 10, 1984.
      (2)   Has continued to be a regularly employed driver of that motor
carrier.
      (3)   With the exception of
§ 70.36(B)(6), is otherwise qualified to drive a motor vehicle under Section
10.55.040.
      (4)   Has made application to the motor carrier safety appeal board
claiming grandfathering rights.
      (5)   Has received a waiver of medical qualification from the Motor
Carrier Division of the Department of State Police. The “medical waiver-
grandfather rights,” card, Motor Carrier Division form number MC-22, shall be
carried at all times on the person of the driver while he or she is operating a
motor vehicle. The original “medical waiver grandfather rights,” Motor Carrier
Division form number MC-25, will be retained in the driver's qualification file
in accordance with the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, Public Act 181 of
1963, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 480.11 through 480.19.
(Ord. 98-003, passed 1-5-98)
§ 70.39 BUS DRIVERS.
   (A)   The provisions of 49 CFR 391.21 relating to applications for
employment, 49 CFR 391.23 relating to investigations and inquiries, 40 CFR
391.31 relating to road tests, and 49 CFR 391.35 relating to written
examinations, do not apply to a driver who has been a regularly employed driver
of an intrastate motor carrier of passengers for a continuous period since
March 3, 1991, as long as he or she continued to be a regularly employed driver
of that motor carrier. Such a driver is qualified to drive a bus if he or she
fulfills the requirements of
§ 70.36(B)(1) through (10) relating to qualifications of drivers.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter pertaining to an intrastate driver's
medical qualifications do not apply to a bus driver who:
      (1)   Has been a regularly employed driver of the motor carrier for a
continuous period since March 3, 1991.
      (2)   Has continued to be a regularly employed driver of that motor
carrier.
      (3)   Is otherwise qualified to drive a bus under
§ 70.36, except for the requirement of
§ 70.36(B)(6).
      (4)   Has made application to the motor carrier division of the
Department of State Police claiming grandfathering rights.
      (5)   Has received a waiver of medical qualification from the Motor
Carrier Division of the Department of State Police. The medical waiver-
grandfather rights card, Motor Carrier Division form number MC-22, shall be
carried at all times on the person of the driver while he or she is operating a
motor vehicle under the applicability of these rules. The original medical
waiver grandfather rights, Motor Carrier Division form MC-25, will be retained
in the driver qualification file in accordance with the Motor Carrier Safety
Act of 1963, Public Act 181 of 1963, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 480.11 through
480.19.
(Ord. 98-003, passed 1-5-98)
§ 70.40 DRIVERS OF FARM VEHICLES.
   The provisions of 49 CFR 391.21 relating to application for employment, 49
CFR 391.23 relating to investigations and inquiries, 49 CFR Code of Federal
Regulations relating to road tests, 49 CFR 391.35 relating to written
examinations, 49 CFR 391.41 to 391.45 to the extent that they require a driver
to be medically qualified or examined and to have a medical examiner’s
certificate on his or her person do not apply to a driver of a vehicle eligible
for an displaying a farm registration plate.
(Ord. 98-003, passed 1-5-98)
§ 70.41 MECHANICS.
   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to a mechanic who services motor
carrier equipment during the intrastate operation of this equipment when the
following apply.
   (A)   The vehicle or combinations are not being used to transport passengers
or property or anything for hire or compensated transportation including paid
haulage when the units are empty.
   (B)   The mechanic is not otherwise being used as a regularly employed
driver.
(Ord. 98-003, passed 1-5-98)
§ 70.42 UTILITY, TELEPHONE, AND CABLE TV EMPLOYEES.
   This chapter and 49 CFR 391 do not apply to utility, telephone, and cable
television company service employees if those employees:
   (A)   Are not otherwise being used as a regularly employed driver.
   (B)   Are not used to operate a bus or a motor vehicle, except a motor home,
having a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds, a motor vehicle
towing a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000, or a
motor vehicle carrying hazardous material and on which is required to be posted
a placard as defined and required under 49 CFR 100 to 180. This does not
include a vehicle used exclusively to transport personal possessions or family
members for nonbusiness purposes.
(Ord. 98-003, passed 1-5-98)
§ 70.43 MOTOR VEHICLES, TRUCK TRACTORS, AND SEMI-TRAILERS.
   (A)   A motor vehicle, except truck tractors, pole trailers, vehicles
engaged in driveaway-towaway operations, and truck tractors and semitrailer
combinations described in division (B) of this section, that were manufactured
after December 31, 1952, that is so constructed that the body or the chassis
assembly, if without a body, has a clearance at the rear end of more than 30
inches from the ground when empty, shall be provided with bumpers or devices
servicing similar purposes which shall be so constructed and located that:
      (1)   The clearance between the effective bottom of the bumpers or
devices and the ground shall not exceed 30 inches with the vehicle is empty.
      (2)   The maximum distance between the closest points between bumpers or
devices, if more than one is used, shall not exceed 24 inches.
      (3)   The maximum transverse distance from. the widest part of the motor
vehicle at the rear to bumper or device shall not exceed 18 inches.
      (4)   The bumpers or devices are located not more than 24 inches forward
of the extreme rear of the vehicle.
      (5)   The bumpers or devices are substantially constructed and firmly
attached. Motor vehicles constructed and maintained so that the body chassis or
other parts of the vehicle afford the rear end protection contemplated shall be
considered to be in compliance with this section.
   (B)   A truck tractor and semi-trailer combination with a semi-trailer
length longer than 50 feet whose frame or body extends more than 36 inches
beyond the rear of its rear axle and is more than 30 inches above the roadway
shall not be operated on the highways of this city unless equipped with an
underride guard on the extreme rear of the frame or body. The underride guard
shall meet the following requirements.
      (1)   Provide a continuous horizontal beam having a maximum ground
clearance of 22 inches, as measured with vehicle empty and on level ground.
      (2)   Extend to within four inches of the lateral extremities of the
trailer on both left and right sides.
   (C)   An asphalt-hauling vehicle that is required to be equipped with an
underride guard under this section shall be exempt from that requirement of
this section if the underride guard prevents the vehicle from being attached to
an asphalt paving machine. As used in this section, ASPHALT-HAULING VEHICLE
means a motor vehicle, trailer, or semi-trailer specifically designed for
attachment to asphalt paving machines and which is used for hauling asphalt
paving materials.
(Ord. 98-003, passed 1-5-98)
§ 70.44 EXCEPTIONS TO FEDERAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
    The rule in 49 CFR 395 shall apply to all drivers of commercial motor
vehicles with the following exceptions.
   (A)   Farm vehicle drivers as defined in 49 CFR 390.5.
   (B)   Mechanics as defined in §
70.41.
   (C)   Utility, telephone, and cable television company service employees as
defined in §
70.42.
   (D)   Any driver of a public utility service vehicle when being used in
cases of emergency.
(Ord. 98-003, passed 1-5-98)
§ 70.45 HOUR LIMITATIONS ON DRIVING.
   (A)   A motor carrier shall not permit or require a driver of a commercial
motor vehicle, regardless of the number of motor carriers using the driver's
services, to drive for any period after having been on duty 60 hours in any
seven consecutive days if the employing motor carrier does not operate every
day in the week, or having been on duty 70 hours in any period of eight
consecutive days if the employing motor carrier operates motor vehicles every
day of the week.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the following drivers if their total
driving time does not exceed 40 hours in any period of seven consecutive days.
      (1)   Any driver-salesperson.
      (2)   Any driver delivering home heating fuel from the months.
      (3)   Any driver involved with the pickup or delivery of crude oil
products during the time when weight limitations are imposed due to seasonal
climatic changes.
      (4)   Any driver of a vehicle engaged in seasonal construction related
activities within a 100-air mile radius of the normal work reporting location.
      (5)   Any driver of a motor vehicle which is being used in the delivery
of beverages to retail businesses.
(Ord. 98-003, passed 1-5-98)
§ 70.46 DUTY ACTIVITIES; RECORDS.
   (A)   Failure to complete the record of duty activities required by 49 CFR
395.8 or 49 CFR 395.15, failure to preserve a record of duty activities, or
making of false reports in connection with duty activities shall make the
driver or the carrier, or both, liable to prosecution.
   (B)   A carrier, agent, or driver who makes a correction of the hours of
service records after submission shall certify as to the accuracy of the record
on the corrected record and state the reason for the correction. This
certification shall be a legible signature of the carrier official making the
correction in addition to the driver certification required in 49 CFR 395.18(d)
(5).
   (C)   The 12 consecutive hours on duty requirement contained in 49 CFR 395.8
(L)(1)(ii) shall not apply to intrastate drivers of motor vehicles regularly
delivering beverages to retail businesses who return to the work reporting
location, and are released from work within 15 consecutive hours of being on
duty.
(Ord. 98-003, passed 1-5-98)
§ 70.47 TRANSPORTATION OF PROPERTY OR PASSENGERS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this chapter is
applicable to all employers, employees, and commercial motor vehicles that
transport property or passengers.
   (B)   The rules of 49 CFR 387, entitled minimum levels of financial
responsibility for motor carriers, are applicable to motor carriers as provided
in 49 CFR 387.3 or 49 CFR 387.27.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit an employer
from requiring and enforcing more stringent requirements relating to safety of
operation and employee safety and health.
   (D)   Every motor carrier shall be knowledgeable of and comply with this
subchapter, the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, Public Act 181 of 1963, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. 480.11 through 480.19, and the rules promulgated
pursuant to the act that are applicable to that motor carrier's operations.
Every driver and employee shall be instructed regarding, and shall comply with,
all applicable provisions of this chapter, the Motor Carrier Safety Act of
1963, Public Act 181 of 1963, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 480.11 through 480.19,
and the rules promulgated pursuant to the act. This section shall not be
construed to prohibit the use of additional equipment and accessories if the
additional equipment or accessories are in proper working condition, are not
inconsistent with or prohibited by this subchapter, the Motor Carrier Safety
Act of 1963, Public Act 181 of 1963, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 480.11 through
480.19, or the rules promulgated pursuant to the act, and do not decrease the
safety of operation of the vehicles on which they are used. All motor vehicle
equipment and accessories required by this subchapter and state and federal law
or regulation shall be maintained in compliance with all applicable performance
and design criteria set forth in this subchapter, the Motor Carrier Safety Act
of 1963, Public Act 181 of 1963, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 480.11 through
480.19 and the rules promulgated pursuant to the act.
   (E)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, this chapter and the rules
promulgated under the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, Public Act 181 of 1963
as amended, being M.C.L.A. 480.11 through 480.19, do not apply to the
following.
      (1)   The occasional transportation of personal property by individuals
not for compensation nor in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise.
      (2)   The transportation of human corpses or sick and injured persons.
      (3)   The operation of an authorized emergency vehicle by a firefighter
who has met the driver training standards of the Michigan firefighter's
training council.
      (4)   A semi-trailer or truck used exclusively for storage purposes.
(Ord. 98-003, passed 1-5-98)
§ 70.48 ADOPTION OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
   The city adopts the following provisions of 49 CFR as of February 28, 1990,
on file with the office of the Secretary of State except where modified by this
chapter or the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, being Public Act 181 of 1963,
as amended, being M.C.L.A. 480.11 through 480.19, to provide for the safe
transportation of persons and property with the intent of following the
policies and procedures of the United States Department of Transportation's
Federal Highway Administration as they relate to 49 CFR and the North American
standard uniform out-of-service criteria and inspection procedures.
   (A)   Hazardous materials regulations, being 49 CFR 100 through 180.
   (B)   Motor carrier safety regulations, being 49 CFR 382, 387, 390 through
393, 395 through 397, and 399 including appendices C, D, E, and G, except for
the following.
      (a)   Where the terms "United States Department of Transportation,"
"Federal Highway Administration," "Federal Highway Administrator," "Director,"
or "Bureau of Motor Carrier Safety" appear, they shall be construed to refer to
the Michigan Department of State Police.
      (b)   Where "interstate" appears, it shall mean intrastate or interstate,
or both, as applicable.
   (3)   Where "special agent of the Federal Highway Administration" or
"administration personnel" appears, either shall be construed to mean a peace
officer.
(Ord. 98-003, passed 1-5-98)
§ 70.49 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963,
being Public Act 181 of 1963, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 480.11 through 480.19,
any driver or operator who violates this chapter, the Motor Carrier Safety Act
of 1963, being Public Act 181 of 1963, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 480.11
through 480.19, or a rule promulgated under the act, or any owner or user of
any bus, truck, truck tractor, or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles or
any officer or agent of any individual, partnership, corporation, or
association or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court which is the
owner or user of any vehicle, who requires or permits the driver or operator to
operate or drive any bus, truck, truck tractor, or trailer, or certain other
motor vehicles in violation of this chapter, the Motor Carrier Safety Act of
1963, being Public Act 181 of 1963, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 480.11 through
480.19, or a rule promulgated under the act, is guilty of a misdemeanor for
each violation.
   (B)   A peace officer, upon reasonable cause to believe that a motor vehicle
is being operated in violation of this chapter, the Motor Carrier Safety Act of
1963, being Public Act 181 of 1963, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 480.11 through
480.19, or a rule promulgated pursuant to such act, may stop the motor vehicle
and inspect the motor vehicle. If a violation is found, the officer may issue a
notice to appear for that violation.
   (C)   In addition to any penalty imposed under this chapter or the Motor
Carrier Safety Act, being Public Act 181 of 1963, as amended, being M.C.L.A.
480.11 through 480.19, a third or subsequent violation within one year of the
rules promulgated pursuant to the act with respect to hours of service and
recording those hours in a daily log may result in an audit of the driver of
the vehicle by the motor carrier division of the Michigan Department of State
Police.
   (D)   This subchapter does not apply to a unit of government or its
employees, officers, or representatives or to a motor vehicle, truck, truck
tractor, or trailer owned or operated thereby, except as provided in Section
601a of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. §
257.601a.
(Ord. 98-003, passed 1-5-98)
WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS FOR COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
§ 70.60 LOAD LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   When the axle spacing is nine feet or more between axles, the
maximum axle load shall not exceed 18,000 pounds for vehicles equipped with
high pressure pneumatic or balloon tires.
      (2)   When the axle spacing is less than nine feet between two axles but
more than 3½ feet, the maximum axle load shall not exceed 13,000 pounds for
high pressure pneumatic or balloon tires.
      (3)   When axles are spaced less than 3½ feet apart, the maximum axle
load shall not exceed 9,000 pounds per axle.
      (4)   Subdivisions (A)(1), (A)(2), and (A)(3) of this section shall be
known as the normal loading maximum.
   (B)   When normal loading is in effect, the state transportation department
and local authorities with respect to highways under their jurisdiction may
designate certain highways, or sections of those highways, where bridges and
road surfaces are adequate for heavier loading, which designation may be
revised as needed, on which the maximum tandem axle assembly loading shall not
exceed 16,000 pounds for any axle of the assembly, if there is no other axle
within nine feet of any axle of the assembly.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (H) of this section, on a legal
combination of vehicles, only one tandem axle assembly shall be permitted on
the designated highways at the gross permissible weight of 16,000 pounds per
axle, if there is no other axle within nine feet of any axle of the assembly,
and if no other tandem axle assembly in the combination of vehicles exceeds a
gross weight of 13,000 pounds per axle. When the maximum gross weight of a
combination of vehicles with load does not exceed 73,280 pounds, two tandem
axle assemblies shall be permitted on the designated highways at a gross
permissible weight of 16,000 pounds per axle, if there is no other axle within
nine feet of any axle of the assembly.
   (D)   The normal size of tires shall be the rated size as published by the
manufacturers, and the maximum wheel load permissible for any wheel shall not
exceed 700 pounds per inch of width of tire.
   (E)   During the months of March, April, and May in each year, the maximum
axle load allowable on concrete pavements, or pavements with a concrete base,
shall be reduced by 25% from the maximum axle load as specified in this
chapter, and the maximum axle loads allowable on all other types of road during
these months shall be reduced by 35% from the maximum axle loads as specified.
The maximum wheel load shall not exceed 525 pounds per inch of tire width on
concrete and concrete base, or 450 pounds per inch of tire width on all other
roads during the period the seasonal road restrictions are in effect.
   (F)   The city may suspend the restrictions imposed by this subchapter when
and where, in its discretion, conditions of the highways or the public health,
safety, and welfare so warrant, and may impose the restricted loading
requirements of this subchapter on designated highways at any other time that
the conditions of the highway may require.
   (G)   For the purpose of enforcement of this act, the gross vehicle weight
of a single vehicle and load or a combination of vehicles and loads shall be
determined by weighing individual axles or groups of axles, and the total
weight on all the axles shall be the gross vehicle weight. In addition, the
gross axle weight shall be determined by weighing individual axles or by
weighing a group of axles and dividing the gross weight of the group of axles
by the number of axles in the group. Pursuant to division (H) of this section,
the overall gross weight on a group of two or more axles shall be determined by
weighing individual axles or several axles, and the total weight of all the
axles in the group shall be the overall gross weight of the group.
   (H)   The loading maximum in this section shall apply to interstate
highways, and the city may designate a highway, or a section of a highway, for
the operation of vehicles having a gross vehicle weight of not more than 80,000
pounds which are subject to the following load maximums.
      (1)   Twenty thousand pounds on any one axle, including all enforcement
tolerances.
      (2)   A tandem axle weight of 34,000 pounds including all enforcement
tolerances.
      (3)   An overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles
equaling: in which: W = overall gross weight on a group of two or more
consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds; L = distance in feet between the
extreme of a group of two or more consecutive axles; N = number of axles in the
group under consideration; except that two consecutive sets of tandem axles may
carry a gross load of 34,000 pounds each if the first and last axles of the
consecutive sets of tandem axles are not less than 36 feet apart. The gross
vehicle weight shall not exceed 80,000 pounds, including all enforcement
tolerances. Except for five-axle truck tractor, semi-trailer combinations
having two consecutive sets of tandem axles, vehicles having a gross weight in
excess of 80,000 pounds or in excess of the vehicle gross weight determined by
application of the formula in this division shall be subject to the maximum
axle loads of divisions (A) through (C) of this section. As used in this
division TANDEM AXLE WEIGHT means the total weight transmitted to the road by
two or more consecutive axles, the centers of which may be included between
parallel transverse vertical planes spaced more than 40 inches, but not more
than 96 inches, apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle.
(Ord. 98-002, passed 1-5-98) Penalty, see
§ 70.99 
§ 70.61 INSPECTION FOR EXCESSIVE LOADS,
   (A)   A police officer or a duly authorized agent of the city having reason
to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful may require the
driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the vehicle by either portable or
stationary scales approved and sealed by the Department of Agriculture as a
legal weighing device, and may require that the vehicle be driven to the
nearest weighing station of the State Transportation Department for the purpose
of allowing an officer or agent of the city to determine whether the conveyance
is loaded in conformity with this subchapter.
   (B)   When the officer or agent, upon weighing a vehicle and load,
determines that the weight is unlawful, the officer or agent may require the
driver to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until that
portion of the load is shifted or removed as necessary to reduce the gross axle
load weight of the vehicle to the limit permitted under this subchapter. All
material unloaded as provided under this division shall be cared for by the
owner or operator of a vehicle at the risk of the owner or operator. A judge or
magistrate imposing a civil fine and costs under this division, which are not
paid in full immediately, or for which a bond is not immediately posted in
double the amount of the civil fine and costs, shall order the driver or owner
to move the vehicle at the driver's own risk to a place of safekeeping within
the jurisdiction of the judge or magistrate, inform the judge or magistrate in
writing of the place of safekeeping, and keep the vehicle until the fine and
costs are paid or sufficient bond is furnished, or until the judge or
magistrate is satisfied that the fine and costs will be paid. The officer or
agent who has determined, after weighing a vehicle and load, that the weight is
unlawful, may require the driver to proceed to a judge or magistrate within the
city. If the judge or magistrate is satisfied that the probable civil fine and
costs will be paid by the owner or lessee, the judge or magistrate may allow
the driver to proceed after the load is made legal. If the judge or magistrate
is not satisfied that the owner or lessee, after a notice and a right to be
heard on the merits is given, will pay the amount of the probable civil fine
and costs, the judge or magistrate may order the vehicle to be impounded until
trial on the merits is completed under conditions set forth in this subchapter
for the impounding of vehicles after the civil fine and costs have been
imposed. Removal of the vehicle, and forwarding, care, or preservation of the
load shall be under the control of and at the risk of the owner or driver.
Vehicles impounded shall be subject to a lien, subject to a prior valid bona
fide lien of prior record, in the amount of the civil fine and costs, and if
the civil fine and costs are not paid within 90 days after the seizure, the
judge or magistrate shall certify the unpaid judgment to the prosecuting
attorney of the county in which the violation occurred, who shall proceed to
enforce the lien by foreclosure sale in accordance with procedure authorized in
the case of chattel mortgage foreclosures. When the duly authorized agent of
the city is performing duties under this subchapter, the agent shall have all
the powers conferred upon peace officers by the general laws of this state.
   (C)   An agent or authorized representative of the city shall not stop a
truck or vehicle in movement upon a road or highway within the city for any
purpose, unless the agent or authorized representative is driving a duly marked
vehicle, clearly showing and denoting the branch of government represented.
(Ord. 98-002, passed 1-5-98) Penalty, see
§ 70.99 
§ 70.62 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   A driver or owner of a vehicle, truck or truck tractor, truck or truck
tractor with other vehicles in combination, or special mobile equipment who
knowingly fails to stop at or who knowingly bypasses any scales or weighing
station is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   A driver or owner of a vehicle who knowingly fails to stop when
requested or ordered to do so by a police officer, or a duly authorized agent
of the city authorized to require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing
of the vehicle and load by means of a portable scale, is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 98-002, passed 1-5-98)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   The following shall apply to §§
70.60 through
70.62.
   (A)   An owner of a vehicle or a lessee of the vehicle of an owner-operator,
or other person, who causes or allows the vehicle to be loaded and driven or
moved on a highway, when the weight of that vehicle violates §
70.60(A), is responsible for a civil infraction and shall pay a civil fine in
an amount equal to $.03 per pound for each pound of excess load over 1,000
pounds when the excess is 2,000 pounds or less; $.06 per pound of excess load
when the excess is over 2,000 pounds but not over 3,000 pounds; $.09 per pound
for each pound of excess load when the excess is over 3,000 pounds but not over
4,000 pounds; $.12 per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess is
over 4,000 pounds but not over 5,000 pounds; $.15 per pound for each pound of
excess load when the excess is over 5, 000 pounds but not over 10,000 pounds;
and $.20 per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess is over 10,000
pounds. However, the court shall have discretionary power as to the amount of
civil fine within the schedule provided by this division, and may impose the
civil fine provided in division (B)(2) of this section, for a civil infraction
where, at the time of the violation, either the motor vehicle, motor vehicle
and semi-trailer, or trailer did not exceed the total weight which would be
lawful for each unit by a proper distribution of the load upon the various
axles supporting each unit.
   (B)   If a person is determined to be responsible or responsible "with
explanation" for a civil infraction under §§
70.60 through
70.62 while driving a commercial vehicle, he or she may be ordered to pay costs
as provided in division (B)(3) of this section and a civil fine of not more
than $250.
   (C)   If a civil fine is ordered to be paid, the judge or district court
magistrate shall summarily tax and determine costs of the action, which shall
not be limited to the costs taxable in ordinary civil actions, and may include
all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the plaintiff has been put in
connection with the civil infraction, up to the entry of judgment. Except as
otherwise provided by law, costs shall be payable to the general fund of the
plaintiff.
(Ord. 98-002, passed 1-5-98)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
Persons with Disabilities Parking
   
71.01   Definitions
   
71.02   Unauthorized use of parking space for persons with disabilities
   
71.03   Parking spaces for persons with disabilities required
   
71.04   Public policy
Snow Emergency
   
71.05   Regulation of streets and traffic during a snow emergency
§ 71.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall be found in
the Barrier-Free Design Standards kept in the Building Department for the city,
and shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   DISABLED PERSON and PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES. A person who is determined by
a physician or an optometrist licensed to practice in this state to have one or
more of the following characteristics:
      (1)   Blindness as determined by an optometrist or a physician.
      (2)   Inability to walk more than 200 feet without having to stop and
rest.
      (3)   Inability to do both of the following:
         (a)   Use one or both legs or feet.
         (b)   Walk without the use of a wheelchair, walker, crutch, brace,
prosthetic, or other device, or without the assistance of another person.
      (4)   A lung disease from which the person's forced expiratory volume for
one second, when measured by spirometry, is less than one liter, or from which
the person's arterial oxygen tension is less than 60mm/hg of room air at rest.
      (5)   A cardiovascular condition that causes the person to measure
between three and four on the New York heart classification scale, or that
renders the person incapable of meeting a minimum
standard for cardiovascular health that is established by the American Heart
Association and approved by the Department of Public Health for the state.
      (6)   An arthritic, neurological, or orthopedic condition that severely
limits the person's ability to walk.
      (7)   The persistent reliance upon an oxygen source other than ordinary
air.
   PARKING AREA. That area reserved for the parking of motor vehicles by
patrons of a shopping center, business, hospital, or public institution.
   PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING SPACE. A space at least 12 feet wide and
marked off in traffic yellow paint. A sign located approximately six feet above
grade and inscribed with the international wheelchair symbol or reasonable
facsimile thereof, shall identify a parking space for persons with
disabilities.
   SHOPPING CENTER. A minimum area of three acres of land on which there is
located one or more stores or business establishments, and where there is
provided a parking area.
(‘83 Code, § 98.20) (Ord. 81-017A, passed 7-20-81; Am. Ord. 98-014, passed 6-
29-98)
§ 71.02 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING SPACE FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   (A)   As set forth in Section 8.10 (s) of the Traffic Code, it is a civil
infraction for a person to park his vehicle in a reserved persons with
disabilities parking space unless that person is disabled as defined in
§ 71.01.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided therein, the unauthorized use of
a parking space designated for persons with disabilities shall subject a
vehicle to be towed away and impounded at the owner's expense and liability.
(‘83 Code, § 98.21) (Ord. 81-017A, passed 7-20-81) Penalty, see
§ 70.99 
§ 71.03 PARKING SPACES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES REQUIRED.
   Every shopping center within the city shall provide parking spaces for
persons with disabilities in numbers to conform with the requirements of
M.C.L.A. § 125.1352 as amended. A violation of this section shall subject the
person to be fined not more than $250.
(‘83 Code, § 98.22) (Ord. 81-017A, passed 7-20-81) Penalty, see
§ 10.99 
§ 71.04 PUBLIC POLICY.
   It shall be the public policy of the city to provide in any municipal
parking area, parking spaces for persons with disabilities in numbers to
conform with the requirements of M.C.L.A. § 125.1352, as amended. The city
shall also encourage the implementation of parking spaces for persons with
disabilities in private parking areas within the city, and shall, upon request
of the owner of a parking area, provide for the designation of parking spaces
for persons with disabilities.
(‘83 Code, § 98.23) (Ord. 81-017A, passed 7-20-81)
SNOW EMERGENCY
§ 71.05 REGULATION OF STREETS AND TRAFFIC DURING A SNOW EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Parking on all city streets shall be prohibited under the following
conditions:
      (1)   Whenever snow or ice has accumulated to the depth of three inches
or more on any street within the city, a snow emergency declaration shall
automatically go into effect on all streets within the city;
      (2)   Whenever the City Manager, or his or her designated representative,
finds on a basis of falling snow, sleet, or freezing rain, or on the basis of a
forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau or other weather service, of snow, sleet or
freezing rain, that weather conditions will make it necessary that parking be
prohibited or restricted for snow plowing or other purposes, and publicly
declares a snow emergency, a parking prohibition is in effect on all city
streets.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (A)(1) herein, the declaration of a
snow emergency shall be made known to the residents of the city in one of the
following ways:
      (1)   Loudspeaker communication declaring the declaration of the snow
emergency from police vehicles;
      (2)   Snow emergency signs being posted at entrances to the city
declaring snow emergency parking restrictions;
      (3)   Publication/communication to home owners by means of newspapers,
radio, television, cable television, the city website or the like; and
      (4)   The declaration of a snow emergency shall be effective immediately
upon posting, publishing or communication as provided in division (B)(3)
herein.
   (C)   Once in effect, the prohibition of parking under the emergency shall
remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the City Manager, or his
or her designated representative, in a fashion similar to that communicating
the emergency.
   (D)   While the prohibition is in effect no person shall park, or allow to
remain parked, any motor vehicle on any street to which it applies. However,
nothing in this division shall be construed to permit parking at any time or
place where it is forbidden by any other provision of this code.
   (E)   Any person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal
civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
(Ord. 13-009, passed 8-12-13; Am. Ord. 18-007, passed 3-19-18)
CHAPTER 72: MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES, SNOWMOBILES AND TOY VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   General regulations
   
72.02   Snowmobiles
Motorcycles
   
72.15   Motorcycle regulations
   
72.16   Mufflers
   
72.17   Noise
Bicycles, Skateboards and Roller Skates
   
72.30   Definitions
   
72.31   Skating or riding on sidewalks
   
72.32   Skating or riding prohibitions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle or operating a motorcycle or motor-
driven cycle shall not ride other than upon and astride a permanent and regular
seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle or motorcycle shall be used to carry more persons at one
time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
   (C)   Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
(‘83 Code, § 71.01) (Ord. 71-017, passed 7-19-71; Am. Ord. 18-008, passed 3-19-
18) Penalty, see §
72.99 
§ 72.02 SNOWMOBILES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile upon a
public street, road, or highway, or upon any public property unless
specifically designated for the use of snowmobiles, or upon any private
property without the express authority of the owners of the property.
   (B)   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate the provisions of
this section.
(‘83 Code, § 71.20) (Ord. 73-019, passed 12-17-73; Am. Ord. 18-008, passed 3-
19-18) Penalty, see §
10.99 
MOTORCYCLES
§ 72.15 MOTORCYCLE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No motor-driven cycle shall be used to carry more than one person at
any one time.
   (B)   A person operating or riding on a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle on
a public thoroughfare shall wear a crash helmet on his head. Crash helmets
shall be approved by the Department of State Police.
   (C)   Whenever a motorcycle or a motor-driven cycle operated on the public
highways of this city in excess of 35 m.p.h. is not equipped with a windshield,
the operator shall wear goggles with transparent lenses or a transparent face
shield or eye glasses, which goggles, eye glasses, or face shield shall be
shatter-resistant material and of sufficient size to protect his eyes against
insects, other airborne material, and highway surface water and debris.
   (D)   Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
(‘83 Code, § 71.05) (Ord. 71-017, passed 7-19-71; Am. Ord. 18-008, passed 3-19-
18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.16 MUFFLERS.
   Every motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall at all times be equipped with a
muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or
unusual noise and annoying smoke. No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass,
or similar device upon a motor vehicle Any person who violates this section
shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil
fines set forth in §
41.06.
(‘83 Code, § 71.06) (Am. Ord. 18-008, passed 3-19-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.17 NOISE.
   No person shall race the motor of any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle,
needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop any motorcycle or motor-driven
cycle, blow the horn, or make or cause to be made any other loud or unseemly
noise, disturbance, or nuisance whereby the quiet and good order of the
neighborhood is disturbed. Any person who violates this section shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set
forth in §
41.06.
(‘83 Code, § 71.07) (Am. Ord. 18-008, passed 3-19-18) Penalty, see §
10.99 
BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER SKATES
§ 72.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BICYCLE. A device propelled by human power on which a person may ride,
having either two or three wheels in tandem, the wheels of which are more than
14 inches in diameter.
   ROLLER SKATES and STREET SKATES. Small wheels near the toe and near the heel
of a shoe or frame that would attach to a shoe which are used for gliding on a
hard surface, such as a floor, sidewalk or street.
   SKATEBOARD. Refers to a self-propelled device consisting of a short oblong
board with small wheels at each end, ridden on a hard surface such as a floor,
sidewalk, or street, and propelled by the rider's feet.
   TO ROLLER SKATE. To skate on any type of roller skates or street skates.
(‘83 Code, § 71.10) (Ord. 89-002, passed 5-1-89)
§ 72.31 SKATING OR RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   Whenever any person is roller skating, riding a bicycle or riding a
skateboard upon a sidewalk or other paved surface intended for use by
pedestrians, it shall be unlawful and punishable hereunder for that person to
fail to yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and/or approach, overtake or
pass any pedestrian in a reckless or careless manner, and shall not pass any
pedestrian except in single file if the person is roller skating, riding a
bicycle or riding a skateboard with other skaters or riders.
(‘83 Code, § 71.11) (Ord. 89-002, passed 5-1-89) Penalty, see
§ 72.99 
§ 72.32 SKATING OR RIDING PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and punishable hereunder to roller skate, ride a
bicycle or ride a skateboard on any bench, table, planter wall, retaining wall
or other device or structure in the public business sector, which is not
intended for pedestrian or vehicle traffic, or to jump or step on or off such
devices or structures in the process of roller skating, riding a bicycle or
riding a skateboard. (‘83 Code, § 71.12)
   (B)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to direct the erection of
signs on any sidewalk or other open areas prohibiting roller skating, riding
bicycles or the riding of skateboards thereon. It shall be unlawful or
punishable hereunder to roller skate, ride a bicycle or ride a skateboard on
any such posted sidewalk or open areas. (‘83 Code, § 71.13)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful and punishable hereunder for any person to roller
skate, ride a bicycle or ride a skateboard on any sidewalk or other paved
surface intended for pedestrians or vehicles in a reckless or careless manner,
nor in a manner which is likely to result in injury or harm to any person or
property. (‘83 Code, § 71.14)
   (D)   It shall be unlawful and punishable hereunder for any person to roller
skate, ride a bicycle or ride a skateboard on private property without first
obtaining and carrying on his or her person the written permission of the owner
of the private property to allow skating or riding. Failure of a person who has
been roller skating, riding a bicycle or riding a skateboard on private
property to produce written permission upon the request of any police officer,
shall constitute prima facie evidence that the person is in violation of this
division. (‘83 Code, § 71.15)
(Ord. 89-002, passed 5-1-89) Penalty, see
§ 72.99 
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   The penalties for violation of §
72.32 shall be considered "civil infractions" in the same manner as civil
infractions are considered under the Motor Vehicle Code, and shall consist of a
fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100 for a first offense. Subsequent
offenses shall be punishable as misdemeanors. (‘83 Code, § 71.16)
(Ord. 89-002, passed 5-1-89)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
92.   PUBLIC NUISANCES
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
95.   TREES
      
96.   PARKING LOTS
      
97.   COST RECOVERY
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Pets; sale of animals; prohibitions
   
90.02   Cruelty to animals; neglect of animals; definitions
   
90.03   Care of animals
Dogs and Cats
   
90.15   License required for dogs and cats
   
90.16   Limitations on the number of dogs or cats
   
90.17   License application
   
90.18   Collar and display of license required
   
90.19   Loud barking; running at large
   
90.20   Declaration of quarantine; notice; disposal
   
90.21   Muzzling of dogs or cats under quarantine
   
90.22   Establishment of a pound
   
90.23   Impoundment of animals running at large
   
90.24   Release of animals
   
90.25   Length of time animals held
   
90.26   Observation following bites; confinement
   
90.27   Owner of dog; definition
   
90.28   Sanitation; health hazard
   
90.29   Vicious and dangerous dogs; definition; prohibition
   
90.30   Vicious dog; destruction; court order
Kennels
   
90.40   Definitions
   
90.41   License required
   
90.42   Dog tags required
Beekeeping
   
90.55   Purpose
   
90.56   Prohibition of beekeeping on certain properties
   
90.57   Water source required
   
90.58   Destruction of aggressive hives or colonies
   
90.59   Nuisance and legal recourse
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 PETS; SALE OF ANIMALS; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall keep or house any animals or fowl within the city
except dogs, cats, canaries, or animals commonly classified as pets,
customarily kept or housed inside dwellings as household pets.
   (B)   No person shall sell, or offer for sale, barter, or give away baby
chicks, rabbits, ducklings, or other fowl as pets or novelties, whether or not
dyed, colored, or otherwise artificially treated. This division shall not be
construed to prohibit the display or sale of natural chicks or ducklings in
proper brooder facilities by hatcheries or stores engaged in the business of
selling the same to be raised for commercial purposes.
(Ord. 11-006, passed 4-25-11)
§ 90.02 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; NEGLECT OF ANIMALS; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   When used in this division, terms shall be as defined in Public Act
328 of the Public Acts of 1931, MCL 750.50, et seq.
   (B)   No owner, possessor or person having charge or custody of an animal
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to provide an animal with adequate care.
      (2)   Negligently allow an animal, including one who is aged, diseased,
maimed, hopelessly sick, disabled or non-ambulatory to suffer unnecessary
neglect, torture or pain.
      (3)   Abandon an animal or cause an animal to be abandoned without making
provisions for its adequate care. An animal that is lost is not abandoned under
this section when the owner or custodian has made a reasonable effort to locate
the animal.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to a Police Officer, Animal Control
Officer or Ordinance Enforcement Officer for acts committed in the performance
of his or her duties.
   (D)   This section does not prohibit the lawful killing or other use of an
animal, including the following:
      (1)   Fishing;
      (2)   Hunting, trapping or wildlife control;.
      (3)   Pest or rodent control regulated under the Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994.
(Ord. 11-006, passed 4-25-11; Am. Ord. 23-005, passed 12-18-23) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 CARE OF ANIMALS.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Fail to keep any premises where animals are kept in a clean and
sanitary condition, or allow such premises to accumulate waste products so as
to permit odors to be perceptible on any adjoining premises;
   (B)   Confine any animal on a leash or chain that fails to allow it
sufficient room for movement to exercise;
   (C)   Fail to keep any animal in other than a humane manner;
   (D)   Own any animal that causes a disturbance by excessive barking,
yelping, howling or other noise making; or
   (E)   Inappropriately tether a domesticated animal in violation of this
section. As used herein, TETHERING means the practice of securing a
domesticated animal to a stationary object by means of a metal chain or coated
steel cable to keep it restrained. TETHERING does not mean walking a
domesticated animal on a leash, or for temporary grooming, or other
professional service. It shall be unlawful for a person to:
      (1)   Continuously tether a domesticated animal for more than three hours
per day;
      (2)   Tether a domesticated animal on a tether made of anything but a
coated steel cable more than ten feet in length;
      (3)   Use a tether, or any assembly or attachments thereto, to tether a
domesticated animal that shall weigh more than 10% of the animal's body weight,
or that, due to the tether’s weight, inhibits the free movement of the animal
within the area tethered;
      (4)   Tether a domesticated animal on anything except a buckle-type
collar or harness, tether it on a choke chain around its neck, or tether it to
training collars such as choke or pinch-style collars, or tether it in such a
manner as to cause its injury, strangulation, or entanglement on fences, trees,
or other man-made or natural obstacles;
      (5)   Tether a domesticated animal without access to shade when sunlight
is likely to cause overheating, or without appropriate shelter to provide
insulation and protection against cold and dampness when the atmospheric
temperature falls below 40°F, or without securing its food and water supply so
that it cannot be tipped over by the tether;
      (6)   Tether a domesticated animal in an open area where it can be teased
by persons or that does not provide it with protection from attack by other
animals;
      (7)   Tether a domesticated animal in an area where bare earth is
present, and no steps have been taken to prevent the surface from becoming wet
and muddy in the event of precipitation; or
      (8)   Tether a domesticated animal less than four months of age;
      (9)   Tether more than one domesticated animal to a single tether;
      (10)   Tether a domesticated animal to a stationary object that would
allow it to come within five feet of any property line; or
      (11)   Tether a domesticated animal without a swivel attached and/or
equipped on both ends.
   (F)   A Police Officer, or an Animal Control Officer, or his or her
designee, may, in his or her discretion, order more restrictive tethering if it
is required by circumstances, and if it is not detrimental to the health,
safety or welfare of the domesticated animal.
(Ord. 23-006, passed 12-18-23) Penalty, see §
90.99
DOGS AND CATS
§ 90.15 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR DOGS AND CATS.
   No person shall keep or harbor any dog or cat over the age of four months
within the limits of the city without having obtained a license from the City
Clerk, or his or her duly authorized representative, as hereinafter provided.
(‘83 Code, § 90.10) (Ord. 11-006, passed 4-25-11; Am. Ord. 23-005, passed 12-
18-23) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.16 LIMITATION ON THE NUMBER OF DOGS OR CATS.
   (A)   Except under the provisions of §
90.40, no person residing in a residential area in this city shall keep,
harbor, or possess more than three dogs or cats.
   (B)   Puppies or kittens less than four months old shall not be counted as
dogs or cats for purposes of the three-dog-or-cat limit.
(‘83 Code, § 90.11) (Ord. 72-016-C, passed 10-16-72; Am. Ord. 11-006, passed 4-
25-11; Am. Ord. 23-005, passed 12-18-23) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.17 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Upon application to the City Clerk, or his or her duly authorized
representative, giving the full name and residence of the applicant, the City
Clerk, or his or her duly authorized representative, shall issue a license to
the applicant and a tag of some durable material stamped or engraved with the
number of the license, the year it is issued, and the words “Animal License,
City of Garden City, Michigan.”
   (B)   Before the City Clerk/Treasurer, or his or her duly authorized
representative, shall deliver a license and tag as provided, the applicant
shall pay to the City Clerk/Treasurer the charges in accordance with the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule in
Chapter 12 of this Code for each and every animal regardless of sex.
   (C)   The application for a dog or cat license shall be accompanied by
satisfactory evidence that the subject dog or cat has been vaccinated by a duly
qualified veterinarian with modified live rabies virus of chick embryo origin.
   (D)   A license shall entitle the applicant to keep or harbor the dog or cat
for the term commencing from the date of the license and terminating June 1
following its issuance, if a one-year license. For two- and three-year
licenses, the termination date shall be June 1 in the second and third years,
respectively, following its issuance. When issued for a period of less than
half of the period prescribed, the City Clerk/Treasurer shall collect a total
of one-half the fee hereinbefore provided. If the license is applied for 60
days or more after the dog or cat was subject to licensing, a late fee will be
assessed according to the current fee schedule. Every dog or cat four months
old or older shall be required to be licensed.
(‘83 Code, § 90.12) (Ord. 81-014, passed 5-18-81; Am. Ord. 82-044, passed 10-
18-82; Am. Ord. 82-046, passed 12-20-82; Am. Ord. 06-009, passed 4-24-06; Am.
Ord. 09-002, passed 2-9-09; Am. Ord. 11-006, passed 4-25-11; Am. Ord. 23-005,
passed 12-18-23) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.18 COLLAR AND DISPLAY OF LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Each person owning, possessing, or harboring any dog or cat shall provide
the dog or cat with a substantial collar of durable material, to which the
license tag is securely attached. The collar and tag shall be worn at all
times. In case of loss, duplicate tags may be issued by the City Clerk, or his
or her authorized representative, upon payment of a fee as set by resolution of
the City Council, and upon proof of loss by the applicant. No tag shall be used
on the collar of any dog or cat other than the dog or cat specified on the
license, and no person shall remove the collar or tag from any dog or cat
without the consent of the owner or the party to whom the license is issued.
(‘83 Code, § 90.13) (Ord. 72-016-A, passed 10-16-72; Am. Ord. 11-006, passed 4-
25-11) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.19 LOUD BARKING; RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   No person shall harbor or keep any dog, cat or other animal that, by
loud, frequent, unnecessary, or habitual barking, howling, or making any such
noise, shall cause serious annoyance to the neighborhood or to people passing
upon the streets. No owner or person harboring or keeping any dog, cat or other
animal shall allow the dog, cat or other animal to run at large at any time
within the city limits.
   (B)    As used in this section, RUNNING AT LARGE shall mean wandering
unrestrained on any street, alley, commons, or other public or open spaces or
places, within the corporate limits of the city, or upon any private property
other than that of the owner of the dog or cat. The animal shall remain on the
private property of its owner. Any person allowing any dog or cat habitually to
remain and be lodged or fed more than once within his or her house, store,
building, enclosure, or premises, shall be considered as harboring or keeping
the dog or cat within the meaning of this section. Any person finding a dog or
cat running at large in violation of this section shall notify and turn over to
the Ordinance Enforcement Officer or any Police Officer in order that proper
disposition of the dog or cat may be made.
   (C)   No person shall ride or take any horse, pony, donkey, or other hoofed
animal on any private property without the owner's permission, nor shall any
person ride or take any horse, pony, donkey or other hoofed animal on any
public street, boulevard medians, berm areas, parks, playgrounds, baseball
diamonds, or school property without authorization of the city.
(‘83 Code, § 90.14) (Ord. 72-016-A, passed 10-16-72; Am. Ord. 73-008, passed 4-
16-73;Am. Ord. 11-006, passed 4-25-11; Am. Ord. 23-005, passed 12-18-23)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.20 DECLARATION OF QUARANTINE; NOTICE; DISPOSAL.
   The City Council, upon recommendation of the Health Officials, may declare a
quarantine against the disease known as rabies, and require that all dogs in
the city be vaccinated against this disease. The City Clerk shall give notice
of the determination by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city, or posted in at least ten public places in the city. The owner of any
animal failing to comply with any quarantine order for vaccination shall be
considered in violation hereof. The operator of the pound shall make provisions
for the disposal of the bodies of all animals that have been destroyed pursuant
to this chapter.
(Ord. 11-006, passed 4-25-11)
§ 90.21 MUZZLING OF DOGS OR CATS UNDER QUARANTINE.
   Whenever the City Council shall declare a quarantine against the disease
known as rabies under § 90.20, the Chief of Police may, at his or her
discretion, upon recommendation of the Health Officer, cause muzzling of every
dog or cat kept or harbored within the city limits; provided, that notice of
the decision is circulated in the city.
(‘83 Code, §90.15) (Ord. 11-006, passed 4-25-11) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.22 ESTABLISHMENT OF A POUND.
   The Council shall provide a location where dogs, cats, or other animals that
may be found running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or
which may have been turned in to the police department or Ordinance Enforcement
Officer for disposition, shall be impounded.
(‘83 Code, §90.16) (Ord. 72-016-A, passed 10-16-72; Am. Ord. 92-008, passed 6-
15-92; Am. Ord. 11-006, passed 4-25-11) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.23 IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   Police Officers, Ordinance Enforcement Officers and/or Animal Control
Officers are hereby authorized to seize, take up and place or cause to be
placed in the pound any and all dogs, cats or other animals that may be found
running at large within the city.
(Ord. 11-006, passed 4-25-11)
§ 90.24 RELEASE OF ANIMALS.
   Any animal impounded by the city is required to be up-to-date on its rabies
vaccinations and to have a license issued by the city to its owner. If an
animal is impounded to a shelter contracted to the city, but is not up-to-date
on its rabies vaccinations, its owner is required to have it vaccinated for
rabies and to acquire a license within ten days of its release. If proof of a
rabies vaccine and a license is not given within ten days of the animal’s
release, its owner is subject to a fine in accordance with §
41.06.
(‘83 Code, § 90.18) (Ord. 72-016-A, passed 10-16-72; Am. Ord. 81-013, passed 5-
18-81; Am. Ord. 88-022, passed 6-20-88; Am. Ord. 92-008, passed 6-15-92; Am.
Ord. 11-006, passed 4-25-11; Am. Ord. 23-005, passed 12-18-23)
§ 90.25 LENGTH OF TIME ANIMALS HELD.
   All animals not claimed and released within five business days after being
impounded shall be destroyed, or if the animal is worthy and valuable, the same
may be sold or released by the administrator of the pound in any appropriate
and reasonable manner. However, no animal shall be disposed of under the
provisions of this section until the Animal Control Officer has inquired to
ascertain the owner. If one can be found, he or she shall be notified of the
detention of the animal. Anyone purchasing or receiving the animal shall secure
any required license as well as paying all fees.
(‘83 Code, § 90.19) (Ord. 71-013, passed 6-21-71; Am. Ord. 92-008, passed 6-15-
92; Am. Ord. 11-006, passed 4-25-11)
§ 90.26 OBSERVATION FOLLOWING BITES; CONFINEMENT.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, or any of his or her subordinates, or the Animal
Control Officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and may seize or
impound any dog, cat, or any other animal kept in violation of the provisions
of this chapter. Any dog, cat, or other animal which is known to have recently
bitten any person or animal shall be confined either by the owner or in the
animal pound for a period of ten days and shall not be removed from that place
while under observation to determine whether or not the animal has rabies. If
the owner of the animal is granted permission to confine the animal for the
observation period on his property, the owner shall immediately notify the
Police Department if the animal becomes ill or dies prior to the expiration of
the ten-day period.
   (B)   Any removal from confinement, prior to the expiration of ten days,
shall be a violation of this chapter. The refusal of any person to deliver up a
dog, cat, or other animal to any Police Officer or the Animal Control Officer
shall be deemed in violation of the provisions of this chapter. No person may
keep or harbor any dog, cat, or other animal in violation of these provisions.
(‘83 Code, § 90.21) (Ord. 72-016-B, passed 10-16-72; Am. Ord. 92-008, passed 6-
15-92; Am. Ord. 11-006, passed 4-25-11) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.27 OWNERSHIP OF DOG; DEFINITION.
   The word OWNER, when applied to the proprietorship of a dog, shall include
every person having a right to property in the dog, every person who keeps or
harbors the dog or has it in his care, and every person who permits the dog to
remain on or about the premises occupied by him. In all prosecutions in
violation of this chapter, the records in the police department showing the
name to whom any license was issued and the tag number of the license, shall be
prima facie evidence of ownership of any dog wearing a tag with a similar
number. In the event the owner is under the age of 17 years, responsibility for
adherence to all provisions of this chapter shall fall to the parent, guardian,
or head of the household of the dog owner.
(‘83 Code, § 90.22) (Ord. 72-016-A, passed 10-16-72; Am. Ord. 11-006, passed 4-
25-11) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.28 SANITATION; HEALTH HAZARD.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog owned or
harbored by him to deposit fecal matter in any place other than the premises
where the dog is harbored or kept, unless the fecal matter is immediately
removed and disposed of.
   (B)   All persons owning, keeping, or harboring a dog, or dogs, horse, or
other animal, shall maintain the premises on which the animal or animals have
access, in a sanitary condition that will not create a health hazard or cause
odors that will offend neighbors or persons that may pass in the street.
(‘83 Code, § 90.23) (Ord. 72-017, passed 8-7-72; Am. Ord. 72-016-A, passed 10-
16-72; Am. Ord. 11- 006, passed 4-25-11) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.29 VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS; DEFINITION; PROHIBITION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and punishable as set forth in this chapter for
any person to keep or harbor any vicious or dangerous dog anywhere within the
city.
   (B)   A VICIOUS/DANGEROUS DOG is defined as any dog that has, without
provocation, attacked or bitten any person engaged in a lawful activity, and
any dog that has attempted to bite any person engaged in a lawful activity, and
any dog that has attempted to bite any person engaged in a lawful activity, and
any dog that has on more than one occasion bitten, seriously injured, or killed
another domestic animal within an 18-month period, and any dog declared by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be a vicious or dangerous dog.
(‘83 Code, § 90.25) (Ord. 93-014, passed 5-3-93; Am. Ord. 11-006, passed 4-25-
11) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.30 VICIOUS DOG; DESTRUCTION; COURT ORDER.
   Pursuant to section 26 of Public Act 339 of 1919, MCL 287.286a, the victim
of a dog attack, or a police officer, may file a complaint with the District
Court requesting that a vicious dog be destroyed or confined.
(Ord. 11-006, passed 4-25-11)
KENNELS
§ 90.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARDING KENNEL. The premises of any person who as a business or means of
livelihood, keeps, grooms, cares for, trains, handles, maintains, or boards a
dog or dogs belonging in a proprietary sense to another.
   OWNER. Every person having a right of property in the dog, every person who
keeps or harbors the dog or has it in his care, and every person who permits
the dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
   PRIVATE KENNEL. An establishment wherein or whereon three or more dogs are
confined and kept for sale, boarding, breeding, or training purposes for
remuneration.
(‘83 Code, § 90.30) (Ord. 72-016-B, passed 10-16-72 ; Am. Ord. 11-006, passed
4-25-11 )
§ 90.41 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Any person who keeps or operates either a private kennel or a boarding
kennel, as defined herein, in lieu of the individual license required under
this chapter, shall annually apply to the City Clerk or his duly authorized
representative for either a private kennel license or a boarding license,
which, upon issuance, will entitle that person to keep or operate a kennel. The
City Clerk or his duly authorized representative shall not issue any kennel
license under the provisions of this section unless the applicant fully
complies with the appropriate regulations of § 90.18 and the following
additional regulations.
   (A)   No new private kennel licenses shall be issued in residential areas.
No private kennel license shall be renewed in a residentially zoned area unless
the following conditions are met.
   (B)   No boarding kennel license shall be issued in a residentially zoned
area.
   (C)   Neither a private kennel license nor boarding kennel license shall be
issued until the following standards are met by the applicant.
      (1)   An annual certification from the Michigan Department of Agriculture
that the applicant's kennel has been inspected as to adequate construction and
comfortable housing for the dogs kept therein.
      (2)   An annual certification from the Police Department that the
applicant has not been convicted of any violations of the animal ordinance
during the preceding year.
      (3)   An enclosed kennel or dog run shall not be located within three
feet of the property line.
      (4)   Outdoor kennel enclosures shall be enclosed with cyclone fencing
and heavy shrubbery or with solid fencing, either of which shall be at least
four feet high but no higher than six feet. The purpose of the fencing shall be
to completely barricade the location of the kennel from sight.
      (5)   Floors and runs shall be cement, gravel or stone and shall be
sloped to drain readily.
      (6)   Stall space for each small dog shall be not less than three feet by
five feet by four feet high; stall space for each medium to large dog shall be
not less than five feet by eight feet by six feet high. The stall space
requirements listed above are for single dog runs; if two or more dogs use the
same run, the size of the stall spaces shall be adjusted to ensure each dog the
minimum space required for each dog.
      (7)   No more than nine dogs shall be allowed in a private kennel; but in
any event the limit of dogs under nine shall be in reasonable accordance with
the kennel space available and the size of the dogs.
      (8)   Kennels shall be reasonably open to inspection by the Police
Department at all times.
      (9)   A kennel license shall be issued by the City Clerk or his duly
authorized representative on a form prepared and supplied by him, and shall
entitle the licensee to keep the number of dogs six months old, or over, as
specified in the license. The annual fee to be paid for each private kennel
license and for each boarding kennel license shall be charged in accordance
with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in
Chapter 12 of this Code. With each kennel license, the City Clerk or his duly
authorized representative shall issue a number of tags of durable material
equal to the number of dogs authorized to be kept in the kennel. The tags shall
be readily distinguishable from the individual license tags issued under §
90.18.
      (10)   It shall be the duty of all kennel licensees to keep the kennel
enclosures, stalls, and/or runs clean and free from any accumulation of dirt,
mud, fecal matter, or debris. All kennel licensees shall clean any and all
refuse matter, including fecal matter, at least twice daily from inside and
outside the kennel enclosures.
      (11)   Upon conviction of a violation of this chapter, the City Clerk,
upon notification to the licensee, may revoke the license granted hereunder.
(‘83 Code, § 90.31) (Ord. 72-016-B, passed 10-16-72; Am. Ord. 11-006, passed 4-
25-11) Penalty, see
§ 90.99
§ 90.42 DOG TAGS REQUIRED.
   The licensee of a private kennel shall, at all times, keep a tag attached to
a collar on each dog four months old or over kept by him or her under a kennel
license. No dog bearing a kennel tag shall be permitted to stray or be taken
anywhere outside the limits of the kennel. This section does not prohibit the
taking of dogs having a kennel license outside the limits of the kennel
temporarily and on a leash, nor does it prohibit the taking of dogs out of the
kennel temporarily for the purpose of hunting, breeding, trial or show.
(‘83 Code, § 90.42) (Ord. 11-006, passed 4-25-11; Am. Ord. 23-005, passed 12-
18-23) Penalty, see §
90.99
BEEKEEPING
§ 90.55 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish beekeeping practices intended
to avoid problems that may otherwise be associated with the keeping of bees in
populated areas and to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens.
(Ord. 07-001, passed 8-28-06)
§ 90.56 PROHIBITION OF BEEKEEPING ON CERTAIN PROPERTIES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, possess, raise,
or maintain one or more hives or colonies of bees on any lot or parcel of land
that is less than one-quarter acre in size.
   (B)   Hives and colonies shall not be located less than 60 feet from any lot
line nor less than 150 feet from any hospital, public eatery, office, or
school.
(Ord. 07-001, passed 8-28-06)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.57 WATER SOURCE REQUIRED.
   Any person maintaining, keeping, raising, harboring, or possessing one or
more hives or colonies of bees shall ensure that a convenient source of water
which is adequate for the size of the hive or colony is available to the bees
at all times to ensure that the bees do not congregate at swimming pools, pet
watering bowls, bird baths, or other water sources on neighboring properties
thereby causing human, bird or domestic pet contact.
(Ord. 07-001, passed 8-28-06)
§ 90.58 DESTRUCTION OF AGGRESSIVE HIVES OR COLONIES.
   In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusually aggressive
characteristics of stinging without provocation or exhibits an unusual
disposition to swarm, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to promptly destroy
the hive(s) or colony(s) or remove them from the property.
(Ord. 07-001, passed 8-28-06)
§ 90.59 NUISANCE AND LEGAL RECOURSE.
   Except as provided above or as otherwise allowed, the keeping of bees is
hereby declared a nuisance for which the city may use any legal recourse
available in addition to prosecuting violations hereof.
(Ord. 07-001, passed 8-28-06)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating §§
90.02 and/or
90.29 shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $500 and costs of prosecution or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days or both fine and imprisonment.
   (B)   Any person who violates any other provision of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the procedures in
Chapter 41.
   (C)   The city may also seek additional legal and/or equitable relief in the
District Court or by filing suit in the Circuit Court. The city may recover its
reasonable attorneys fees, court costs and other expenses related to
enforcement activities or litigation against the person or entity found to have
violated this subchapter.
   (D)   Upon a finding that a dog is vicious or dangerous, under §§
90.29 through
90.30 the court may, in addition to the penalties set forth herein, cause the
dog to be destroyed.
(‘83 Code, § 90.99) (Ord. 93-014, passed 5-3-93; Ord. 07-001, passed 8-28-06;
Am. Ord. 18-009, passed 3-19-18)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Adoption of Fire Codes
   
91.01   NFPA National Fire Code adopted by reference
   
91.02   (Reserved)
   
91.03   International Fire Prevention Code adopted by reference
General Provisions
   
91.15   False alarm
   
91.16   Interference with firefighters
   
91.17   Fire inspection
   
91.18   Storage of flammable materials
   
91.19   Fire exits
   
91.20   Flammable liquids
   
91.21   Special permits
   
91.22   Alarm system standards
Open Burning
   
91.35   Open burning prohibited
   
91.36   Additional restrictions
   
91.37   Declaration of nuisance
Hazardous or Toxic Substances or Materials
   
91.50   Definition
   
91.51   Removal of hazardous or toxic substances
   
91.52   Liability for costs; lien
Fireworks
   
91.65   Sale or use of fireworks prohibited
 
   
91.99   Penalty
ADOPTION OF FIRE CODES
§ 91.01 NFPA NATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
    The most current versions of the National Fire Codes and Standards, as
published by the National Fire Protection Association, are adopted by reference
by the city. In the event of conflict between the provisions of the
International Fire Code and provisions of this chapter, the more stringent of
the two shall govern. Complete copies of the Fire Codes shall be available for
public use and inspection at the office of the City Clerk.
(‘83 Code, §91.11) (Ord. 72-025, passed 9-18-72; Am. Ord. 85-002, passed 4-9-
85; Am. Ord. 92-01, passed 12-21-92; Am. Ord. 98-018, passed 9-21-98; Am. Ord.
21-002, passed 2-8-21)
§ 91.02 (RESERVED).
§ 91.03 INTERNATIONAL FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The 2021 Edition of the International Fire Code with Appendices, as
published by the International Code Council (ICC), or any subsequent edition as
approved by the ICC, is adopted by the city. In the event of a conflict between
the provisions of the National Fire Codes and the International Fire Code, the
more stringent of the two shall govern. A complete copy of the International
Fire Code is available for public use and inspection at the office of the City
Clerk.
   (B)   The following sections and subsections of the 2021 Edition of the
International Fire Code with Appendices are hereby amended or repealed as set
forth. Subsequent section numbers used in this section shall refer to the like-
numbered sections of the International Fire Code.
      (1)   Section 101.1 of the Code is amended to read as follows:
         These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of
Garden City, hereinafter referred to as "this code".
      (2)   Section 110.4 of the Code is amended to read as follows:
         Person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to
comply with the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair
or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of
the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under the provisions
of this code, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction punishable
by the fine specified in §
41.06 of the Garden City Code of Ordinances. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 08-003, passed 11-5-07; Am. Ord. 20-005, passed 11-23-20; Am. Ord. 23-
005, passed 12-18-23) Penalty, §
91.99
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.15 FALSE ALARM.
   No person within the city shall knowingly and willfully raise a false alarm
of fire at any gathering or in any public place, or ring any bell or operate
any public or private mechanical fire alarm apparatus for the purpose of
creating a false alarm of fire, or raise a false alarm of fire orally, by
telephone or in person.
(‘83 Code, § 91.01) (Ord. 75-005, passed 4-14-75; Am. Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-
21)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.16 INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE FIGHTERS.
    No person within the city shall knowingly and willfully hinder, obstruct,
or interfere with any firefighter/paramedic in the performance of his duties.
No person shall, while in the vicinity of any fire or emergency scene,
willfully disobey and/or disregard any reasonable order, rule, or regulation of
the officer commanding any Fire Department response.
(‘83 Code, § 91.02) (Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.17 FIRE INSPECTION.
    The Fire Marshal is empowered to enter at any and all reasonable times upon
and into any premises, building, or structure for the purpose of examining and
inspecting the same, to ascertain the conditions with regard to fire hazards,
and the condition, size, arrangement, and efficiency of any and all appliances
for detection, notification, or fire suppression. The Fire Marshal is empowered
to appoint members of the regular personnel of the Fire Department to make the
inspection, who shall report in writing to the Fire Marshal the results of the
inspection, and who are empowered to make any written orders for the correction
of any hazard or deficiency in detection, notification, or fire suppression
appliances as the Fire Marshal is authorized to make. Every order made by the
Fire Marshal or by authorized members of the Fire Department shall be promptly
complied with.
(‘83 Code, § 91.03) (Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.18 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS.
   No person owning or being responsible for any premises shall permit any
waste paper, ashes, oil, rags, waste rags, excelsior, or any material of a
similar nature to accumulate thereon, unless contained in fireproof
receptacles.
(‘83 Code, § 91.04) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 91.19 FIRE EXITS.
   The following rules relative to passageways, stairs, and fire exits shall be
applicable to all public buildings, places of assembly, commercial and business
buildings, hotels, apartment buildings, lodging houses, tourist homes, and all
other buildings except private dwellings, and except as otherwise expressly
limited herein to a particular type of building.
   (A)   No fire escape, stairway, balcony, or ladder on any building shall be
obstructed, out of repair, or maintained in a hazardous condition. Doors and
windows leading to any fire escape shall open easily from the inside.
   (B)   No combustible material shall be stored, placed, or kept under or upon
any passageway, stairs, or elevator shaft, nor shall any such material be
stored, placed, or kept in any other part of any building in such a position as
to obstruct or render hazardous egress therefrom.
   (C)   All doors, hallways, and stairways shall be unobstructed at all times.
   (D)   In all theaters, churches, schools, and other places of public
assembly, no door, aisle, or passageway shall be obstructed with any furniture
or article; nor shall any person sit or stand or be permitted to sit or stand
in any aisle, or in any exit or passageway; and all exits and the sidewalks
leading therefrom shall be unobstructed while places of public assembly are in
use.
   (E)   No person shall do any act which causes any violation of any of the
rules set forth in this section, nor shall any person owning any building or in
charge thereof, as agent, employee, or otherwise permit any of these rules to
be violated.
(‘83 Code, § 91.05) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 91.20 FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS.
   The use, storage, and processing of flammable liquids shall conform to the
State Fire Prevention Code, M.C.L.A. §§ 29.1 et seq. Any person violating these
regulations or failing to comply therewith shall be guilty of a violation of
this code.
(‘83 Code, § 91.09) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 91.21 SPECIAL PERMITS.
   Special permits shall be issued by the Fire Chief for the uses, occupancy
and operation of certain dangerous and hazardous businesses as herein
specified. Any permit may be revoked at any time by the Fire Chief or his
assistants for violation of any pertinent law or provision of the city code.
Permits are required for the following.
   (A)   To transport, use, or store explosives.
   (B)   To handle, use, or store flammable liquids in quantities in excess of
500 gallons.
   (C)   To operate spray rooms or booths.
   (D)   To store hazardous chemicals.
   (E)   To fumigate buildings.
(‘83 Code, § 91.10) Penalty, see
§ 10.99 
§ 91.22 ALARM SYSTEM STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purposes of this section are to promote the responsible use of
security alarm systems in order to facilitate the effective and efficient
response to alarms by the Garden City Police and Fire Departments. Furthermore,
the provisions of this section are intended to reduce the number of false alarm
activations and responses by Garden City Police and Fire Departments. It is not
the intention of this section to interfere with the contractual obligations
between alarm businesses and alarm users or to supersede any provisions of
state law.
      (2)   Response to false alarms consumes many hours of valuable law
enforcement and fire responder time and resources, reduces mental preparedness
of officers responding to alarms if an actual emergency exists, and presents
significant health, safety and welfare hazards to the citizens of Garden City.
Those who utilize faulty alarm systems or errantly operate alarm systems which
repeatedly generate false alarms that necessitate public safety (police and
fire) response are impacting valuable public safety resources and it is deemed
that the adoption of a false alarm ordinance is in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   ALARM BUSINESS. The business, by an individual, partnership,
corporation, or other entity, of selling, leasing, servicing, repairing,
altering, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring an alarm system.
      (2)   ALARM DISPATCH. A notification to the Emergency Dispatch Center by
the alarm business that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been
activated at an alarm site and police and/or fire responders have been
dispatched to the alarm site.
      (3)   ALARM SITE. A single premises or location served by an alarm system
or systems. Each tenancy, if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-
tenant building or complex shall be considered a separate alarm site.
      (4)   ALARM SYSTEM. Any device or assembly of equipment designed for the
detection of fire, medical emergency, unauthorized entry on or into any
building, place or premises, or for the alerting of others on or off premises
of the commission of an unlawful act, or both, and when activated causes an
audible and/or visual signal or transmits a signal or message to which law
enforcement officers and/or fire responders are expected to respond or which
would imply to a reasonable person that public safety personnel (police or
fire) are needed at the alarm source to investigate a criminal activity or
emergency. The following devices shall not constitute an alarm system:
         (a)   Alarm devices affixed to motor vehicles; and
         (b)   Handheld portable personal safety devices.
      (5)   ALARM USER. Any person, firm, partnership, company, association,
corporation or owner, tenant or lessee or their authorized agent or
representative of premises at which an alarm system is installed, maintained or
utilized.
      (6)   FALSE ALARM. The activation of an alarm system resulting in a
response to the building, place or premises on which the alarm system is
located by the Garden City Police Department or Garden City Fire Department
when the responding police and/or fire personnel find no evidence of a fire,
medical emergency, or criminal offense or attempted criminal offense after
having completed a timely investigation of the alarm site.
         (a)   FALSE ALARM shall not include an alarm dispatch which is
cancelled by the alarm business or the alarm user prior to the time the
responding police and/or fire personnel reach the alarm site; however, robbery
and hold-up alarms shall not be subject to cancellation, i.e. police and/or
fire personnel shall continue to the alarm site.
         (b)   Acts of God, including violent conditions of nature such as
earthquakes, high intensity winds, extreme storms including thunderstorms,
lightning, electrical surges and utility failures which interrupt the alarm
service through no fault of the alarm user shall likewise not be considered
FALSE ALARMS.
      (7)   MONITORING. The process by which an alarm business receives signals
from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the communications
center for the purpose of summoning public safety response to the alarm site.
      (8)   NOTICE OF NON-COMPLIANCE. A formal 30-day notification by the Alarm
Administrator, advising of the intent to put the alarm business in substantial
default status leading to lien.
   (C)   Fee for excessive false alarms. To defray the cost of responding to
false alarms and to discourage the continuation of repeat false alarms, the
alarm user of the alarm site shall pay to the city a false alarm fee as set by
the City Council for the fourth and any subsequent false alarm during any
calendar year that the alarm system is activated and responded to by the Police
and/or Fire Departments, and the service called for is not needed.
      (a)   Notification; assessment of fee. After the Alarm Administrator has
recorded three fire-related and /or police-related false alarm occurrences
within a calendar year for a given alarm site, the Alarm Administrator shall
notify the alarm user, in writing, by first class mail or hand delivery, that
additional false alarm occurrences will result in the imposition of service
charges in accordance with the above fee schedule. Failure to receive such
notification does not waive or nullify any service charges. A fourth or
subsequent police and/or fire related false alarm occurring within any calendar
year shall result in a per occurrence false alarm charge as set by the City
Council to the alarm user of the alarm site. Such fees will be invoiced
periodically as determined by the Alarm Administrator.
      (b)   Disposition of false alarm fees.  All fees and service charges
collected under this section shall be paid into the treasury of the City of
Garden City.
   (D)   Failure to pay fee; lien. False alarm fees under this section shall at
once become a debt to the city and shall be paid to the City Clerk within 60
days from the date of invoice. In the event the false alarm fee is not paid
within 60 days from the date of invoice, a service charge as set by the City
Council shall be added. A notice of non-compliance will be sent with the
adjusted fine amounts. Fees and service charges remaining unpaid for 30 days
shall be filed as a lien on the property and shall have the same character and
effect as a lien created by general law for state and county taxes, until paid.
   (E)   Exceptions. The following circumstances shall not constitute a false
alarm, and no fee shall be assessed:
      (1)   Alarms activated by a person working on the alarm system with prior
notification to the Emergency Dispatch Center;
      (2)   Alarms which can be substantiated as being activated by disruption
or disturbance of utility company facilities or motor vehicle-utility pole
accidents; and
      (3)   Alarms indicating an actual intrusion or other illegal activity,
i.e. not false alarms:
   (F)   Alarm user duties.
      (1)   To be familiar with the provisions of this section.
      (2)   To maintain the alarm system in good working order, periodically
test, and take reasonable measures to prevent the occurrence of false alarms.
      (3)   To instruct all persons who are authorized to place the alarm
system into operation, in the appropriate method of operation and to lock and
secure all points of entry, such as doors and windows.
      (4)   To inform all persons who are authorized to place the alarm system
into operation of the provisions of this section, emphasizing the importance of
avoiding false alarms.
      (5)   To provide a sign or notice posted on or near every audible device
with the name and 24-hour telephone number of the person or company responsible
for the maintenance of the system. The notice shall be posted in such a
position as to be readable from the ground level outside and adjacent to the
building. All silent alarm systems shall include a posted notice on the
premises which provides the same information.
(Ord. 10-004, passed 9-21-09; Am. Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21) Penalty, see §
91.99
OPEN BURNING
§ 91.35 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   BONFIRE. An outdoor burning put on by a recognized community,
educational, or religious organization for a specified ceremonial purpose.
      (2)   CAMPFIRE.  A small outdoor fire intended for recreation or cooking,
but not including a fire intended for the disposal of waste wood or refuse.
      (3)   CLEAN WOOD. Natural wood that has not been painted, varnished, or
coated with a similar material; has not been pressure treated with
preservatives; and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other
composite wood products.
      (4)   GARBAGE. Rejected food wastes, including waste accumulation of
animal, fruit, or vegetable matter used or intended for food, or that attend
the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl,
fruit, or vegetables.
      (5)   OPEN BURNING. Any combustion process from which the products of
combustion are emitted directly into the outdoor atmosphere without passing
through a stack, patio wood-burning unit, or recreational fire pit.
      (6)   PATIO WOOD-BURNING UNIT. A chimney, patio warmer, or other
enclosed, portable wood-burning device used for outdoor recreation and/or
heating.   
      (7)   RECREATIONAL FIRE PIT. A man-made enclosure, above or below grade,
no larger than three feet in diameter and no more than 18 inches in depth.
      (8)   REFUSE. Solid wastes, except body wastes, and included garbage,
rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, incinerator residue, street cleanings, and
solid market and industrial wastes.
      (9)   RUBBISH. Solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, trees, timber, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of
any kind that will be a detriment to the public health and safety.
   (B)   No person shall cause, suffer, or allow the open burning of refuse or
rubbish without a permit. A permit may be issued only if all the following
conditions are met.
      (1)   A written statement is filed with the Fire Chief giving the reasons
why no method except open burning can be employed to dispose of the refuse or
rubbish involved; the amount and kind of refuse or rubbish to be burned; the
exact location where the burning will take place, and the dates and time when
the open burning will be done and the duration thereof.
      (2)   A program is filed with the Fire Chief, setting forth a
satisfactory method for eliminating the need for open burning in the future.
      (3)   Written approval is received from the Fire Chief.
      (4)   Approval is obtained from the Wayne County Health Department.
   (C)   In no case shall the open burning of garbage be permitted.
   (D)   No person shall conduct a salvage or demolition operation by open
burning.
   (E)   Any person who shall install refuse- or rubbish-burning equipment in
structures other than those designed and used exclusively as a dwelling for
more than three families shall procure an installation permit from the Wayne
County Department of Health.
   (F)   Patio wood-burning units. A patio wood-burning unit may be installed
and used in the city only in accordance with all of the following provisions.
      (1)   The patio wood-burning unit shall not be used to burn refuse or
yard waste.
      (2)   The patio wood-burning unit shall burn only clean wood.
      (3)   The patio wood-burning unit shall be located at least 25 feet from
any structure or lot line, or as depicted within the manufacturer’s operating
guidelines.
      (4)   The patio wood-burning unit shall not cause a nuisance by way of
unreasonable light, heat, smoke, odor, or in other manner.
      (5)   The patio wood-burning unit shall not be used on any combustible
surface, including, though not limited to, a wood, composite, or plastic deck.
      (6)   The patio wood-burning unit must be enclosed, by one-quarter-inch
metallic mesh or otherwise, to ensure that burning materials are contained
within the unit.
      (7)   The fire shall be attended to at all times by an adult over the age
of 18 who must also be a resident of that property.
      (8)   There shall be at least one suitable means of fire extinguishment
available near the fire. These can include a 40-bc-rated fire extinguisher, a
garden hose hooked up to a water supply ready for use (not frozen or otherwise
obstructed), or dirt/sand and shovels.
      (9)   The fire shall be completely extinguished after each use and before
retiring for the night.
      (10)   The patio wood-burning unit shall be utilized in rear yards only.
   (G)   Recreational fire pits. A recreational fire pit may be used in the
city only in accordance with all of the following provisions.
      (1)   The recreational fire pit shall not be used to burn refuse or yard
waste.
      (2)   The recreational fire pit shall only burn clean wood.
      (3)   The recreational fire pit shall be located a minimum of 50 feet
away from any structure or lot line.
      (4)   The recreational fire pit shall not cause a nuisance to neighbors
by way of unreasonable light, heat, smoke, odor, or in other unreasonable
manner.
      (5)   The recreational fire pit shall not be located within 25 feet of
any utility line, including, but not limited to, overhead or underground power
lines or communication cable and natural gas service lines. Prior to
installation, it is the property owner’s or occupier’s responsibility to
contact MISDIG to ensure the same with respect to underground utility lines.
      (6)   The recreational fire pit shall be no larger than three feet in
diameter.
      (7)   The recreational fire pit shall be no more than 18 inches in depth.
      (8)   The lid of the recreational fire pit shall be completely enclosed
by steel mesh, with openings no larger than one-quarter inch.
      (9)   When in use, the recreational fire pit shall be completely enclosed
with the steel mesh screening.
      (10)   The fire shall be attended to at all times by an adult over the
age of 18 who must also be a resident of that property.
      (11)   There shall be at least one suitable means of fire extinguishment
available near the fire. These can include a 40-bc-rated fire extinguisher, a
garden hose hooked up to a water supply ready for use (not frozen or otherwise
obstructed), or dirt/sand and shovels.
      (12)   The fire shall be completely extinguished after each use and
before retiring for the night; and
      (13)   The recreational fire pit shall be in rear yards only.
(‘83 Code, § 91.06) (Ord. 71-012, passed 5-17-71; Am. Ord. 23-005, passed 12-
18-23) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.36 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   In addition to the requirements set forth herein, for burning
permitted under this section, the following shall be required:
      (1)   All burning shall be conducted in a safe, nuisance-free manner,
when wind and weather conditions minimize adverse effects and do not create a
health hazard or a visibility hazard on roadways, highways, railroads or
airfields;
      (2)   No materials shall be burned on any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk,
city right-of-way or on the ice of a pond;
      (3)   No open or outdoor burning may be conducted on days when the
Department of Environmental Quality has declared an “air quality action day”
applicable to the county;
      (4)   Should the city experience a drought, water conservation period, or
other unspecified emergency, open and/or outdoor burning may be prohibited at
the sole discretion of the Fire Chief;
      (5)   No items shall be brought into the city for open or outdoor burning
by any licensed or unlicensed contractor, including without limitation, for
demolition, tree service, or lawn service;
      (6)   The fire load will be limited up to two cords of wood. All wood
shall comply with all city ordinances regarding the storage of firewood;
      (7)   Under no circumstances shall gasoline be used to start any fire;
      (8)   The Fire Chief shall retain discretion to require additional
conditions or restrictions, should the circumstances of a particular proposed
open or outdoor burning so require.
   (B)   Air contamination.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause the
emissions of such quantities of air contaminants from whatever source in a
place or manner as to be detrimental to any person or to the public or to
endanger their health, comfort, or safety of any person or the public, or in
such manner as to cause injury or damage to property or business. Each day that
a violation of this section occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   Nothing in any section of this chapter relating to regulation of
emission of air contaminants shall in any manner be construed as authorizing or
legalizing the erection or the maintenance of a nuisance.
   (C)   Hours. Open burning with a permit shall be carried on only between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. of the official time of the city.
   (D)   Attendance at burning. Any open burning permitted under the provisions
of this chapter shall be constantly attended by a responsible person until the
fire is extinguished. That person shall have immediately available such fire
extinguishing equipment as the Chief of the Fire Prevention Division deems
necessary to keep the fire under control and to extinguish the open fire in a
reasonable time.
   (E)   Extinguishment of fires. Any open fire permitted under the provisions
of this chapter shall be immediately extinguished on the order of the Chief of
the Fire Prevention Division, or his or her authorized assistants, when found
to be conducted in such a manner as to violate divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D)
of this section. Any open fire started without permit first being obtained
under this subchapter shall be immediately extinguished on order of the Chief
of the Fire Prevention Division or his or her authorized assistants.
   (F)   Disposal of ashes or debris. Ashes or debris from any open fire
permitted under the provisions of this chapter shall be covered with at least
six inches of earth or otherwise disposed of in a safe manner acceptable to the
Chief of the Fire Prevention Division, so as to prevent air contamination,
immediately after the burning is completed or the fire is extinguished.
(‘83 Code, § 91.07) (Ord. 71-012, passed 5-17-71; Am. Ord. 23-005, passed 12-
18-23) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.37 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to burn or allow to be
burned, at any time or place, refuse materials of any kind that exude obnoxious
odors, or when a fire emits sparks or burning embers upon adjoining, adjacent,
neighboring, or nearby premises.
(‘83 Code, § 91.08) (Am. Ord. 23-005, passed 12-18-23) Penalty, see §
10.99
HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC SUBSTANCES OR MATERIALS
§ 91.50 DEFINITION.
   A DANGEROUS OR HAZARDOUS/TOXIC SUBSTANCE OR MATERIAL is defined as any
material or substance that has been identified by city, state or federal laws/
regulations to be dangerous or hazardous to the environment, animal life and/or
the public health and safety, and shall include but not be limited to such
substances as chemicals and gases, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum
or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents,
flammables and corrosives which have spilled, leaked or otherwise been released
from their containers.
(‘83 Code, § 91.25) (Ord. 93-012, passed 4-19-93)
§ 91.51 REMOVAL OF HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC WASTES.
   (A)    It shall be the duty of any person or any other entity which causes
or controls leakage, spillage, or any other dissemination of dangerous or
hazardous/toxic substances or materials to immediately remove the substances or
materials and clean up the area of spillage or leakage in such a manner that
the area involved is fully restored to its condition prior to the event or
occurrence. The Fire Department and the Building Department will inspect the
site to make sure the cleanup follows local, county, state, and federal
guidelines. (‘83 Code, § 91.26)
   (B)   Any person or entity which fails to comply with the provisions of
division (A) of this section shall be liable to and shall pay the city for its
costs and expenses, including the costs incurred by the city of any contractor
which it may engage for the complete abatement, clean up, restoration and
inspections of the affected area. The costs shall include, but are not limited
to, those costs associated with the incident abatement, mitigation, cleanup,
stand by, restoration, inspections, and any related third-party costs. (‘83
Code, § 91.27)
   (C)   The removal, clean up or payment of any costs under divisions (A) and
(B) of this section does not constitute an admission of liability or negligence
by the party, person or entity taking the action or paying the expenses. (‘83
Code, § 91.28)
(Ord. 93-012, passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.52 LIABILITY FOR COSTS; LIEN.
   The city shall submit an itemized bill for any costs by personal service or
first-class mail to the person, party or entity liable for same under the
provisions of this subchapter. The bill shall require payment of expenses
within 30 days. If any person, party or entity fails to reimburse the city as
provided herein, and the person, party or entity is the owner of the affected
property where the leak or spill occurred, the city shall have the right and
power to add the costs of cleanup and restoration to the tax roll as to the
property, and to levy and collect costs in the same manner as provided for the
levy and collection of real property taxes against the property.
(‘83 Code, § 91.29) (Ord. 93-012, passed 4-19-93)
FIREWORKS
§ 91.65 SALE OR USE OF FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this
section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      (1)   ACT. The Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Act 256 of 2011, and any
amendments to the Act which may, from time to time, be adopted.
      (2)   APA STANDARD 87-1. 2001 APA standard for construction and approval
for transportation of fireworks, novelties, and theatrical pyrotechnics,
published by the American Pyrotechnics Association of Bethesda, Maryland, and
any amendments to the standard which may, from time to time, be adopted.
      (3)   ARTICLES PYROTECHNIC. Pyrotechnic devices for professional use that
are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction but
not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer
fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or
UN0432 under 49 CFR 172.101.
      (4)   CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Fireworks devices that are designed to produce
visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the
construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the
United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and
1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer
fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks.
      (5)   DISPLAY FIREWORKS. Large fireworks devices that are explosive
materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designated to produce
visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as
provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standard 87-1, 4.1.
      (6)   FIREWORKS. Any composition or device, except for a starting pistol,
a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or
audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. FIREWORKS consist of
consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display
fireworks, and special effects.
      (7)   LOW-IMPACT FIREWORKS. Ground and handheld sparkling devices as that
phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5.
      (8)   MINOR. An individual who is less than 17 years of age.
      (9)   PERMITTED DAYS. In accordance with the Michigan Fireworks Safety
Act 256 of 2011.
         (a)   December 31, 11:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. on January 1.
         (b)   The Saturday and Sunday before Memorial Day, 11:00 a.m. until
11:45 p.m.
         (c)   June 29 to July 4, 11:00 a.m. until 11:45 p.m.
         (d)   July 5, if it falls on a Friday or Saturday, 11:00 a.m. until
11:45 p.m.
         (e)   The Saturday and Sunday before Labor Day, 11:00 a.m. until 11:45
p.m.
      (10)   NOVELTIES. That term as defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.2,
3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all the following:
         (a)   Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips,
rolls, or individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of explosive
content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content
per cap.
         (b)   Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and
toy guns in which toy caps as described in division (10)(a) above are used,
that are constructed so that the hand cannot come into contact with the cap
when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be
separated so as to form a missile by the explosion.
         (c)   Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding one-eighth inch
in diameter.
         (d)   Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes
with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer's
name and the quantity contained in each box are printed on the box; and toy
smoke devices.
      (11)   PERSON. Any individual, agent, legal representative, association,
charitable organization, church, non-profit organization, unincorporated
organization, labor organization, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, or any other entity or organization. An individual shall include a
minor as defined in this section.
      (12)   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Property dedicated and appropriated to the public
use.
      (13)   PUBLIC USE. When used with reference to land reserved for that
purpose, means and relates to uses for the general benefit of the public, such
as schools, libraries, public institutions, government buildings, government
parking lots, parks, boulevards, playgrounds, streets, roads, highways, alleys,
sidewalks, bike paths, trailways, easements and sewers, public lighting, water,
gas, or other similar utility installations, structures and grounds.
      (14)   SPECIAL EFFECTS. A combination of chemical elements or chemical
compounds capable or burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and
designed and intended to produce an audible visual, mechanical, or thermal
effect as an integral part of a motion picture, radio, television, theatrical,
or opera production or live entertainment.
      (15)   VISIBLY INTOXICATED. An individual shall not discharge, ignite, or
use consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks while under the influence of
alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor
and a controlled substance. A person that violates this subsection is
responsible for a state civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine
of not more than $1,000. As used in this division:
         (a)   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR means that term as defined in section 1d of the
Michigan vehicle code, 1949 PA 300, M.C.L.A. 257.1d.
         (b)   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE means that term as defined in section 8b of
the Michigan vehicle code, 1949 PA 300, M.C.L.A. 257.8b.
   (B)   Fireworks; prohibitions.
      (1)   Consumer fireworks. A person shall not ignite, discharge or use
consumer fireworks, (such as roman candles, bottle rockets, firecrackers,
aerials, etc.) except on permitted days and times, provided that a person shall
not ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks in violation of the Act and/or
this section.
      (2)   Low impact and novelty fireworks. A person shall not use, ignite or
discharge low impact or novelty fireworks (such as sparklers, snakes, smoke
devices, snaps, poppers, etc.) between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      (3)   Illegal fireworks. A person shall not use, possess, or discharge
fireworks in violation of the Act.
   (C)   Minors.
      (1)   A minor shall not possess, use, discharge or ignite any consumer
fireworks, at any time, nor on any day, including permitted days and times.
      (2)   A minor shall not use, discharge, or ignite any low impact
fireworks or novelty fireworks, unless under the supervision of a parent or
guardian, and the use, discharge and/or ignition is within permitted hours, and
does not violate the provisions of this section and/or the Act.
   (D)   General restrictions.
      (1)   Unless specifically authorized, no person shall use, discharge or
ignite fireworks, including consumer fireworks on public property and that of
public use (including streets and sidewalks), school property, another person's
business or property without their express permission, and property defined
above.
      (2)   No person shall use, discharge or ignite any fireworks within 20
feet of an open flame, a burner, gasoline, ignited gas or electric grill, or in
any enclosed structure, garage, tent, or shed, or under any canopy, or
overhanging cover, of any nature.
      (3)   No person being visibly intoxicated due to the voluntary
consumption of alcoholic liquor as that term is defined under the State of
Michigan Motor Vehicle Code shall use, discharge or ignite fireworks, anything
by this section to the contrary notwithstanding.
      (4)   No person shall either individually or in concert with another
person, cause damage to any private or public property by the use, discharge or
ignition of any fireworks.
      (5)   No person shall use, discharge or ignite consumer fireworks within
200 feet of a residential structure.
      (6)   No person shall create litter by using, igniting or discharging
fireworks.
   (E)   Applicability of general ordinances. Nothing in this section or in the
Act shall preclude the enforcement of ordinances prohibiting conduct that is
secondary or incidental to the use, discharge, or ignition of fireworks.
   (F)   Zoning ordinances. Any person selling, distributing or transporting
fireworks shall otherwise comply with the Act, and is required to comply with
the zoning ordinances of the city, including obtaining necessary approvals
thereunder. Failure to obtain necessary zoning approvals is subject to penalty
as provided in the zoning ordinances of the city.
   (G)   Imminent dangers. Notwithstanding the Act, no person shall use,
discharge or ignite fireworks thereby creating or causing an imminent danger or
threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, as reasonably deemed by the
Fire Marshall, and such fireworks being used, ignited or discharged may be
immediately seized.
   (H)   Seizure. All fireworks used, discharged, and/or ignited in violation
of the Act and/or this section are subject to seizure. Any costs incurred by
the city to seize and store the fireworks shall be paid by the responsible
party.
(‘83 Code, § 137.15) (Ord. 12-007, passed 8-27-12; Am. Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-
21) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity who
violates the provisions of §
91.03 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court. Each
day that the violation continues after due notice has been served in accordance
with the terms and provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person or entity that violates any provision of §
91.22 may, upon conviction, be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more
than 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court.
   (C)   (1)   A violation of §
91.65 is a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000, plus the
costs of prosecution. Five hundred dollars of a fine collected under §
91.65 shall be remitted to the local law enforcement agency responsible for
enforcing the ordinance.
      (2)   Following final disposition of a finding of responsibility for
violating §
91.65, the city may dispose of or destroy any fireworks retained as evidence in
that prosecution.
      (3)   In addition to any other penalty, a person that is found
responsible for a violation of §
91.65 shall be required to reimburse the city for the costs or storing,
disposing of, or destroying consumer fireworks that were confiscated by the
city in accordance with this §
91.65.
(Ord. 08-003, passed 11-5-07; Am. Ord. 10-004, passed 9-21-09; Am. Ord. 12-007,
passed 8-27-12; Am. Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21)
CHAPTER 92: PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Definition
   
92.02   Maintaining a nuisance prohibited
   
92.03   Nuisances defined
   
92.04   Abatement of nuisances
   
92.05   Abatement by city
Weed Control
   
92.15   Control and maintenance of grass and weeds
   
92.16   Control and maintenance by city
   
92.17   Exemptions
   
92.18   Administrative rules
Noise Control
   
92.30   Unnecessary noises prohibited
   
92.31   Unnecessary noises defined
   
92.32   Noise in certain areas
   
92.33   Sound amplification devices
   
92.34   Exceptions
   
92.35   Vehicular noise abatement
Recreational Vehicles
   
92.45   Definitions
   
92.46   Prohibition of temporary storage or parking
   
92.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 DEFINITION.
   A PUBLIC NUISANCE is defined as anything which annoys, injures, or endangers
the safety, health, comfort, or repose of the public; interferes with or
destroys or renders dangerous any street, alley, or highway; allows
accumulation of junk or obnoxious matters on private property; or in any way
renders the public insecure in life or property. Public nuisances shall
include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this
chapter, the common law, and statutory law of the state.
(‘83 Code, § 92.01)
§ 92.02 MAINTAINING A NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   Nuisances are not to be created or maintained. No owner or occupant, having
control or management of any dwelling or any building, structure, excavation,
business pursuit, matter, or thing, shall allow any nuisance to be created or
to exist on the premises of which the person is the owner or exercises control
or management thereof. No person owning or occupying any public or private
street, alleyway, or any premises whatever, or having control or management
thereof, within the limits of the city, shall create or maintain a nuisance
thereon.
(‘83 Code, § 92.02) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.03 NUISANCES DEFINED.
   (A)   No person shall permit or cause the escape of such quantities of
smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, and gases in a place or manner as
to be detrimental to any person or to the public or to endanger the health,
comfort, and safety of any person or of the public, or in a manner as to cause
or have a tendency to cause injury or damage to property or business. The
escape of such matter is a public nuisance. (‘83 Code, § 92.03)
   (B)   No person shall use or maintain any lighting facilities connected with
any use of land, or operation of any place or business or factory, so as to
reflect light upon any residential use adjacent to the lighting facilities. The
use of lights in this manner is a public nuisance. (‘83 Code, § 92.04)
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle which is unlicensed,
inoperative, in a state of major disassembly or disrepair to be parked or
stored on any private or public property, unless the same is completely
enclosed in a garage, building, structure or enclosed by a private fence so as
not to be visible from surrounding property.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, a vehicle of any kind as described
in division (C)(1) shall be deemed abandoned when it has remained parked or
stored on public or private property for a period of 48 continuous hours or
more.
      (3)   The Chief of Police or his designee may remove or cause to remove
or tow away any motor vehicle which is violating the provisions of this
division relating to parking or storing of any abandoned vehicle on public or
private property, and disposed of in accordance with law. The officer
authorized to enforce this provision shall leave a written notice at the
premises where the vehicle is kept or affix notice to the vehicle at least 48
hours prior to removal. The written notice shall contain the following
information.
         (a)   The date and time the notice was left or affixed.
         (b)   The name and address of the police agency taking the action.
         (c)   The name and badge number of the officer leaving or affixing the
notice.
         (d)   The date and time the vehicle may be taken into custody and
stored at the owner's expense, or scrapped if the vehicle is not removed.
         (e)   The year, make and vehicle identification number of the vehicle,
if available.
      (4)   The provisions of the above restrictions do not apply to residents
of the city while the resident is serving in any branch of the United States
Armed Forces. Proof of such service shall be submitted to the Police
Department. The serviceperson, spouse, or parents shall register with the
department, and a decal shall be purchased at the cost of $1 and displayed on
the right side of the front windshield. The registration must be made each year
prior to March 1, and the vehicle stored at the rear of the property.
(‘83 Code, § 92.05)
   (D)   If any lands, excavations, lots, cellar, vault, sewer, drain, place,
or premises within the city shall be damp, unwholesome, offensive, or filthy,
or be covered during any portion of the year with stagnant or impure water, or
shall be in such condition as to produce offensive exhalations or be in a
condition dangerous to life or property, the Health Officer or the City Council
may cause the same to be drained, filled up, cleansed, or purified, or may
require the owner, occupant, or person in charge of the lot, premises, or place
to perform that duty. The escape or stagnation of such matter is a public
nuisance. (‘83 Code, § 92.06)
   (E)   No person shall, by himself or by another, throw, place, deposit, or
leave in any street, lane, alley, or in any public or private place or
premises, any animal or vegetable substance, dead animals, dirt, rubbish,
excrement, filth, garbage, swill, trash, paper, wood, glass, metal, stone, or
any other article or substance whatever which may cause any offensive,
unwholesome or nauseous odor, or is likely to cause injury to travelers,
pedestrians, or motor vehicles, or may cause any annoyance to others, or
endanger the health of the public. The deposit of such matter is a public
nuisance. (‘83 Code, § 92.07)
   (F)   No person, whether owner or occupant of any lot or premises, shall
maintain any structure, building, or fence which is unsafe, liable to collapse,
or which is a menace to the health, morals, or safety of the public. The
maintenance of such structures is a public nuisance. (‘83 Code, § 92.08)
(Ord. 89-007, passed 8-21-89) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.04 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   Whenever any officer or official of the city shall determine that there
exists a nuisance within the meaning of this code, the officer or official
shall cause a notice to be served on the owner or occupant of the premises on
which the nuisance exists, requiring the person to abate the nuisance within
the time specified in the notice. Service of the notice shall be made in the
following manner.
   (A)   By delivering the notice to the owner or occupant personally, or by
leaving it at his residence, office, or place of business with some person of
suitable age and discretion.
   (B)   By mailing the notice by certified mail to the owner or occupant at
his last known address.
   (C)   If the owner or occupant is unknown, by posting the notice in some
conspicuous place on the premises for five days.
(‘83 Code, § 92.09)
§ 92.05 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   Whenever a person fails to abate a nuisance in accordance with the notice
required in
§ 92.04, the city shall do so and the cost shall be charged against the owner
or occupant as a special assessment in the same manner as specified for weed
control. Performance of the work by the city, or the owner or occupant of any
premises, shall not relieve any person from the penalty prescribed in
§ 92.99.
(‘83 Code, § 92.10)
WEED CONTROL
§ 92.15 CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE OF GRASS AND WEEDS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant, or any person
having control or management of any lot, area, or parcel of land within the
city to permit or allow the presence thereon, or in the unpaved portion of the
right-of-way immediately adjacent thereto, of weeds, grass, brush, or
deleterious, unhealthy growths of any species or variety exceeding a height of
seven inches above ground level, or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass, or
brush, and the same are declared to be a public nuisance.
      (2)   It shall also be unlawful for the occupant or owner of any lot,
place, area, or parcel of land within the city to permit or allow the presence
thereon, or on any portion thereof, of noxious weeds, scattered among which are
Canada thistle, dodders, mustards, wild carrot, bindweed, perennial sowthistle,
hoary alyssum, ragweed and poison ivy, poison sumac, ox-eyed daisies,
goldenrod, milkweed, or any other varieties, species, or plants designated by
the Department of Health as poisonous or injurious. The presence of these weeds
upon any lot or parcel of land within the city is declared to be a public
nuisance.
(‘83 Code, § 91.20)
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the occupant of every premises and the owner
of unoccupied premises within the city, to cut and remove or destroy by lawful
means, all weeds, grass, or undesirable poisonous or harmful vegetation as
often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions stated in division (A)
of this section. Cutting, removing, or destroying of weeds, grass, and
vegetation at least three times in each year, once before May 1, once again
before July 1, and once again before September 1, or as often as necessary,
when weeds, grass and vegetation has reached a height of seven inches, shall be
deemed in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(‘83 Code, § 91.21)
(Ord. 85-003, passed 10-7-85; Am. Ord. 85-004, passed 11-18-85; Am. Ord. 91-
002, passed 5-6-91; Am. Ord. 11-010, passed 7-25-11 ) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.16 CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE BY CITY.
   If the provisions of
§ 92.15 are not complied with, the Director of Public Services, or his duly
authorized representatives, shall notify the occupant or owner of unoccupied
premises to comply with the provisions within a time to be specified in the
notice. The notice shall be given in accordance with
§ 10.12 of this Code. The notice shall require compliance within five days
after service of the notice, and if the notice is not complied with within the
time limit specified within the notice, the Director shall cause the weeds,
grass, and other vegetation to be removed or destroyed, together with any
grading necessary to allow the removal of the vegetation. The cost of cutting,
removal, grading, or destruction shall be charged in accordance with the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule in Chapter 12 of this Code. The charge shall become
at once a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed, together
with all charges thereon, and shall, on July 1, become a lien on the property
assessed of the same character and effect as the lien created by general law
for state and county taxes, until paid.
(‘83 Code, § 92.22) (Am. Ord. 79-002, passed 2-5-79; Am. Ord. 91-002, passed 5-
6-91; Am. Ord. 95-01, passed 7-17-95; Am. Ord. 98-008, passed 6-29-98)
§ 92.17 EXEMPTIONS.
   Exempted from the provisions of
§ 92.15 are flower gardens, plots of shrubbery, vegetable gardens, and grain
plots. An exemption under this section cannot be claimed unless the land has
been cultivated and cared for in a manner appropriate to these exempt
categories.
(‘83 Code, § 92.23)
§ 92.18 ADMINISTRATIVE RULES.
   The City Manager may make any rules and regulations not inconsistent with
the provisions hereof, which may be necessary for the proper administration of
§§
92.15 through
91.17.
(‘83 Code, § 92.24) (Ord. 79-002, passed 2-5-79)
NOISE CONTROL
§ 92.30 UNNECESSARY NOISES PROHIBITED.
   No person within the limits of the city shall make, continue, or cause to be
made or continued any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise which unreasonably
annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, convenience, safety,
health, welfare, or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof, unless the
making, continuing, or causing of the noise to be made or continued cannot be
prevented, and is necessary for the protection or preservation of property or
of the health, safety, life, or limb of some person.
(‘83 Code, § 92.30) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.31 UNNECESSARY NOISES DEFINED.
   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, unnecessary, or
unusual noises in violation of this chapter; however, this enumeration is not
exclusive.
   (A)   Horns, signaling devices, and the like. The sounding of any horn or
signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle on any
street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by
means of any signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the
sounding of any such device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of
time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or
electricity; the use of any horn, whistle, or other device operated by engine
exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any
reason held up.
   (B)   Radios, phonographs, and the like. The playing, using, or operating or
permitting the playing, using, or operating of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort
of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume than is
necessary for convenient hearing of the person or persons who are in the room,
vehicle, chamber, or in or on a porch, patio, or similar improved area, in
which the machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners. The
operation of any set, instrument, phonograph, machine, or device between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet from the building, structure, porch, patio, or similar
improved area, or vehicle in which it is located, shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation of this section.
   (C)   Animals, birds, and the like. The keeping of any animal or bird which,
by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or
repose of any persons in the vicinity.
   (D)   Defect in vehicle or loads. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.
   (E)   Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the
opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers.
   (F)   Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including
excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of
urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only
with a permit from the building inspector. This permit may be granted for a
period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues, and
which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the
emergency continues. If the building inspector should determine that the public
health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration,
or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss
or inconvenience would not result to any party in interest, he may grant
permission for the work to be done within the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
upon application at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the
progress of the work.
   (G)   Pile drivers, hammers, and the like. The operation between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer,
derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is
attended by loud or unusual noise, except in case of urgent necessity in the
interest of public health and safety pursuant to a permit granted by the
building inspector as provided in division (F) above.
   (H)   Hawkers, peddlers. Crying, shouting, calling, the blowing of horns,
the ringing of bells or the use of a whistle, bell, rattle, gong, clapper,
hammer, drum, or similar mechanical device, by peddlers, hawkers, and vendors
for the purpose of advertising any goods, wares or merchandise, or attracting
customers or informing persons and residents in the vicinity of their presence
on the streets during the hours between 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
   (I)   Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show,
or sale.
   (J)   Metal rails, pillars, and columns, transportation thereof. The
transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material,
over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks,
or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the
peace and quiet of persons in the vicinity of such streets or other public
places.
   (K)   Blowers. The operating or causing to be operated of any noise-creating
blower or power fan, internal combustion engine, air compressor, or steam
engine, which causes noises due to the explosion or expansion of operating
gases or fluids unless the noise from the blower or fan is muffled and the
engine or compressor is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden
noises so that the same shall not cause annoyance to the public or disturb the
rest and quiet of persons residing in or occupying property near enough to be
annoyed thereby.
   (L)   Chains on motor vehicles. The driving or propelling of motor vehicle
in any street or public place with chains fastened to the wheels of the motor
vehicle in such a manner that they or any part of them will strike any other
part or parts of the vehicle on the revolution of the wheels, or with any other
part or parts of the vehicle so loose or out of repair as to create any loud or
unnecessary noise.
(‘83 Code, § 92.31) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.32 NOISE IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   No person within the limits of the city shall make, continue, or cause to be
made or continued any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise on any street
adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, or court while the
same are in use, on any street adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably
interferes with the workings of the institution, or which disturbs or unduly
annoys patients in the hospital. Conspicuous signs shall be placed on or
adjacent to streets indicating a school, church, hospital, or court location,
and in determining whether a particular noise is loud, unnecessary, or unusual,
the special circumstances of a school, church, hospital, or court location
shall not be considered unless signs have been placed as required by this
section.
(‘83 Code, § 92.32) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.33 SOUND AMPLIFICATION DEVICES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      (1)   SOUND DEVICE OR APPARATUS. Any radio device or apparatus for the
amplification of any sounds from any radio, phonograph, or other sound-making
or sound-producing device, or any device or apparatus for the reproduction or
amplification of the human voice or other sounds.
      (2)   TO USE OR OPERATE ANY SOUND DEVICE OR APPARATUS IN, ON, NEAR OR
ADJACENT TO ANY PUBLIC STREET, PARK OR PLACE.  To use or operate or cause to be
used or operated any sound device or apparatus on the street or public place in
front of or outside of the enclosed part of any building, place, or premises,
or in or upon any vehicles operated, standing or being in or on any public
street, park, or place where the sounds therefrom may be heard in any public
street, park, or place, or from any stand, platform, or other structure, or
anywhere in the public streets, parks, or places.
   (B)   Commercial uses. No person shall use or operate any sound device or
apparatus in, on, near, or adjacent to any public street, park, or place, for
commercial or business advertising purposes.
   (C)   Non-commercial uses; registration required. No person shall use or
operate any sound device or apparatus, in, on, near, or adjacent to any public
street, park, or place for non-commercial purposes in the city before filing a
registration statement with the City Clerk in writing. This registration
certificate or statement shall be filed in duplicate at least ten days prior to
the date on which the sound device or apparatus is to be used or operated and
shall state the following.
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant.
      (2)   Address of place of business of applicant.
      (3)   If sound device is to be used on a motor vehicle, license number
and motor vehicle number, name and address of person having direct charge of
the vehicle, names and addresses of all persons who will use or operate the
vehicle.
      (4)   The purpose for which the sound device or apparatus will be used.
      (5)   A general statement as to the section or sections of the city in
which the sound device or apparatus will be used.
      (6)   The proposed hours of operation of the sound device or apparatus.
      (7)   The number of days of proposed operation of the sound device or
apparatus.
      (8)   A general description of the sound-amplifying equipment which is to
be used.
      (9)   The maximum sound-producing power of the sound-amplifying equipment
to be used. State the following.
         (a)   The wattage to be used.
         (b)   The volume of sound which is proposed to be used, measured by
decibels or by any other efficient method of measuring sound.
         (c)   The approximate maximum distance for which sound will be thrown
from the sound device or apparatus.
   (D)   Registration statement amendment. All persons using or causing to be
used sound equipment for non-commercial purposes shall amend any registration
statement filed pursuant to division (C) of this section, within 48 hours after
any change in the information therein furnished.
   (E)   Registration and identification. The City Clerk shall return to each
applicant under division (C) of this section, one copy of the registration
statement duly certified by the City Clerk as a correct copy of the
application. The certified copy of the application shall be in the possession
of any person operating the sound equipment at all times while the sound-
amplifying equipment is in operation, and the copy shall be promptly displayed
and shown to any police officer of the city upon request.
   (F)   Regulations for use. Non-commercial use of any sound device or
apparatus in, on, near, or adjacent to any public street, park, or place shall
be subject to the following regulations, a copy of which shall be delivered to
the applicant at the time of delivery of the duly certified registration
statement set forth above.
      (1)   The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.
      (2)   Operations are permitted only between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m.
      (3)   Sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated on a sound truck
unless the truck upon which the equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of
at least ten miles per hour, except when the truck is stopped or impeded by
traffic. Where stopped by traffic, the sound-amplifying equipment shall not be
operated for longer than one minute at the stop.
      (4)   Sound shall not be issued within 500 feet of a school, courthouse,
or church, during the hours of school, court, or worship respectively, or
within 500 feet of any hospital or similar institution.
      (5)   No amplifying device shall be operated on a sound truck or
otherwise in any location where the police department, upon investigation,
shall determine that the conditions of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or both
are such that the use of such a device or apparatus will constitute a threat to
the safety of pedestrians or vehicular operators.
      (6)   No amplifying device shall be operated on a sound truck or
otherwise in any location where the police department, upon investigation,
shall determine that the conditions of overcrowding or of street repair or
other physical conditions are such that the use of such a sound device or
apparatus will deprive the public of the right of the safe, comfortable,
convenient, and peaceful enjoyment of any public street, park, or place for
other public purposes, or will constitute a threat to the safety of pedestrians
or vehicle operators.
      (7)   The human speech and music amplified shall not be profane, lewd,
indecent, or slanderous.
      (8)   The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be
audible for a distance in excess of 300 feet from the place or places where the
device or apparatus will be located, and so the volume is not unreasonably
loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to persons within the area of
audibility.
   (G)   Exemptions. The provision of this section on sound-amplification
devices shall not apply to the use or operation of any sound device or
apparatus by any church or synagogue on or within its own premises, in
connection with the religious rites or ceremonies of the church or synagogue,
or to sound- amplification devices used by the police and fire departments and
other departments of the city in the performance of their official duties.
(‘83 Code, § 92.33) (Ord. 98-009, passed 6-29-98) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.34 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to classify as loud, unusual,
or unnecessary sounds from any of the following activities.
   (A)   Marching and/or playing of music bands, orchestras, or other musical
aggregations at appropriate times and in non-residential areas.
   (B)   Church bells, chimes, and carillons.
   (C)   Duly authorized parades.
(‘83 Code, § 92.34)
§ 92.35 VEHICULAR NOISE ABATEMENT.
   An owner, operator, person in charge of, in possession of, exercising
control over, or responsible for a motor vehicle, whether in operation or
parked, on public or private property, from which sound, music, loud voices and
the like, produced by radio, phonograph, stereo system, compact disc player,
DVD, cassette player, eight-track tape, television set, amplified or
unamplified musical instruments, microphone, sound system, sound amplification
device or any other means of sound production, including but not limited to
loud voices, that is plainly audible at a distance of 30 feet from the vehicle
which is the originating source of the above-referenced noise, shall be subject
to the penalty provisions in
§ 92.99.
(Ord. 03-004, passed 11-18-02) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
§ 92.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOAT OR SNOWMOBILE OR MOTORCYCLE TRAILER. A vehicular portable structure
built on a chassis and designed for carrying boats, snowmobiles, and
motorcycles, and propelled by means of another vehicle.
   HOUSE TRAILER or MOBILE HOME. A vehicular, portable structure built on a
chassis designed primarily to be used as a permanent residential dwelling.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Shall include the following.
      (1)   FOLDING TENT TRAILER. A canvas, fiberglass, or metal folding
structure, mounted on wheels and designated for travel and vacation use as a
temporary dwelling.
      (2)   MOTORIZED HOME. A portable dwelling designed and constructed as an
integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
      (3)   PICKUP CAMPER. A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a
pickup truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for
use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses.
      (4)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and
vacation uses, permanently identified TRAVEL TRAILER by the manufacturer.
   UTILITY TRAILER. A vehicular portable structure built on a chassis and
designed for carrying any items of personal property, and propelled by means of
another vehicle.
(‘83 Code, § 96.01) (Ord. 78-011, passed 5-1-78)
§ 92.46 TEMPORARY STORAGE OR PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall park overnight or permit the parking overnight of any
house trailer, recreational vehicle, boat, snowmobile, motorcycle trailer, or
any utility trailer upon any public highway, street, alley, park, or other
public place within the city.
   (B)   No person shall park or store or permit the parking or storage of any
house trailer, recreational vehicle, boat, snowmobile, motorcycle trailer, or
any utility trailer upon any private residential property within the city,
except and unless the same is parked or stored in the garage or to the rear of
the front building line of a residential lot, as that line is defined in
Chapter 154. It is further unlawful for trailers to be connected to
electricity, water, gas, or sanitary sewer facilities on the residential lot
upon which they are parked or stored, except for the express purpose of
readying the vehicle for use 48 hours prior to use or 48 hours after use. At no
time shall trailers be used for living or housekeeping purposes.
(‘83 Code, § 96.02) (Ord. 78-011, passed 5-1-78) Penalty, see
§ 92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A) Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, notwithstanding whether
another penalty is specifically provided, shall be responsible for a municipal
civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06. In addition to the general penalty applicable to a violation of this
code, a person parking, storing, occupying, or using any trailer as defined
herein in violation of §
92.46, shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance. Upon application of the city
to a court of competent jurisdiction, the maintenance of the nuisance may be
restrained or abated.
   (B) Whoever violates §§
92.15 through
92.18 shall be fined not more than $25 for each offense.
(‘83 Code, § 92.99)
   (C)   In addition to the general penalty applicable to a violation of this
code, a person parking, storing, occupying, or using any trailer as defined
herein in violation of §
92.46, shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance. Upon application of the city
to a court of competent jurisdiction, the maintenance of the nuisance may be
restrained or abated.
(‘83 Code, § 96.99) (Ord. 78-011, passed 5-1-78; Am. Ord. 18-010, passed 3-19-
18)
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
93.01   Damage to park property
   
93.02   Waste receptacles
   
93.03   Sports
   
93.04   Picnic areas
   
93.05   Open fires
   
93.06   Vehicles in parks
   
93.07   Intoxicating liquor
   
93.08   Additional regulations
   
93.09   Parking prohibited in certain areas of Garden City Park
   
93.10   Loitering prohibited in Garden City Park
   
93.11   Hour of operation
   
93.12   Smoke free parks
   
93.13   Special events and rental policies
   
93.14   Camping in parks
§ 93.01 DAMAGE TO PARK PROPERTY.
   No person shall obstruct any walk or drive in any public park or playground,
or injure, mar, or damage in any manner any building, monument, ornament,
fence, bridge, seat, tree, fountain, shrub, flower, playground equipment,
fireplace, or other public property within or pertaining to any park or
playground.
(‘83 Code, § 93.01) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 93.02 WASTE RECEPTACLES.
   No person shall place or deposit any garbage, glass, tin cans, papers, or
miscellaneous waste in any park or playground except in containers provided for
that purpose.
(‘83 Code, § 93.02) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 93.03 SPORTS.
   No baseball, football, or softball throwing, or other violent or rough
exercises or play shall be engaged in, in any public park or other public
place, except in such areas or spaces designated for such purposes or play by
the Department of Parks and Recreation.
(‘83 Code, § 93.03) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 93.04 PICNIC AREAS.
   Picnics may be held in such places of any park as shall be designated for
that purpose by the Department of Parks and Recreation, subject to any rules or
regulations pertaining thereto.
(‘83 Code, § 93.04) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 93.05 OPEN FIRES.
   No person shall kindle or build an open fire in any park or playground. All
barbeque coals contained in the park provided grills and/or personal barbeque
grills shall be extinguished upon leaving the park.
(‘83 Code, § 93.05) Penalty, see
§
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Open burning, see
Ch. 91
§ 93.06 VEHICLES IN PARKS.
    No person shall drive or park any vehicle in any park or playground except
in spaces set aside and designated as parking areas by the Department of Parks
and Recreation. Recreational vehicles such as ATVs, side by sides, dirt bikes,
minibikes, or snowmobiles are also prohibited in parks unless permitted and/or
operated by Parks and Recreation staff. Driving and parking on all streets and
public ways within any park, or bordering on the same, shall be subject to all
the provisions of
Chapter 70 of this code regulating traffic generally, and to such additional
rules and regulations as the city shall adopt pursuant to this chapter.
(‘83 Code, § 93.06) (Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21)  Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 93.07 INTOXICATING LIQUOR.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for any person to
bring into, possess, consume, sell or give away any alcoholic beverage in any
public park or grounds, except as provided in this section.
   (B)   Upon written application to the Director of Parks and Recreation, or
his/her legal designee, a limited permit may be issued for discreet consumption
of alcoholic beverages for family or social parties and recognized civic and
fraternal club activities. The grant of a permit is subject to the rules and
regulations and restrictions imposed and promulgated by the Department of Parks
and Recreation as authorized by
§ 93.08.
(‘83 Code, § 93.07) (Ord. 92-006, passed 3-2-92) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 93.08 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   The Director of Parks and Recreation is hereby empowered to make any
additional rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the City Council,
pertaining to the conduct and use of the parks and public grounds, as are
necessary to administer the same and to protect property and the safety,
health, morals, and welfare of the public. No person shall fail to comply with
such rules and regulations.
(‘83 Code, § 93.08) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 93.09 PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS OF GARDEN CITY PARK.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in the Garden City Park
except in compliance with official signs that have been posted with the
following legend. No parking - 10:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m.
   (B)   Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
(‘83 Code, § 93.09) (Ord. 71-020, passed 10-18-71; Am. Ord. 98-010, passed 6-
29-98; Am. Ord. 18-011, passed 3-19-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.10 LOITERING PROHIBITED IN GARDEN CITY PARK.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, stand, or idle in or about
any parking area in the Garden City Park.
(‘83 Code, § 93.10) (Ord. 71-020, passed 10-18-71) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.11 HOURS OF OPERATION.
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except authorized personnel, to use or
be found in or about any city park between dusk to dawn from February through
October and 6:00 p.m. to dawn from November through January; unless the person
is attending or in the process of attending a parks and recreation sponsored
event held on the premises; or unless the person has a special permit for use
of park facilities after hours.
(‘83 Code, § 93.11) (Ord. 70-009, passed 10-12-70; Am. Ord. 80-009, passed 9-8-
80; Am. Ord. 81-009, passed 4-13-81; Am. Ord. 98-011, passed 6-29-98; Am. Ord.
20-004, passed 8-10-20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.12 SMOKE FREE PARKS.
   The lighting up or smoking of tobacco or any other substance, or smoking,
consumption or use of marijuana products or derivatives, or use of vapor
products or nicotine alternatives, is prohibited within all Garden City Parks,
unless it is in the vehicle parking area and over 100 feet from the grass
surface of a park.
(Ord. 20-004, passed 8-10-20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.13 SPECIAL EVENTS AND RENTAL POLICIES.
   (A)    Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this
section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      SPECIAL EVENT. The term special event shall include, but not be limited
to, pavilion rentals; festivals; parties; meetings; functions; walks; marches;
parades; street closures; rallies; gatherings; assemblies; park events;
carnivals; ceremonies; concerts; performances; sporting events; tournaments;
amateur and professional filming, and similar activities that would normally be
considered a special event.
   (B)   No person, entity, corporation, or organization shall hold and/or
conduct a special event within the city without first obtaining a special event
permit from the city.
   (C)   The requirements for a special event application and requisite fee
shall be set forth in a policy approved by City Council. The City Council may
update and/or approve new special event policies at any time.
   (D)   Any special event request beyond a traditional pavilion rental may
need to be submitted and approved by the Garden City Police Department, Fire
Department, and the Code Compliance Department, as well receive final approval
by the City Council.
   (E)   All costs incurred by the city relative to a special event, including
but not limited to staff costs and equipment costs, shall be the responsibility
of the permit holder. An estimate of the total costs shall be computed by the
city and be provided to the permit holder. Payment of the estimated costs is
due prior to the special event, with any balance due within ten calendar days
after the conclusion of the special event. Any damage incurred during the
special event is the responsibility of the permit holder.
(Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.14 CAMPING IN PARKS.
   No individual or groups is permitted to camp during the day and/or sleep in
any city park or city property, unless specifically permitted by the Parks and
Recreation Director.
(Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 94: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Definitions
Streets
   
94.10   Authority of City Council
   
94.11   Street names; numbers
   
94.12   Damage and obstruction prohibited
   
94.13   Permits and bonds
   
94.14   Street openings
   
94.15   New paving
   
94.16   Driveway approach
   
94.17   Curb cuts
   
94.18   Unauthorized use of street drains prohibited
   
94.19   Construction
   
94.20   Moving of structures; permit
   
94.21   Temporary street closing or occupancy
   
94.22   Additional regulations
Sidewalks
   
94.35   Construction; permit
   
94.36   Sidewalk specifications
   
94.37   Inspection of construction required
   
94.38   Sidewalk maintenance
   
94.39   Single lot assessments; procedure
Snow Removal
   
94.45   Business license required
   
94.46   Equipment
   
94.47   Applicability
   
94.48   Cleaning of sidewalks
   
94.49   Cleaning of streets
   
94.50   Permit required for moving snow
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works of the city.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works or designated representative.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street right-of-way designed for pedestrian
travel.
   STREET. All of the land lying between property lines on either side of all
streets, alleys and boulevards in the city, and includes lawn extensions, and
sidewalks, and the area reserved therefor where the same are not yet
constructed.
(‘83 Code, § 94.01) (Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21)
STREETS
§ 94.10 AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL.
   Subject to existing legal grants, and the provisions of the general laws of
this state, the City Council shall have the supervision and control of all
public highways, bridges, sewers, drains, culverts, water courses, lanes,
streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys, easements, and public grounds within the
city. The City Council shall have the power to lay out, establish, open, make,
widen, extend, straighten, alter, close, vacate, or abolish any highway,
bridge, sewer, drain, culvert, watercourse, lane, street, avenue, boulevard,
alley, easement, or public ground within the city, or change the name or grade
of any above mentioned item. If in doing the aforementioned work, it shall be
necessary to take or use private property, the same shall be taken and paid for
in the manner provided by law. Whenever the City Council shall deem it
advisable to vacate, discontinue or abolish any highway, street, easement, or
alley or any part thereof, it shall by resolution so declare, and in the same
resolution appoint a time and place of public hearing, at which time the City
Council shall meet to hear complaint. The City Clerk shall give notice in
advance of the public hearing by notice in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city.
(‘83 Code, § 94.02) (Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21)
§ 94.11 STREET NAMES; NUMBERS.
   (A)   All streets shall be known and designated by the names applied thereto
on the map of the city known as the Street Plan, on file with the City Clerk.
(‘83 Code, § 94.03)
   (B)   All premises shall bear a distinctive street number on the front of
the premises in accordance with and as designated upon the Street Plan on file
with the City Clerk. (‘83 Code, § 94.05)
   (C)   The owners and occupants of all buildings in the city shall cause the
correct numbers to be placed thereon in accordance with the Street Plan.
Numbers shall be not less than two inches in height, and shall be plainly
visible from the street adjacent to the principal entrance. (‘83 Code, § 94.05)
Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 94.12 DAMAGE AND OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall make any excavation in, or cause any damage to any street in
the city, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this
chapter. No person shall place any article, thing, or obstruction in any
street, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this
chapter. This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit temporary obstructions
as may be incidental to the expeditious movement of articles and things to and
from abutting premises, nor to the lawful parking of vehicles within the part
of the street reserved for vehicular traffic.
(‘83 Code, § 94.06) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 94.13 PERMITS AND BONDS.
   Where permits are authorized in this chapter, they shall be obtained, upon
application to the Director or designated representative, upon forms as he
shall prescribe, and there shall be a charge for each permit, provided by
resolution of the City Council. The permit shall be revocable by the Director
or designated representative for failure to comply with this chapter, rules and
regulations adopted pursuant hereto, and the lawful orders of the Director or
designated representative, and shall be valid only for the period of time
endorsed thereon. Where bonds are required by this chapter, they shall be
corporate surety bonds issued by a company authorized to do business in the
state. The bonds shall be conditioned upon prompt completion of the work
permitted, observance of all pertinent laws and regulations of the city, repair
of all damage done to the street surface and installations on, over, or within
the street, including trees and lawns, and to protect and save harmless the
city from all damages or actions at law that may arise or may be brought on
account of injury to persons or property resulting from the work done under the
permit or in connection therewith.
(‘83 Code, § 94.07)
§ 94.14 STREET OPENINGS.
   (A)   No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street
without first obtaining a written permit and furnishing a bond in the sum of
not less than $3,000. The Director or designated representative may increase
the required amount of the bond, where in his judgment the proposed work
involves an abnormal risk of injury or damage. (‘83 Code, § 94.08)
   (B)   The Director or designated representative may, if the public safety
requires immediate action, grant permission to make a necessary street opening
in an emergency, provided that a permit shall be obtained on the following
business day and the provisions of this chapter shall be complied with. (‘83
Code, § 94.09)
Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 94.15 NEW PAVING.
   Whenever the City Council shall determine by resolution to pave or resurface
any street, the Director or designated representative shall, not less than 20
days prior to commencement of construction, serve notice upon all public
utilities requiring them to install all necessary underground work.
(‘83 Code, § 94.10)
§ 94.16 DRIVEWAY APPROACH.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner of the premises in front of which
new paving is constructed to pave the driveway approach to the premises within
one year of the completion of the new paving.
   (B)   Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
   (C)   If the owner of any lot or premises shall fail to construct, rebuild
or repair driveway approach within one year of the completion of the new
roadway, the City Manager is authorized, immediately after the time limited for
construction, rebuilding, or repair of the driveway approach by the owner, to
cause the driveway approach to be constructed, rebuilt or repaired in
accordance with the city's specifications, and that the expense thereof plus
20% administrative costs shall be assessed and charged to the premises and the
owner thereof, and collected as provided for in §
94.39 of this Code.
(‘83 Code, § 94.11) (Ord. 72-023, passed 9-18-72; Am. Ord. 18-012, passed 3-19-
18; Am. Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.17 CURB CUTS.
   No openings in or through any curb of any street shall be made without first
obtaining a written permit from the Director or designated representative. Curb
cuts and sidewalk driveway crossings to provide access to private property
shall comply with the following.
   (A)   No single curb cut shall exceed 22 feet nor be less than ten feet.
   (B)   The minimum distance between any curb cut and a public crosswalk shall
be five feet.
   (C)   The minimum distance between curb cuts shall be 25 feet.
   (D)   The maximum number of lineal feet of sidewalk driveway crossings
permitted for any lot, parcel of land, business or enterprise, shall be 45% of
the total abutting street frontage up to and including 200 lineal feet of
street frontage, plus 20% of the lineal feet of street frontage in excess of
200 feet.
   (E)   The necessary adjustments to utility poles, light standards, fire
hydrants, signs, signals, or other public improvements, as well as the removal
of trees, shall be accomplished without cost to the city.
   (F)   All construction shall be in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the Director or designated representative.
(‘83 Code, § 94.12) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 94.18 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF STREET DRAINS PROHIBITED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make connections with or openings
into, use, alter, block, or disturb any public sewer, drain, ditch, swale,
manhole, catch basin, culvert, or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining
a written permit from the Director or designated representative.
(‘83 Code, § 94.13) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 94.19 CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   No person shall occupy any street with any materials or machinery
incidental to the construction or repair of any building adjacent to the street
or for any other purpose without first obtaining a written permit and filing a
bond of not less than $3,000. (‘83 Code, § 94.14)
   (B)   At least five feet of sidewalk space shall be kept clear and clean for
the free passage of pedestrians. If the building operations are such that free
passageway is impracticable, a temporary plank sidewalk with a substantial
railing on each side, built to the specifications of the Director or designated
representative, shall be provided around the obstruction. (‘83 Code, § 94.15)
   (C)   All openings, excavations, and obstructions shall be properly and
substantially barricaded and railed off, and at night shall be provided with
approved warning lights. Warning lights shall comply with the Michigan Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. (‘83 Code, § 94.16)
   (D)   Encroachments and obstructions in the street may be removed and
excavations refilled and the expense of removal or refilling charged to the
abutting land owner when made or permitted by him or suffered to remain by him,
otherwise than in accordance with the terms and conditions of this chapter. The
procedure for collection of expenses shall be as prescribed in the Charter for
single lot assessments upon not less than seven days notice to the land owner
in accordance with § 10.09 of this Code. (‘83 Code, § 94.19)
   (E)   All building operations shall be conducted in a safe and careful
manner, with due regard to the safety of the public. The following provisions
shall be complied with.
      (1)   Whenever any building or part thereof is to be erected, added to,
or demolished, and any enclosing wall of the building is within ten feet of the
street line, and the foregoing operations are not carried on entirely within
the enclosing walls of the building, a substantial fence not less than six feet
in height shall be maintained on the building side of the walkway, and a
substantial roof of not less than eight feet in clear height above the walkway
shall be maintained over the walkway, except that when the building is less
than 40 feet in height and no enclosing wall of which is within seven feet of
any walkway, the walkway need not be roofed over.
      (2)   Guard lights shall be displayed during the legal hours of darkness
on all obstructions and around all dangerous excavations within the public
right-of-way.
      (3)   In demolishing any building or part thereof, the upper story shall
be completely removed before starting the removal of the story below. No
material shall be stored upon any floor of a building in a course of
demolishing, and all material shall be lowered to the ground immediately upon
displacement. Materials which, in their removal, cause an excessive amount of
dust, shall be wet down.
      (4)   No building material, fence, shed, or obstruction of any kind shall
be placed so as to obstruct free approach to any fire hydrant, lamppost,
manhole, fire alarm box, catch basin or inlet, or be placed so as to interfere
with drainage.
(‘83 Code, § 94.22) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 94.20 MOVING OF STRUCTURES; PERMIT.
   No person shall move, transport, or convey any building, house, or other
similar bulky or heavy object upon any city street without first obtaining a
permit and filing a bond in a sum as shall be fixed by the Director or
designated representative, but not to exceed $20,000. The amount of the bond
shall be commensurate with the risk of damage or injury involved. The permit
shall designate the route to be followed, the time within which the movement
shall be completed, and any necessary repairs to any street or installation
upon, in or over any street, or any trees, resulting from the movement done
under the permit. No permittee shall fail to comply with the conditions
specified on the permit, nor fail to obey any order of the Director or
designated representative given in connection with the movement of any
building. No person shall fail to promptly restore any damage done by him under
the permit, to the satisfaction of the Director or designated representative.
No permit shall be granted except under the prior approval of the City Council
if the movement is of a structure other than pre-manufactured housing, to any
location within the city. Approval shall be withheld unless the proposed
movement complies with the Building Code.
(‘83 Code, § 94.17) (Ord. 82-040, passed 8-16-82) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 94.21 TEMPORARY STREET CLOSING OR OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   The Director or designated representative shall have the authority to
temporarily close any street, or portion thereof, when he shall deem the street
to be unsafe or temporarily unsuitable for use for any reason. He shall cause
suitable barriers and signs to be erected on the street indicating that it is
closed to public travel. When any street or portion thereof shall have been
closed to public travel, no person shall drive any vehicle upon or over the
street, or park thereon, except as may be necessary incidental to any work
being done in the area. No person shall move or interfere with any sign or
barrier erected pursuant to this section without authority from the Director or
designated representative. (‘83 Code, § 94.20)
   (B)   (1)   No street, sidewalk, or other public property shall be occupied
for the storage and handling of material or other use connected with the
construction of any building without a permit having been obtained for
occupancy. During the construction of the building, the extent of the occupancy
of any sidewalk and/or street shall be covered by the terms of the permit
issued.
      (2)   The occupancy of streets and sidewalks for the purpose of building
is intended only for use in connection with the actual erection, repair,
alteration, or removal of building, and shall terminate with the completion of
the operation. Occupancy shall be in accordance with the following provisions.
         (a)   Building materials required for use in connection with the
construction of a building may be placed upon the street or sidewalk in front
of the building site. The maximum amount of street occupied shall not exceed
one-fourth of the width of the street measured from property line to property
line, but in no case shall the space within 11 feet of the nearest rail of any
railway tracks be so occupied. The sidewalk space may be occupied for building
construction purposes, provided the owner or his agent constructs a temporary
sidewalk not less than three feet in width, except that a walkway of greater
width than three feet shall be provided if required by the Building Inspector,
in the outer portion of the permissible occupied space and the sidewalk shall
be protected as specified in
§ 94.19(E).
         (b)   Pavements, curb and gutter, sidewalk, and all other portions of
the street shall be well cleaned of all building materials upon completion of
the work.
         (c)   The person causing any excavation to be made shall properly
guard and protect the same. Any excavation in a street or within a distance
from the street line equal to its depth shall be properly protected by a fence.
(‘83 Code, § 94.21) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 94.22 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   The Director or designated representative may make additional regulations
pertaining to openings and excavations in the streets, curb cuts, street
obstructions, and house moving, which shall be subject to the approval of the
City Council. No person shall fail to comply with any such regulations.
(‘83 Code, § 94.18) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
SIDEWALKS
§ 94.35 CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT.
   (A)    No person shall construct, rebuild, or repair any sidewalk except in
accordance with line, grade, slope, and specifications established by the
Director of Public Services or designated representative, nor without first
obtaining a written permit from the Director or designated representative for
an area larger than 25 square feet. The written permit shall be prominently
displayed on the construction site. The fee for a permit shall be charged in
accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in
Chapter 12 of this Code. (‘83 Code, § 94.30)
   (B)   The contractor shall furnish all line and grade stakes as may be
necessary for proper control of the work, but this does not relieve the owner
of the responsibility for making careful and accurate measurements in
constructing the work. (‘83 Code, § 94.31)
   (C)   The City Council may, by resolution, require the owners of lots and
premises to construct, rebuild or repair sidewalks in the public streets
adjacent to and abutting upon the lots and premises. When such a resolution
shall be adopted, the City Clerk shall give notice thereof, in accordance with
§
40.04(A) of this Code, to the owners of the lots or premises, requiring them to
construct, rebuild or repair the sidewalks within 30 days from the date of the
notice. (‘83 Code, § 94.35)
   (D)   The owner of any lot or property in the city must install sidewalks in
front of and along the side of any property, along any roadway, which is
currently vacant of sidewalks, in the following circumstances:
      (1)   A new home is being built on an empty lot.
      (2)   The lot or property is being sold.
      (3)   The lot or property is currently being used as a rental or is being
permitted as a rental property.
   No certificate of occupancy will be issued to the homeowner or renter until
the sidewalk is installed.
   (E)   If the owner of any lot or premises shall fail to construct, rebuild
or repair any particular sidewalk as described in the notice as provided by the
City Clerk or the Director or designated representative and within the time and
manner required thereby, the City Manager is authorized, immediately after the
time limited for construction, rebuilding, or repair of the sidewalk by the
owner, to cause the sidewalk to be constructed, rebuilt or repaired in
accordance with the city's specifications, and that the expense thereof plus
20% administrative costs shall be assessed and charged to the premises and the
owner thereof, and collected as provided for in §
94.39 of this Code. (‘83 Code, § 94.36)
   (F)   The Director or designated representative may revoke any permit issued
under the terms of this chapter for incompetency or failure to comply with the
terms of this chapter, or the rules and regulations, plans and specifications
established by the Director or designated representative for the construction,
reconstruction, or repair of any sidewalk. It shall be unlawful for any person
to construct, rebuild, or repair any sidewalk on a site where the sidewalk
permit has been revoked until a new permit has been secured. (‘83 Code, §
94.34)
   (G)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building Division
for new construction unless the owner of the lot shall construct, in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, a sidewalk or apron for driveway deemed
necessary in the opinion of the Building Inspector, or unless the owner of the
lot places in escrow with the City Clerk a sum of money deemed sufficient for
the construction of a sidewalk or apron driveway, and orders the construction
of the same. (‘83 Code, § 94.38)
(Ord. 72-008, passed 5-15-72; Am. Ord. 88-018, passed 6-6-88; Am. Ord. 91-005,
passed 6-3-91; Am. Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 94.36 SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS.
    Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with Michigan Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction. The Director or
designated representative shall establish such additional specifications as are
necessary to properly construct a sidewalk.
(‘83 Code, § 94.32) (Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21)  Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 94.37 INSPECTION OF CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED.
   The owner of each lot will be responsible for seeing that the Director or
designated representative is notified at least 24 hours in advance of the
pouring of any sidewalk. The work shall not proceed until the Director or
designated representative shall have inspected the rails and subgrade and
passes the work as suitable and in conformance with the grades and
specifications. The sidewalk shall also be subject to a final inspection after
all work has been completed.
(‘83 Code, § 94.33) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 94.38 SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE.
   All sidewalks within the city shall be kept and maintained in good repair by
the owner of the land adjacent to and abutting upon it.
(‘83 Code, § 94.37) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 94.39 SINGLE LOT ASSESSMENTS; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Report of City Manager. When any expense has been incurred by the city
upon or with respect to any single lot or parcel of land, which expense is
chargeable against the lot or parcel of land and the owner thereof by any City
Charter provision or ordinance of the city or the laws of the state, and is not
of that class required to be prorated among several lots or parcels of land in
a special assessment district, the amount of labor and material or any other
expense or service for which the expense was incurred, with a description of
the lot or parcel of land upon or with respect to which the expense was
incurred, and the name of the owner, if known, shall be reported by the City
Manager to Council.
   (B)   Resolution of determination. After reviewing the report of the City
Manager, Council may, if it so desires, determine by resolution what amount or
part of each expense shall be charged, and the person, if known, against whom
and the premises upon which the same shall be levied as a special assessment.
By the resolution, Council shall determine the number of installments in which
the assessment may be paid, determine the rate of interest to be charged on
installments, not to exceed 6% per year, designate the land and premises upon
which the special assessment shall be levied, direct the Assessor to prepare a
special assessment roll in accordance with Council's determination, designate
the name by which the assessment roll shall be known and referred to, and, as
often as Council deems expedient, require notice of the several amounts so
reported and determined to be given by the Clerk, by first-class mail sent to
the last known address of the owner as shown on the assessment roll of the
city, and by publication.
   (C)   Special assessment roll. The Assessor shall thereupon prepare a
special assessment roll, including all lots and parcels of land within the
special assessment district designated by Council, and shall assess to each lot
or parcel of land such sums as may have been directed by Council.
   (D)   Certificate of Assessor. When the Assessor has completed the
assessment roll, he or she shall attach thereto and endorse thereon his or her
certificate to the effect that the roll has been made by him or her pursuant to
a resolution of Council (giving the date of adoption of the same) and that in
making the assessments therein the Assessor has, as near as may be, according
to his or her best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions
contained in such resolution, the City Charter and ordinances. Thereupon, the
Assessor shall file the special assessment roll with the Clerk who shall
present the same to Council.
   (E)   Notice of hearing on roll. Upon receipt of the special assessment
roll, Council shall order it filed in the office of the Clerk for public
examination and shall, by resolution, fix the time and place when Council will
meet and review the roll, which meeting shall be held not less than one week
after notice thereof, specifying the purpose, time and place, which will have
been given by first-class mail to the owner of each lot or parcel of land
affected thereby at his or her address shown on the last tax roll of the city,
and by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city, to be designated by Council.
   (F)   Hearing on objections. Council shall meet and review the special
assessment roll at the time and place appointed or at an adjourned date
therefor and shall consider any written objections thereto.
   (G)   Corrections and changes. Council may correct the roll as to any
assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors
appearing therein. Any changes made in the roll shall be noted in the Council
minutes.
   (H)   Confirmation of roll. After the hearing, Council shall confirm the
special assessment roll, with any corrections as may have been made, and the
Clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation thereon. Upon confirmation, the
roll shall be final and conclusive.
(‘83 Code, § 94.40) (Ord. 88-020, passed 6-6-88)
Cross-reference:
   Special Assessments, see
Ch. 40
SNOW REMOVAL
§ 94.45 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall, for hire, gain, or reward, operate any snow removal
equipment as defined in §
94.46, upon the sidewalks of the city without first obtaining an annual license
from the City Clerk after complying with the licensing requirements of
Chapter 110 and upon payment of a sum, charged in accordance with the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule in
Chapter 12 of this Code, as a license fee. The license shall expire on July 1
of each year. The licensee shall execute a bond to the city in the penal sum of
$5,000 approved by the City Attorney, and conditioned that the licensee will
reimburse the city for any and all damage done to the sidewalks, trees, or any
other public property. The licensee shall also execute a policy of insurance,
approved by the city as co-insured in the amount of $5,000 property damage,
$10,000 for injury to or death of one person, and $20,000 for injuries to or
death of more than one person arising out of the operation of snow removal
equipment. The bond and policy shall be filed with the City Clerk. Any person
who violates this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction
and subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
(‘83 Code, § 119.02) (Am. Ord. 18-013, passed 3-19-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.46 EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall operate upon the sidewalks of the city any snow removal
equipment operated by a motor-driven vehicle of a gross weight in excess of
4,000 pounds, not equipped with pneumatic tires, and of an overall width
greater than the width of the public sidewalk. The equipment shall not in any
case be wider than five feet and not equipped with a revolving-type brush. No
person shall use any snow removal equipment of a scraper or plow-type operated
by a motor driven vehicle. Any person who violates this section shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set
forth in §
41.06.
(‘83 Code, § 119.01) (Am. Ord. 18-013, passed 3-19-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.47 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to the owner,
occupant, or lessee who, by means of a motor driven device, removes snow from
the sidewalks contiguous to his premises.
(‘83 Code, § 119.03) (Am. Ord. 18-013, passed 3-19-18)
§ 94.48 CLEANING OF SIDEWALKS.
   The owner or occupant of every lot or parcel of land adjoining any sidewalk
or the owner of any lot or parcel of land, if the same is not occupied, shall
clean all snow from sidewalks adjoining the lot or parcel of land within 24
hours of the time that snow has accumulated. When any ice shall form on any
sidewalk, the owner or occupant of the lot or parcel of land adjoining the
sidewalk shall, if practicable, immediately remove the ice, and when immediate
removal is impracticable, shall immediately cause appropriate material to be
spread upon the ice in such a manner and in such a quantity as to prevent the
sidewalk from being slippery and dangerous to pedestrians, and shall remove the
ice as soon thereafter as shall be practicable. Any person who violates this
section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to
the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
(‘83 Code, § 119.04) (Ord. 82-042, passed 10-18-82; Am. Ord. 18-013, passed 3-
19-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.49 CLEANING OF STREETS.
   (A)   A person shall not remove, or cause to be removed, snow, ice, or slush
onto or across a roadway, the shoulder of the roadway, or roadway intersection
in a manner which obstructs the vision of the driver of a motor vehicle other
than off-road vehicles.
   (B)   A person shall not deposit, or cause to be deposited, snow, ice, or
slush onto or across a roadway, the shoulder of the roadway, or roadway
intersection, in a manner which obstructs the vision of the driver of a motor
vehicle.
   (C)   A person shall not deposit or cause to be deposited any snow, ice, or
slush on or against a fire hydrant, roadway, highway, or loading and unloading
areas of a public transportation system.
   (D)   A person shall not remove, or cause to be removed, snow, ice, or slush
from one parcel of property located within the city to another parcel of
property located within the city, unless the person conforms to the provisions
of §
94.50.
   (E)   Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
(‘83 Code, § 119.05) (Ord. 82-042, passed 10-18-82; Am. Ord. 18-013, passed 3-
19-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.50 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR MOVING SNOW.
    Any person wishing to remove, or cause to be removed, snow, ice, or slush
from one parcel of property located within the city to another location within
the city must obtain a permit from the office of the City Clerk. The permit
shall state the proposed location that the snow, ice, or slush is to be removed
to. The location must first be approved by the Director of the Department of
Public Services or designated representative prior to issuance by the City
Clerk. Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
(‘83 Code, § 119.06) (Ord. 82-042, passed 10-18-82; Am. Ord. 18-013, passed 3-
19-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 95: TREES
Section
   
95.01   Definitions
   
95.02   Application
   
95.03   Enforcement
   
95.04   Tree planting regulations; care and removal
   
95.05   Excavations near trees
   
95.06   Drainage from gas main leakage; repair
   
95.07   Trees on private property
   
95.08   Treatment of Dutch Elm disease
   
95.09   Trimming near utility line; permit
   
95.10   Additional rules and regulations
   
95.11   Appeal
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT.  The Department of Public Works of the city.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works or his authorized designee.
   PARK. All public parks, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the
public has free access as a park.
   PROHIBITED SPECIES. Any tree of the species of poplar (Populus Sp.), willow
(Salix Sp.), and box elder (Acer Negundo), Black Locust (Robina pseudoacacia)
and Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus altissima).
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person or company owning or operating any pole, line,
pipe, or conduit located in any public street or over or along any public
easement or right-of-way for the transmission of electricity, gas, telephone
service, or telegraph service.
   STREET. All of the land lying between property lines on either side of all
streets, highways, and boulevards of the city.
   TREE. Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation.
(‘83 Code, § 95.01) (Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21)
§ 95.02 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise specifically stated
herein, shall apply only to public streets, parkways, parks, and other land
publicly owned or controlled by the city.
(‘83 Code, § 95.01)
§ 95.03 ENFORCEMENT.
    The Director of Public Works shall be charged with the duty of enforcing
the provisions of this chapter.
(‘83 Code, § 95.02) (Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21)
§ 95.04 TREE PLANTING REGULATIONS; CARE AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   The Director shall have control over all trees located within the
street rights-of-way and parks in the city, and the planting, care, and removal
thereof, subject to the regulations contained in this chapter. The owner of
land abutting on any street may, upon obtaining prior written permission of the
Director, prune, spray, plant, or remove trees in that part of the street
abutting his land not used for public travel, but no person shall otherwise
prune, spray, plant, or remove any tree in any street or park. Every permit
shall specify the extent of the authorization and the conditions to which it is
subject. Where an owner of abutting property requests the removal of a tree,
the Director is authorized, in his discretion, to require as a condition to
granting of approval for the removal of a tree, that the property owner make
the removal in accordance with regulations established by the Department,
assume all or any part of the costs of removing the tree, and replace the tree
at some other nearby location by planting another tree, not necessarily of the
same type. (‘83 Code, § 95.03)
   (B)   (1)   No tree of any prohibited species shall be planted in any street
or park, nor shall any such tree be planted on any private property within 50
feet of any street or sidewalk right-of-way or any sewer or sewer extension.
Shade trees planted in any street right-of-way shall be spaced not less than 40
feet apart, except that trees may be planted less than 40 feet from an existing
tree in the right-of-way, providing the existing tree has been approved for
removal within a period of two years from the date of planting of the new tree.
The owner of a single lot may, in order to provide a shade or ornamental tree
in front of his lot, secure special permission from the Department to have a
tree planted closer than 40 feet from an existing tree, but in no case shall
the planting be within 30 feet of any existing tree, within the right-of-way.
      (2)   No tree shall be planted in any planting strip between the street
proper and the sidewalk where the distance between the back of the curb and the
sidewalk is less than three feet in width. No tree shall be planted nearer to
the intersection of any streets than 25 feet from the corner of the
intersection.
(‘83 Code, § 98.06)
   (C)   No person shall break, injure, mutilate, kill, or destroy any tree or
shrub, or set any fire, or permit any fire or the heat thereof to injure any
portion of any tree. No toxic chemicals or other injurious materials shall be
allowed to seep, drain or be emptied on, near or about any tree. No electric
wires or any other lines or wires shall be permitted to come in contact with
any tree or shrub in any manner that shall cause damage thereto, and no person
shall attach any electric insulation to any tree. No person shall use any tree
as an anchor, and no material shall be fastened to or hung on any tree. All
persons having under their care, custody, or control facilities which may
interfere with the trimming or removal of any tree shall, after notice thereof
by the Department, promptly abate the interference in such manner as shall
permit the trimming or removal of the tree by the Department. (‘83 Code, §
95.07)
   (D)   All dead trees and trees afflicted with any fatal or communicable
disease shall be removed by the Department. The Department is authorized to
remove any tree of a prohibited species. (‘83 Code, § 95.04)
   (E)   The Department is authorized to remove any tree growing within any
street, park, or public place, when the tree interferes with fire hydrants,
sewer and water mains, visibility of street intersections, traffic-control
devices, or construction within street rights-of-way. (‘83 Code, § 95.05)
Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 95.05 EXCAVATIONS NEAR TREES.
   (A)   Excavations and driveways shall not be placed within six feet of any
tree without written permit from the Director. Any person making an excavation
or construction shall guard any tree within six feet thereof with a good
substantial frame box to be approved by the department, and all building
material or other debris shall be kept at least four feet from any tree. All
persons desiring to make an excavation or construction shall deposit with the
city a sum sufficient to cover the cost of inspection and any damage which may
result therefrom, provided that the charge shall not be less than $2 in any
case. (‘83 Code, § 95.08)
   (B)   No person shall place within the street right-of-way any stone, brick,
sand, concrete, or other material which will in any way impede the full and
free passage of water, air, or fertilizer to the roots of any tree, except a
sidewalk of authorized width and location. (‘83 Code, § 95.09)
Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 95.06 DAMAGE FROM GAS MAIN LEAKAGE; REPAIR.
   Gas pipes or mains within any public rights-of-way or on property shall be
so maintained as to avoid any leakage therefrom. In the event a leak exists or
occurs, it shall be reported to the owner of the pipe and main, and the leak
shall be repaired within 24 hours. Any damage to trees, shrubbery, or grass
resulting from the escape of gas from a pipe or main shall be repaired, and the
cost of the work, including the cost of removal and the replacement of any
trees, shall be levied against the owner of the pipe or main causing the
damage.
(‘83 Code, § 95.10) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 95.07 TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Every owner of any tree on private property overhanging any street or
right-of-way within the city shall trim the branches so that they shall not
obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street
intersection, and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the
surface of the street or right-of-way. The owners shall remove all dead,
diseased, or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a
menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to trim any
tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of
light along the street from a street light, or interferes with visibility on
any traffic-control device or sign, the trimming to be confined to the area
immediately above the right-of-way. Trees may be planted and maintained in this
area, provided that all branches are trimmed to maintain a clear vision for a
vertical height of eight feet above the roadway surface. (‘83 Code, § 95.11)
   (B)   When the Director shall discover that any tree growing on private
property within the city is afflicted with any dangerous and infectious insect
infestation or tree disease, he shall forthwith serve a written notice upon the
owner or his agent, or the occupant of the property, describing the tree, its
location, and the nature of the infestation or tree disease, and ordering the
owner, agent, and occupant to take any measures as may be reasonably necessary
to cure the infestation or disease and to prevent the spreading thereof,
specifying the measures required to be taken. The order may require the
pruning, spraying, or destruction of trees as may be reasonably necessary.
Every notice shall be complied with, within ten days after service thereof,
upon the owner, agent, or occupant of the property on which the afflicted tree
is located, or within any additional time as may be stipulated in the notice.
(‘83 Code, § 95.12)
   (C)   In case the owner, agent, and occupant of the property refuse to carry
out the order of the Director within the time limit, or in case of an appeal,
within five days after the Council shall have affirmed the order, the Director
shall carry out the pruning, spraying or destruction of the trees as deemed
necessary by him, and shall bill the owner, agent or occupant of the property
for the cost thereof. In case the owner of the property shall fail to pay the
bill within 30 days after it has been rendered, the Director shall report it to
the City Council for collection as a single lot assessment against the property
in accordance with the Charter. The Director may, without serving the above
notice, when the owner or occupant of any private property shall consent
thereto and pay the reasonable cost thereof, cause trees growing on private
property to be sprayed when he deems the same necessary on account of any
infestation or disease or threat thereof. (‘83 Code, § 95.15)
   (D)   The Director and his assistants and employees shall have authority to
enter upon private premises for the purpose of examining any trees, shrubs,
plants, or vines for the presence of destructive insects or plant diseases. No
damages shall be awarded for the destruction of any tree, shrub, plant, or
fruit, or injury to the same, if done by the Director or under his direction,
in accordance with this chapter. (‘83 Code, § 95.16)
   (E)   On residential streets, the abutting owner or occupant may maintain a
planting strip on the lawn extension between the sidewalk and curb, and may
plant flowers, trees, and shrubbery therein in conformity with this chapter. No
person shall wilfully injure or destroy any grass, flower, tree, or shrub upon
any planting strip, or throw any papers, refuse, or other debris thereon. No
person shall drive an automobile, bicycle, or other vehicle upon or over any
planting strip. (‘83 Code, § 95.17)
(Ord. 78-009, passed 4-3-78) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 95.08 TREATMENT OF DUTCH ELM DISEASE.
   Every elm tree, regardless of species or variety, infected with the fungus
Ceratostomella ulmi, popularly called Dutch Elm disease, shall be cut and
burned; if on public property, within 30 days after the Director shall learn of
the condition; if on private property, within ten days after notice as
specified in
§ 95.07(B). No person shall possess, sell, give away, or transport any elm tree
afflicted with the fungus Ceratostomella ulmi, nor any wood from, or parts of,
any afflicted tree, branches, and roots of any tree so afflicted may be
transported to a place for burning in a manner approved by the Director.
(‘83 Code, § 95.13) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 95.09 TRIMMING NEAR UTILITY POLES; PERMITS.
   The Director shall annually issue permits granting permission to public
utilities to trim and keep trimmed all trees within the streets, alleys, parks,
and public places of the city in such a manner as shall keep the overhead lines
of the public utilities safe and accessible. Trimming shall be done in
accordance with approved practices and under the general direction of the
Director of the Department. A permit, as provided for in this section, shall
require reasonable prior notice to the city before any work is commenced
thereunder. However, in the event of an emergency requiring immediate
maintenance work on the overhead lines of the public utilities, prior notice of
commencing work under a permit shall not be required. EMERGENCY as used in this
section shall mean the occurrence or happening of an event which could not be
foreseen by the exercise of reasonable care and foresight, which might cause
damage to the overhead lines of the public utilities.
(‘83 Code, § 95.18) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 95.10 ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Director, subject to the approval of the City Council, shall make rules
and regulations supplementary to this chapter and not in conflict herewith, as
he may from time to time deem necessary. Until changed pursuant to this
section, the rules and regulations in effect at the adoption of this code shall
continue in effect. No person shall fail to obey any rule or regulation
effective hereunder.
(‘83 Code, § 95.19) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 95.11 APPEAL.
   In case the owner, agent, or occupant of the property shall feel himself
aggrieved at an order of the Director requiring the treatment or destruction of
any tree, he may within 48 hours make an appeal to the City Council by
communication filed with the City Clerk. The Council shall hear the appeal at
its next regular meeting, unless another time shall be set, and shall determine
the matter under such expert advice as may be necessary.
(‘83 Code, § 95.14)
CHAPTER 96: PARKING LOTS
Section
   
96.01   Definition
   
96.02   Regulation of parking lots
   
96.03   Parking appeals
   
96.04   Pavement specifications
§ 96.01 DEFINITION.
   AUTOMOBILE PARKING LOT. Any plot, piece or parcel of land used for the
purpose of parking more than two motor vehicles, whether let or leased for a
fee or other consideration, for storage or parking, or whether maintained and
operated by any person, in connection with or for the benefit of patrons or
customers of any commercial establishment, store, theater, amusement hall,
apartment, motel, or other business or enterprise.
(‘83 Code, § 98.01) (Ord. 74-007, passed 9-23-74)
§ 96.02 REGULATIONS OF PARKING LOTS.
   Automobile parking lots shall not need a license for their operation and
maintenance, but shall be subject to the following regulations. The failure to
observe these regulations shall subject violators to the provisions of
§
10.99.
   (A)   A permit will be required and shall be applied for on forms to be
furnished by the Department of Public Works or designated representative. A
plot plan shall be submitted with the application which shall show size of lot,
property lines, street and alley lines, adjacent building lines, location and
size of entrances and exits and drainage facilities, and any other information
pertinent to the construction.
   (B)   A permit fee shall be charged in accordance with the fee schedule
adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time.
   (C)   Parking lots shall be laned and provided with adequate ingress and
egress for automobile parking so that in case of fire or other emergency, each
vehicle may be easily reached or removed.
   (D)   Entrances and exits from parking lots shall be only at properly
established curb cut driveways with paved cement concrete aprons from sidewalks
to curb. Driving of cars across curbs or sidewalks except at curb cut driveways
is prohibited.
   (E)   The parking surface shall be covered with asphaltic or cement concrete
pavement and shall be graded so as not to drain on adjoining property or across
the city sidewalk. Parking lots no larger than 65 feet x 50 feet will not be
required to install drainage facilities provided the lots are accessible to a
public alley; otherwise it will be necessary to install catch basins in the
parking lot area and connect to city storm drains.
   (F)   All parking lots shall be kept free from dust, ruts, and pits, and
shall have a seal coat applied wherever necessary.
   (G)   A barrier consisting of a concrete wall, precast concrete, or
bituminous curb or a steel guard rail not over 18 inches high above the grade
as established by the city shall be maintained on all parking lots between the
parking area and the side yards abutting any partition fence, and along any
part of the area which abuts a public street or highway. The barriers shall be
placed a sufficient distance from adjoining property lines to prevent car
bumpers from projecting over property lines.
(‘83 Code, § 98.02) (Ord. 74-007, passed 9-23-74; Am. Ord. 92-010, passed 12-7-
92; Am. Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.03 PARKING APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Department as specified in this
chapter may appeal the decision to the city’s Zoning Board of Appeals.
(Ord. 98-012, passed 6-29-98)
§ 96.04 PAVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS.
   For cement concrete pavement, bituminous concrete pavement, and asphaltic
penetration pavement specifications, refer to the Michigan Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction.
(Ord. 98-013, passed 6-29-98)
CHAPTER 97: COST RECOVERY
Section
   
97.01   Obligation of persons in custody to pay for medical services
§ 97.01 OBLIGATION OF PERSONS IN CUSTODY TO PAY FOR MEDICAL SERVICES.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, individuals who are "in custody"
include, but are not limited to, individuals who are:
      (1)   Under arrest;
      (2)   Incarcerated;
      (3)   Imprisoned;
      (4)   Escaped from confinement;
      (5)   Under supervised release;
      (6)   On medical furlough;
      (7)   Required to reside in mental health facilities;
      (8)   Required to reside in halfway houses;
      (9)   Required to live under home detention; or
      (10)   Confined completely in any way under a penal statute, code,
ordinance, or rule.
   (B)   Any person in custody of the city or 21st District Court, or in
custody at the direction of the city or 21st District Court, shall be
responsible for the payment of any medical services rendered to and received by
that person while in such custody. Any such person shall be required to
reimburse the city in full for any fees, charges, or expenses of any kind or
nature whatsoever that are incurred for the provision of any such medical
services unless such fees, charges, or expenses are paid directly by the person
in custody or the insurance carrier of the person in custody.
   (C)   The obligation of the person in custody to reimburse the city for
medical services shall be construed to be as broad as possible. Without
limiting the scope of the obligation in the preceding sentence, the obligation
shall apply to all medical services including, without limitation,
transportation to or from any medical provider or facility. Further, without
limiting the scope of the obligation stated previously, the obligation shall
apply to any treatment deemed necessary by the treating physician, facility, or
medical provider of the person in custody, whether or not the treatment was
requested by the person.
(Ord. 11-013, passed 10-10-11)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
         
110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
111.   FOOD AND DRINK REGULATIONS
         
112.   TEMPORARY BUSINESSES AND SALES
         
113.   JUNK DEALERS; SECONDHAND MERCHANTS
         
114.   TAXICAB REGULATIONS
         
115.   HAULING AND TRUCKING
         
116.   AMUSEMENTS
         
117.   SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRIES; DRY CLEANERS
         
118.   PET SHOPS
         
119.   VENDING MACHINES
         
120.   MASSAGE PARLORS
         
121.   CABLE TV REGULATIONS
         
122.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS-OF-WAY
         
123.   MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
         
124.   MARIJUANA REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Licensing Regulations
   
110.01   Scope
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   Application of regulations
   
110.04   City license officer; powers and duties
   
110.05   Qualifications of applicants
   
110.06   Issuance
   
110.07   Determination of license fee
   
110.08   Contents of license
   
110.09   Duties of licensee
   
110.10   Transfer of license
   
110.11   Enforcement
   
110.12   Required licenses, bonds and fees
   
110.13   Dealers in precious items; registration
   
110.14   Hazardous trades
LICENSING REGULATIONS
§ 110.01 SCOPE.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances,
except those specifically repealed by this chapter. Where this chapter imposes
a greater restriction upon persons, premises, or personal property than is
imposed or required by any existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract, or
deed, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(‘83 Code, § 110.01)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
    BUSINESS. Includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions,
enterprises, establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters, any
of which are conducted for private profit, or benefit, either directly or
indirectly, physically located within the city, or within its jurisdiction,
together with all devices, machines, vehicles, and appurtenances used therein.
   INSIGNIA or INSIGNE. Any tag, plate, badge, emblem, sticker, or any other
kind of device which may be required for any use in connection with any
license.
   LICENSE or LICENSEE. Shall include respectively the words PERMIT or
PERMITTEE, or the holder for any use or period of time of any similar
privilege, wherever relevant to any provision of this chapter or other law or
ordinance.
   LICENSE OFFICER. The City Clerk of the city.
   PREMISES. Includes all lands, structures, places, and also the equipment and
appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any
personal property which is either affixed to, or is otherwise used in
connection with any business conducted on the premises.
(‘83 Code, § 110.02) (Ord. 94-001, passed 4-11-94)
§ 110.03 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance required. No person, either directly or indirectly, shall
conduct any business or nonprofit enterprise, or use in connection therewith
any vehicle, premises, machine, or device, in whole or in part, for which a
license or permit is required by any law or ordinance of this city, without a
license or permit therefor being procured and kept in effect at all times as
required by this chapter or other law or ordinance of this city.
   (B)   Special sales. This chapter shall apply to all business in the nature
of special sales for which a license is required by any law or ordinance of
this city, and it shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or
indirectly, to conduct any sale except in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.
   (C)   One act constitutes doing business. For the purpose of this chapter,
any person shall be deemed to be in business or engaging in nonprofit
enterprise, and thus subject to the requirements of divisions (A) and (B) of
this section, when he does one of the following acts.
      (1)   Selling any goods or service.
      (2)   Soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale or hire.
      (3)   Acquiring or using any vehicle or any premises in the city for
business purposes.
   (D)   Agents responsible for obtaining license. The agents or other
representatives of nonresidents who are doing business in this city shall be
personally responsible for the compliance of their principals and of the
businesses they represent with this chapter.
   (E)   Separate license for branch establishments.
      (1)   A license shall be obtained in the manner prescribed herein for
each branch establishment or location of the business engaged in, as if each
branch establishment or location were a separate business; however, warehouses
and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business
licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be
separate places of business or branch establishments.
      (2)   Each rental real property shall be deemed a branch establishment or
separate place of business for the purposes of this chapter when there is a
representative of the owner or the owner's agent on the premises who is
authorized to transact business for the owner or owner's agent, or there is a
regular employee of the owner or of the owner's agent working on the premises.
   (F)   Joint license. A person engaged in two or more businesses at the same
location shall not be required to obtain separate licenses for conducting each
business; but, when he is eligible, he shall be issued one license, which shall
specify on its face all such businesses.
   (G)   No license required for mere delivery. No license shall be required of
any person for any mere delivery in the city of any property purchased or
acquired in good faith from the person at his regular place of business outside
the city where no intent by the person is shown to exist to evade the
provisions of this chapter.
   (H)   Special permits to nonprofit enterprise. The City License Officer,
upon approval of the City Council, shall issue special permits, without the
payment of any license fees or other charges therefor, to any person or
organization for the conduct or operation of a nonprofit enterprise, whether
regularly or temporarily, when he finds that the applicant operates without
private profit, for a public, charitable, educational, literary, fraternal, or
religious purpose.
      (1)   Application for special permit. An applicant for a special permit
shall submit an application therefore to the City License Officer, upon forms
prescribed by the City License Officer, and the applicant shall furnish
additional information and make any affidavits as the License Officer shall
require.
      (2)   Special permittees must conform. A person or organization operating
under a special permit shall operate the nonprofit enterprise in compliance
with this chapter and all other applicable rules and regulations, except as
provided herein.
(‘83 Code, § 110.03) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 110.04 CITY LICENSE OFFICER; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The City License Officer shall collect all license fees and shall issue
licenses in the name of the city to all persons qualified under the provisions
of this chapter, and shall do the following.
   (A)   Promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations necessary
to the operation and enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   Adopt all forms and prescribe the information to be given therein as
to character and other relevant matter for all necessary papers.
   (C)   Require applicants to submit all affidavits and oaths necessary to the
administration of this chapter.
   (D)   Submit all applications, in a proper case, to interested city
officials, including but not limited to the Fire Chief, Police Chief, and
Building Official, for their endorsements thereon as to compliance by the
applicant with all city regulations which they have the duty of enforcing.
   (E)   Investigate and determine the eligibility of any applicant for a
license as prescribed herein.
   (F)   Notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection of the
application, and shall, upon the refusal of any license or permit, at the
applicant's request, state in writing the reasons therefor and deliver them to
the applicant.
(‘83 Code, § 110.04)
§ 110.05 QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANTS.
   The general standards herein as to the qualifications of every applicant for
a city license shall be considered and applied by the City License Officer. In
making such a determination, the City License Officer shall consider the
following.
   (A)   History/relevant facts.
      (1)   Any criminal convictions and reasons therefore, of the applicant.
      (2)   The license history of the applicant; whether the person, in
previously operating in this or another state, has ever had a license revoked
or suspended, the reasons therefor, and the demeanor of the applicant
subsequent to that action.
      (3)   Any other facts relevant to the general personal history of the
applicant as the City Licensing Officer shall find necessary to a fair
determination of the eligibility of the applicant.
      (4)   Applicant shall be in compliance with all county and state
regulations relevant to the business in which the applicant is engaged and
furnish proof of same.
   (B)   Non-default. The applicant shall not be in default under the
provisions of this chapter or indebted or obligated in any manner to the city
except for current taxes. Such debt includes the late payment of city property
taxes, personal property taxes, water bills, code enforcement tickets, Building
Department permits, and other such debts.
   (C)   Building/zoning compliance. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
or corporation, to hereafter occupy or reoccupy, or for any owner or agent to
permit the occupation or reoccupation of any building or addition thereto, for
commercial and industrial purposes, until a certificate of occupancy has been
issued by the Building Department. The certificate of occupancy shall state
that the occupancy complies with all the provisions of the within chapter, as
amended, and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the city. This
section shall not apply to any occupancy in existence at the time of the
adoption of this section.
(‘83 Code, § 110.05) (Ord. 81-024, passed 9-8-81; Am. Ord. 94-001, passed 4-11-
94; Am. Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21)
§ 110.06 ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Formal application required. Every person required to procure a
license under the provisions of any ordinance or law of the city shall submit
an application for a license to the City License Officer. The application
shall:
      (1)   Be a written statement upon forms provided by the City License
Officer; the form shall include an affidavit, to be sworn to by the applicant
before a notary public of this state;
      (2)   Require the disclosure of all information necessary for compliance
with
§ 110.05, and of any other information which the City License Officer shall
find to be reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this chapter.
   (B)   Issuance of receipts. Once the License Officer has determined that
there has been compliance with
§ 110.05 and all other criteria contained within this chapter, the fees shall
be paid and the license shall be issued.
   (C)   Renewal license procedure.  The applicant for the renewal of a license
shall submit an application for a license to the City License Officer. Any
inspections subsequent to the initial licensing shall be in accordance with the
ordinances, policies and procedures of the fire, police departments of the
city. The applicant shall furnish proof that compliance with all county and
state regulations relevant to the business have been met. All outstanding debts
such as the late payment of city property taxes, personal property taxes, water
bills, code enforcement tickets, Building Department permits, and other such
debts must be fully paid before a renewal license can be issued.
   (D)   Duplicate license procedure. A duplicate license or special permit
shall be issued by the License Officer to replace any license previously issued
which has been lost, stolen, defaced, or destroyed without any willful conduct
on the part of the licensee, and paying to the License Officer of a fee charged
in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in Chapter 12 of this Code.
   (E)   Supplemental license procedure. When a licensee places himself in a
new status as provided in
§ 110.10(B), the License Officer shall issue a supplemental license and
additional insignia as may be required.
   (F)   Nonapproval of license.
      (1)   Refund. The License Officer shall, upon disapproving any
application submitted under the provisions of this chapter, refund all fees
paid in advance to the applicant, provided that the applicant is not otherwise
indebted to the city.
      (2)   Compliance pending legal action. When the issuance of a license is
denied, and any action is instituted by the applicant to compel its issuance,
the applicant shall not engage in the business for which the license was
refused unless a license be issued to him pursuant to a judgment ordering the
same.
(‘83 Code, § 110.06) (Ord. 94-001, passed 4-11-94; Am. Ord. 21-002, passed 5-8-
21)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 110.07 DETERMINATION OF LICENSE FEE.
   License fees shall be in the amounts established in
§ 110.12. No rebate or refund of any license fee or part thereof shall be made
by reason of the non-use of a license, or by reason of a change of location or
business rendering the use of the license ineffective.
(‘83 Code, § 110.07) (Ord. 94-001, passed 4-11-94)
§ 110.08 CONTENTS OF LICENSE.
   Each license issued shall state on its face the following.
   (A)   The name of the licensee and any other name under which its business
is to be conducted.
   (B)   The type and address of each business so licensed.
   (C)   The amount of license fee therefor.
   (D)   The dates of issuance and expiration thereof.
   (E)   Such other information as the License Officer shall determine.
(‘83 Code, § 110.08) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 110.09 DUTIES OF LICENSEE.
   (A)   General standards of conduct. Every licensee under this chapter shall
do the following.
      (1)   Permit all reasonable inspections of his business.
      (2)   Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws and regulations
applicable to the licensed business.
      (3)   Avoid all forbidden, improper, or unnecessary practices or
conditions which do or may affect the public health, morals, or welfare.
      (4)   Refrain from operating the licensed businesses on premises after
expiration of his license, or during the period of his license if it is revoked
or suspended.
   (B)   Display of license and insignia. Every licensee under this chapter
shall have the following duties with respect to the following.
      (1)   Premises.
         (a)   The licensee shall post and maintain any license upon the
licensed premises in a place where it may be seen at all times.
         (b)   The licensee shall affix any insignia delivered for use in
connection with business premises on the inside glass part of the window of the
establishment, facing the public way, or on the inside glass part of the door
opening on the public way. The insignia shall be placed and maintained so as to
be plainly visible from the public way. Where the licensed premises does not
have a window facing a public way at street level, or a glass door opening upon
the public way, the insignia shall be affixed to the glass in the door, window,
or other prominent place in the nearest proximity to the principal public
entrance to the establishment, and shall be placed and maintained so as to be
plainly visible from the public entrance.
      (2)   Vehicles.
         (a)   Any general or special license fees required for any kind of
vehicle for the privilege of being operated upon the public highways by any
statute or ordinance, shall not abrogate, limit or affect any further
requirements of this chapter or of other ordinances or laws for additional and
separate licenses, permits, and insignia and fees for the vehicles or other
uses for and relating to the privilege of using the same in the business so
licensed.
         (b)   The licensee shall affix any insignia delivered for use in
connection with a licensed motor vehicle on the inside of the windshield of the
vehicle or as may be otherwise prescribed by the License Officer or by law.
         (c)   The licensee shall affix any metal or other durable type of
insignia delivered for use in connection with a wagon or other vehicle not
operated by motor power securely on the outside of the vehicle.
      (3)   Persons. The licensee shall carry the license on his person when he
has no licensed business premises.
      (4)   Machines. The licensee shall affix any insignia delivered for use
in connection therewith upon the outside of any coin, vending, or other
business machine or device, so that it may be seen at all times.
      (5)   Inoperative licenses, special permits, and insignia. The licensee
shall not allow any license, special permit, or insignia to remain posted, or
displayed, or used, after the period for which it was issued has expired; or
when it has been suspended or revoked, or for any other reason become
ineffective.
      (6)   Unlawful possession. The licensee shall not loan, sell, give or
assign to any other person, or allow any other person to use or display, or to
destroy, damage, or remove, or to have in his possession except as authorized
by the License Officer or by law, any license or insignia which has been issued
to the licensee.
   (C)   New location desired. A licensee shall have the right to change the
location of the licensed business provided the licensee shall comply with all
the provisions of this chapter.
(‘83 Code, § 110.09) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 110.10 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   When authorized. A licensee hereunder shall have the right to transfer
his license to another person provided he shall do the following.
      (1)   Obtain written permission from the License Officer for the
transfer.
      (2)   Execute the transfer in the form and under the conditions required
by law and as prescribed by the License Officer.
      (3)   Promptly report the completed act of transfer to the License
Officer.
      (4)   Promptly surrender any license certificate, and, when required by
the License Officer, all licensing insignia.
   (B)   New license issued. Upon the completion of a transfer of license in
compliance with division (A) of this section, the License Officer shall issue a
new license and insignia to the transferee for the unexpired term of the old
license. The new license issued hereunder shall authorize the transferee to
engage in the same business at the same location or at any other place as shall
be approved by the License Officer and named in the new license.
(‘83 Code, § 110.10) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 110.11 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Inspections.
      (1)   Persons authorized. The following persons are authorized to conduct
inspections in the manner prescribed herein. The Fire Chief, Police Chief, and
Building Official or their designated
representatives having duties to perform with reference to licenses or
businesses shall be in accordance with the ordinances, policies, and procedures
of their respective departments.
      (2)   Authority of inspectors. All persons authorized herein to inspect
licensees and businesses shall have the authority to enter, with or without a
search warrant, at all reasonable times, the following premises.
         (a)   Those for which a license is required.
         (b)   Those for which a license was issued and which, at the time of
inspection, are operating under the license.
         (c)   Those for which the license has been revoked or suspended.
      (3)   Reports by inspectors. Persons inspecting licensees, their
businesses, or premises as herein authorized shall report all violations of
this chapter or of other laws or ordinances to the License Officer, and shall
submit any other reports as the License Officer shall order.
   (B)   Provisional order. When an inspector has reported the violation of
this chapter or of any law or ordinance, the License Officer shall issue to the
affected person a provisional order to comply.
      (1)   Nature of notice. The provisional order, and all other notices
issued in compliance with this chapter, shall be in writing, shall be
personally served, and shall apprise the person affected of his specific
violations. In the absence of the person affected or his agent or employee, a
copy of the notice shall be affixed to some structure on the premises.
Depositing the notice in the United States mail shall constitute service
thereof.
      (2)   Period for compliance. The provisional order shall require
compliance within ten days of personal service on the affected person.
      (3)   Hearing. Upon written application by the person affected before the
expiration of the ten- day period for compliance, the License Officer shall
order a hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given the affected person in
the manner prescribed herein.
   (C)   Modifying authority of License Officer. Upon written application, or
on his own motion, the License Officer shall have the authority, in a proper
case, to extend the time for compliance, to grant a new hearing date, and to
change, modify, or rescind any recommendation or order.
   (D)   Final order. Upon the failure or refusal of the violator to comply
with the provisional order or with any order made after hearing, the License
Officer shall then declare and make the provisional order final.
      (1)   Authority of License Officer. The License Officer shall have the
authority to suspend or revoke licenses upon making and declaring a provisional
order final.
      (2)   Effect of revocation or suspension. Upon revocation or suspension,
no refund of any portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee, and
he shall immediately cease all business at all places under the license.
   (E)   Summary action.
      (1)   When the conduct of any licensee, agent, or employee is so inimical
to the public health, safety, and general welfare as to constitute a nuisance
and thus give rise to an emergency, the License Officer shall have the
authority to summarily order the cessation of business and the close of the
premises, or to suspend or revoke the license.
       (2)   Unless waived in writing, within ten days after he has acted
summarily, the License Officer shall conduct a special hearing for this action
in respect to the summary order as may be therein determined. Notice of the
hearing shall be given the affected person in the manner prescribed herein.
   (F)   Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the License
Officer after hearing shall have the right to appeal to the Council, Mayor, or
City Manager of the city by filing a written appeal with that Officer within
ten days following the effective date of the action or decision complained of.
      (1)   Contents of appeal. The appeal shall set out a copy of the order or
decision appealed from, and shall include a statement of the facts relied upon
to avoid the order.
      (2)   Notification of License Officer. At the time of filing any appeal,
a copy thereof shall be filed by the appellant with the License Officer.
      (3)   Hearing. The Council, Mayor, or City Manager shall fix a time and
place for hearing the appeal, and shall personally serve a written notice, as
provided herein, upon the appellant informing him thereof. The Council, Mayor,
or City Manager shall also give notice to the License Officer, and the License
Officer shall be entitled to appear and defend the order.
      (4)   Effect of decision. The findings of the Council, Mayor, or City
Manager shall be final and conclusive, and shall be personally served upon the
appellant as required herein.
   (G)   Liability of violator.
      (1)   Unpaid fee constitutes debt. The amount of any unpaid fee, the
payment of which is required hereunder, shall constitute a debt due the city.
      (2)   Action by City Attorney. The City Attorney shall, at the direction
of the License Officer, institute civil suit in the name of the city to recover
any unpaid fee.
      (3)   Civil judgment no bar. No civil judgment, or any act by the City
Attorney, the License Officer, or the violator shall bar or prevent a criminal
prosecution for each and every violation of this chapter.
(‘83 Code, § 110.11) (Ord. 94-001, passed 4-11-94) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 110.12 REQUIRED LICENSES, BONDS AND FEES.
   (A)   All businesses, trades, occupations or activities requiring licenses
shall pay the fee as prescribed provided by resolution of the City Council,
from time to time, and posted in the City Clerk's office, which fee shall cover
the period from the date of issuance of the license until the following
February 28th, plus an additional year ending on February 28th.
   (B)   Renewal fees shall be assessed annually after the initial period and
as prescribed provided by resolution of the City Council, from time to time,
and posted in the City Clerk's office. Any further increases after the initial
period shall be limited to the increase in the rate of inflation as determined
by the consumer price index.
   (C)   Businesses, trades, occupations or activities requiring a license and/
or insurances and bonds shall annually submit proof of the following insurances
and/or bonds.
 
Bond            Used auto parts                          $500
Bond            Foreign corporation building contractors $1,000
Bond            Christmas tree lots                      $250
Insurance       Taxicabs
Personal Injury 1 person                                 $300,000
Personal Injury 1 accident                               $500,000
Property Damage 1 accident                               $100,000
 
   (D)   Transfer fee for address change of same business license shall be
charged in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in Chapter 12 of this
Code.
   (E)   No fees may be waived except by Council resolution for non-profit
enterprises or corporations.
(‘83 Code, § 110.12) (Ord. 73-005, passed 3-12-73; Am. Ord. 88-023, passed 6-
20-88; Am. Ord. 91-013, passed 7-1-91; Am. Ord. 94-001, passed 4-11-94 ; Am.
Ord. 12-006, passed 7-9-12)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 110.13 DEALERS IN PRECIOUS ITEMS; REGISTRATION.
   A dealer in the business of receiving and buying gold, silver, platinum,
gems, jewelry, and other precious items shall not conduct business in the city
unless the dealer has obtained a valid certificate of registration from the
Department of Police, and by paying a one-time only registration fee in the
amount, charged in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in Chapter 12
of this Code, to cover the reasonable cost of processing and issuing the
certificate of registration as prescribed by state law.
(‘83 Code, § 110.13) (Ord. 82-001, passed 1-4-82) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 110.14 HAZARDOUS TRADES.
   No hazardous or dangerous industry, trade, occupation, or use which involves
the transportation, storage, or handling of explosives, flammable liquids, or
combustible substances involving fire or life hazards shall be conducted
without a permit from the Fire Department prescribing the conditions and
requirements necessary to secure the public safety.
(‘83 Code, § 110.15) (Ord. 73-009, passed 4-16-73) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
CHAPTER 111: FOOD AND DRINK REGULATIONS
Section
Eating and Drinking Establishments
   
111.001   Definitions
   
111.002   License required
   
111.003   Sanitation requirements for restaurants
   
111.004   Inspection by Health Officer
   
111.005   Disease control
   
111.006   Suspected infection; procedure
   
111.007   Additional regulations
   
111.008   Enforcement
Late-Night Business Establishments
   
111.020   Definitions
   
111.021   License required
   
111.022   Consumption of alcohol; loitering
   
111.023   Posting required
   
111.024   Prohibited activities and conduct
Bakeries and Bulk Food Establishments
   
111.035   Definitions
   
111.036   License required
   
111.037   Literacy required
   
111.038   General regulations
   
111.039   Bakeries
   
111.040   Bulk food establishments
   
111.041   Additional regulations
Meat Markets and Vendors
   
111.055   Definitions
   
111.056   License required
   
111.057   Unwholesome meat; removal
   
111.058   Sanitary transportation required
   
111.059   Adulterants; diseases
   
111.060   Meat vendors
   
111.061   Meat markets
Soft Drinks
   
111.075   License required for sale
   
111.076   Application for license
   
111.077   License to be posted
   
111.078   Disorderly conduct prohibited
Mobile Food Vending
   
111.080   Intent
   
111.081   Definitions
   
111.082   Permit required
   
111.083   Duration of permit
   
111.084   Application for permit
   
111.085   Fees
   
111.086   Requirements
   
111.087   Revocation of permit
   
111.088   Violations
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 111.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAPACITY. The maximum number of seating facilities for patrons.
   CLERK. The City Clerk.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who handles food or drink during preparation or
serving, or who comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensils, or who is
employed in a room in which food or drink is prepared or served.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The Wayne County Health Department.
   ITINERANT RESTAURANT. Any restaurant operating for a temporary period in
connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition, or other similar
gathering.
   RESTAURANT. Any restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, short order café,
luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, or soda fountain, and all other eating or
drinking establishments, as well as kitchens or other places in which food or
drink is prepared for sale on the premises or elsewhere.
   UTENSILS. Includes any kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery,
containers, or other equipment with which food or drink comes in contact during
storage, preparation, or serving.
(‘83 Code, § 111.01)
§ 111.002 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a restaurant in the city who does not possess an
unrevoked license of current issue granted in accordance with Chapter 110 of
this code. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the
restaurant. Only persons who comply with the requirements of this chapter shall
be entitled to receive and retain such a license. A person conducting an
itinerant restaurant shall also be required to secure a license. No license
shall be issued except upon the certification of the Health Officer. The
license fee shall be as prescribed in Chapter 110 of this code.
(‘83 Code, § 111.04) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.003 SANITATION REQUIREMENTS FOR RESTAURANTS.
   All restaurants shall comply with all of the following sanitation
requirements.
   (A)   Floors. The floors of all rooms in which food or drink is stored,
prepared, or served, or in which utensils are washed, shall be of such
construction as to be easily cleaned, shall be smooth, and shall be kept clean
and in good repair.
   (B)   Walls and ceilings. Walls and ceilings of all rooms shall be kept
clean and in good repair. All walls and ceilings of rooms in which food or
drink is prepared shall be finished in light color. The walls of all rooms in
which food or drink is prepared or utensils are washed shall have a smooth,
washable surface.
   (C)   Doors and windows. When flies are prevalent, all openings into the
outer air shall be effectively screened, and doors shall be self-closing unless
other effective means are provided to prevent the entrance of flies.
   (D)   Lighting. All rooms in which food or drink is stored or prepared or in
which utensils are washed shall be well-lighted.
   (E)   Ventilation. All rooms in which food or drink is stored or prepared,
or served, or in which utensils are washed, shall be well-ventilated.
   (F)   Toilet facilities.
      (1)   Facilities for employees. Every restaurant shall be provided with
adequate and conveniently located toilet facilities for its employees,
conforming with the Building Code and the State Plumbing Code. Toilet rooms
shall not open directly into any food processing room. The doors of all toilet
rooms shall be self-closing. Toilet rooms shall be kept in a clean condition,
in good repair, shall be well-lighted and ventilated. Hand-washing signs shall
be posted in each toilet room used by employees.
      (2)   Ventilation. All toilet rooms shall be properly vented by exterior
windows or mechanical means to the outside air.
      (3)   Lighting. All toilet rooms and passageways leading to the same
shall be well-lighted.
      (4)   Maintenance. All toilet rooms shall be kept clean. Sanitary toilet
paper shall be provided.
      (5)   Establishments serving alcoholic beverages. Establishments serving
alcoholic beverages shall provide proper and adequate toilet facilities for
patrons. Separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex, and
adequate urinals shall be provided in men's toilets. The number of fixtures
provided shall be on the basis of the seating capacity of the establishment.
   (G)   Lavatory facilities. Adequate and convenient hand-washing facilities
shall be provided, including hot and cold running water, soap and dispenser,
and approved sanitary towels. The use of a common towel is prohibited. No
employee shall resume work after using the toilet room without first washing
his hands.
   (H)   Water supply. Running water under pressure shall be easily accessible
to all rooms in which food is prepared or utensils are washed, and the water
supply shall be from the city water system.
   (I)   Construction of utensils and equipment. All multi-use utensils and all
show and display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerating
equipment, sinks, and other equipment or utensils used in connection with the
operation of a restaurant shall be so constructed as to be easily cleaned, and
shall be kept in good repair. Utensils containing or plated with cadmium or
lead shall not be used; however, solder containing lead may be used for
jointing.
   (J)   Cleaning and bactericidal treatment of utensils and equipment.
      (1)   All equipment, including display cases or windows, counters,
shelves, tables, refrigerators, stoves, hoods, and sinks, shall be kept clean
and free from dust, dirt, insects, and other contaminating material. All cloths
used by waiters, chefs, and other employees shall be clean. Single-service
containers shall be used only once.
      (2)   All multi-service eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly
cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process after
each usage. All multi-use utensils used in the preparation of food and drink
shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved
bactericidal process immediately following the day's operation. Drying cloths,
if used, shall be clean and shall be used for no other purpose. No article,
polish, or other substance containing any cyanide preparation or other
poisonous material shall be used for the cleaning or polishing of utensils.
   (K)   Storage and handling of utensils and equipment. After bactericidal
treatment, utensils shall be stored in a clean, dry place protected from flies,
dust, and other contamination, and shall be handled in such a manner as to
prevent contamination as far as practicable. Single-service utensils shall be
purchased only in sanitary containers, shall be stored therein in a clean, dry
place until used, and shall be handled in a sanitary manner.
   (L)   Disposal of wastes. All wastes shall be properly disposed of, and all
garbage and trash shall be kept in suitable receptacles, in such manner as not
to become a nuisance.
   (M) Refrigeration. All readily perishable food and drink shall be kept at or
below 50°F, except when being prepared or served. Waste water from
refrigeration equipment shall be properly disposed of.
   (N)   Wholesomeness of food and drink. All food and drink shall be clean,
wholesome, free from spoilage, and so prepared as to be safe for human
consumption. All milk, fluid milk products, ice cream, and other frozen
desserts served shall be from approved sources. Milk and fluid milk products
shall be served in the individual original containers in which they were
received from the distributor, or from a bulk container equipped with an
approved dispensing device; however, this requirement shall not apply to cream,
which may be served from the original bottle or from a dispenser approved for
that service. All oysters, clams, and mussels shall be from approved sources,
and, if shucked, shall be kept until used in the containers in which they were
placed at the shucking plant. Artificial or natural ice shall be from an
approved source.
   (O)   Storage, display, and serving of food. All food and drink shall be
stored, displayed, and served so as to be protected from dust, flies, vermin,
depredation and pollution by rodents, unnecessary handling, droplet infection,
overhead leakage, and other contamination. No animals or fowl shall be kept or
allowed in any room in which food or drink is prepared or stored. All means
necessary for the elimination of flies, roaches, and rodents shall be used.
   (P)   Cleanliness of employees. All employees shall wear clean garments and
shall keep their hands clean at all times while engaged in handling food,
drink, utensils, or equipment. Employees shall not expectorate or use tobacco
in any form in rooms in which food is prepared.
   (Q)   Miscellaneous. The premises of all restaurants shall be kept clean and
free of litter or rubbish. None of the operations connected with a restaurant
shall be conducted in any room used as living or sleeping quarters. Adequate
lockers or dressing rooms shall be provided for employees' clothing and shall
be kept clean. Soiled linens, coats, and aprons shall be kept in containers
provided for this purpose.
   (R)   Itinerant restaurants. Itinerant restaurants shall be constructed and
operated in an approved manner.
(‘83 Code, § 111.02) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.004 INSPECTION BY HEALTH OFFICER.
   (A)   The Health Officer shall have authority to enter any building or part
thereof which is used, or which he has reason to believe is used, for the
storage, preparation, sale, serving, or distribution of food or drink for human
consumption, in order to inspect the premises, furniture, equipment, dishes, or
utensils used therein, and to take samples of any of the food or drink so
stored, prepared, sold, served, or distributed. No person shall refuse
admittance to the Health Officer or interfere with him in the performance of
his duties under this section. This section shall apply to inspections carried
out in any establishment subject to licensing under any provision of this
chapter. (‘83 Code, § 111.12)
     (B)   Certifications shall be maintained as required by the Wayne County
Health Department or the State of Michigan. (‘83 Code, § 111.06)
   (C)   Samples of food, drink, and other substances may be taken and examined
by the Health Officer as often as may be necessary for the detection of
unwholesomeness or adulteration. The Health Officer may condemn and forbid the
sale of, or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food or drink which is
unwholesome or adulterated. (‘83 Code, § 111.03)
   (D)   If, on inspection, the Health Officer finds any violation of the
requirements of this chapter, he shall issue an order to the licensee or person
in charge of the restaurant directing the correction of the violation within a
reasonable time as he shall deem proper. (‘83 Code, § 111.07)
   (E)   If the Health Officer finds a continuation of the violation upon a
second inspection after a reasonable time, he shall suspend the license of the
restaurant until the violations have been corrected.
(‘83 Code, § 111.08)
   (F)   If the Health Officer finds unsanitary conditions in any restaurant
such that it would be immediately dangerous to the health of the general
public, he may immediately suspend the license of and close the restaurant
until the unsanitary conditions are corrected, following which he shall give a
written notice in a reasonable time to the licensee or the responsible
representative in charge stating his reasons for closing the restaurant.
Continued operation after receipt of a written notice shall constitute a
violation of this code. License suspensions shall be subject to the provisions
of Chapter 110 of this code. (‘83 Code, § 111.09) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.005 DISEASE CONTROL.
   No person who is affected with any disease in a communicable form or is a
carrier of a disease shall work in any restaurant, and no restaurant shall
employ any person suspected of being affected with any disease in a
communicable form or of being a carrier of a disease. If the restaurant manager
suspects that any employee has contracted any disease in a communicable form,
or has become a carrier of a disease, he shall notify the Health Officer
immediately. A placard containing this section shall be posted in all toilet
rooms.
(‘83 Code, § 111.10)
§ 111.006 SUSPECTED INFECTION; PROCEDURE.
   When suspicion arises as to the possibility of transmission of infection
from any restaurant employee, the Health Officer is authorized to require any
or all of the following measures.
   (A)   The immediate exclusion of the employee from all restaurants.
   (B)   The immediate closing of the restaurant concerned until no further
danger of disease outbreak exists, in the opinion of the Health Officer.
   (C)   Adequate medical examinations of the employee and of his associates,
with such laboratory examinations as may be indicated.
(‘83 Code, § 111.11) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.007 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   The Health Officer may formulate and promulgate such reasonable rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, as he may
deem necessary to govern the inspection and operation of food establishments
within the city, and no person shall disobey any such rule or regulation.
(‘83 Code, § 111.13)
§ 111.008 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Health Officer shall have the authority and duty to enforce this
chapter.
(‘83 Code, § 111.05)
LATE-NIGHT BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 111.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LATE-NIGHT BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. A late-night retail establishment, a
late-night gasoline station, or a late-night food service, as defined in this
section, and having less than five employees on the premises at any time
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   LATE-NIGHT RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any person, partnership, corporation, or
other entity which:
      (1)   Derives 50% or more of its gross income from the sale of goods,
merchandise, or other articles of value.
      (2)   Sells goods, merchandise, or other articles of value in their
original containers any time between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   LATE-NIGHT GASOLINE STATION. Any person, partnership, corporation, or other
entity who sells gasoline or other petroleum fuel to the public any time
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   LATE-NIGHT FOOD SERVICE. Any person, partnership, corporation, or other
entity, which maintains, operates, or owns a place where food, beverage, and/or
desserts are served to the public from a counter or a drive-in window in
disposable containers or wrappers and the food may be consumed inside the
building, or carried out for consumption off the premises between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(‘83 Code, § 111.15) (Ord. 89-003, passed 5-15-89)
 § 111.021 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation shall operate a
late-night business establishment without having obtained a license therefor,
in accordance with Chapter 110 and paying the license fee as prescribed
therein.
(‘83 Code, § 111.16) (Ord. 89-003, passed 5-15-89) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.022 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL; LOITERING.
   No patron or other person on the premises of a late-night business
establishment, whether in or out of an automobile, shall drink any intoxicating
liquor, or have in his possession any open bottle, can, or other receptacle
containing alcoholic liquor. It shall be unlawful for any number of persons to
congregate for any time whatsoever at any location on the premises of a late-
night business establishment other than in the business building, or in a
legally parked motor vehicle. Any person so congregating shall be deemed guilty
of loitering. No person shall drive a motor vehicle onto the premises of a
business and then from the premises without parking the motor vehicle and
seeking service, unless there is not parking space available on the premises.
(‘83 Code, § 111.20) (Ord. 89-003, passed 5-15-89) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.023 POSTING REQUIRED.
   All late night business establishments shall post, in conspicuous locations,
including the parking lot, signs prohibiting loitering (gathering outside
vehicles), alcoholic beverages, loud noises (racing motors, music, and the
like), disorderly conduct, and cruising, and that violators will be prosecuted.
(‘83 Code, § 111.21) (Ord. 89-003, passed 5-15-89) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.024 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES AND CONDUCT.
   (A)   (1)   In addition to the applicable regulations of §§
111.001 through
111.008 regarding eating and drinking establishments, and any other applicable
regulations, it shall be the duty of the licensee of a late-night business
establishment to maintain quiet and good order upon the premises thereof, and
the licensee shall not permit disorderly or immoral conduct or loitering. The
licensee of a late-night business establishment shall not cause or permit to be
caused any noise or other nuisance on the premises whereby the quiet and good
order of the premises or of the neighborhood is disturbed. The City Council
shall have the authority to revoke or suspend a license issued hereunder, or to
refuse to renew a license when it finds that the following apply.
         (a)   That the licensee is operating in violation of this chapter or
any other governing law, ordinance, or regulation.
         (b)   That the licensee is operating so as to constitute a nuisance,
by reason of noise, disorderly conduct, or immoral activity on the premises.
      (2)   Prior to revoking or suspending a license, or refusing to renew a
license, a hearing shall be held by the Council at which the licensee shall
have an opportunity to show cause why his license should not be revoked or
suspended, or why his license should be renewed, as the case may be.
(‘83 Code, § 111.17)
   (B)   No owner or operator of any late-night business establishment shall
operate or permit to be operated any loudspeakers, or make or permit to be made
any other loud noise or permit any show or exhibit on the premises occupied by
the establishment; however, the owner or operator of the business may use a
public address system solely for the purpose of giving instructions to
employees on the premises, provided that the instructions so given shall not be
loud enough to cause any noise or disturbance to persons not on the premises of
the establishment. (‘83 Code, § 111.18)
    (C)   No patron of a late-night business establishment while parking on or
adjacent to the premises thereof, or any other person while on the premises of
the business, shall race the motor of any car, suddenly start or stop any car,
or make or cause to be made any other loud or unseemly noise. It shall also be
unlawful for any patron or other person parked on the premises of any business
to blow or cause to be blown any automobile horn or motorcycle horn at any time
while so parked. (‘83 Code, § 111.19)
(Ord. 89-003, passed 5-15-89) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
BAKERIES AND BULK FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 111.035 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BAKERY. An establishment wherein bread and cakes and/or pastries are
prepared and baked and/or sold at wholesale or retail.
   BULK FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment where food in bulk or packaged in
metal, pasteboard, glass, or plastic containers is held, stored, or offered for
sale. The following establishments are illustrative of the meaning of the term
bulk food establishment, but this listing shall not be deemed exclusive, nor by
way of limitation: grocery stores, dairy stores, confectioneries, fruit or
vegetable markets, and establishments selling groceries, confectioneries,
fruits, or vegetables at wholesale. Establishments selling food and licensed
under other provisions of this code such as meat markets, fish markets, or
otherwise shall not be subject to the terms of this subchapter by reason of
engaging in the business otherwise licensed. Such establishments shall,
however, be subject to this chapter and additionally licensed hereunder when
there is conducted on the premises an additional business of selling groceries,
confections, fruit, or vegetables. Persons selling at retail securely wrapped
gum and candy only, and persons maintaining food and drink vending machines
only, on the premises, shall not be subject to the terms of this chapter.
   DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH. The Wayne County Department of Health.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Wayne County Health Officer or his authorized
representative.
(‘83 Code, § 111.25)
§ 111.036 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate or maintain a bakery or bulk food
establishment in the city without first having obtained a license therefor in
accordance with Chapter 110 of this code.
   (B)   No license shall be issued except upon the certification of the Health
Officer. Licenses shall be subject to suspension by the Health Officer as
provided in
§ 111.004(E) and (F) of this chapter. License fees shall be as specified in
Chapter 110.
(‘83 Code, § 111.26) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.037 LITERACY REQUIRED.
   Every applicant shall be able to read the English language sufficiently well
to read and understand this chapter; an applicant unable to do so may be
considered not a proper person to be licensed hereunder.
(‘83 Code, § 111.27) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.038 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   Every bakery and bulk food establishment shall comply with all of the
following regulations.
   (A)   Adequate toilet facilities shall be conveniently located within the
establishment to be licensed.
   (B)   Toilet rooms shall not open directly into any food processing room.
Toilet rooms shall be kept in a clean condition, in good repair, and well-
lighted and ventilated. Conveniently located lavatory facilities shall be
provided, with hot and cold running water. Hand-washing signs shall be posted
in each toilet room used by employees.
   (C)   All food stored shall be elevated at least 12 inches above the floor,
unless packaged in water- tight containers, and free of possible sources of
contamination.
   (D)   No food shall be stored below sewer lines.
   (E)   Metal sinks shall be provided for the purpose of cleaning utensils and
tools used in the handling, display, or dispensing of foods.
   (F)   All dairy products and eggs must be kept under refrigeration at all
times at or below a temperature of 50°F.
   (G)   Buildings must be free from contaminating surroundings, and must be
rodent-proof.
   (H)   Living or sleeping rooms in direct connection with any part of a food
establishment shall not be permitted.
   (I)   An adequate supply of running hot water shall be piped to all sinks.
Where a storage tank is used, the minimum capacity shall be 30 gallons.
   (J)   All work tables and benches must be of a tight, smooth material, free
from cracks, and easily cleaned.
(‘83 Code, § 111.28)
§ 111.039 BAKERIES.
   Bakeries shall be subject to the following additional regulations.
   (A)   Metal sinks shall be provided to thoroughly clean mixing bowls, pots,
pans, fixtures, and parts of machinery used in the preparation of baked goods.
Sinks shall be large enough to receive the largest utensil used. Brushes shall
be used to aid in the cleaning processes.
   (B)   Frying kettles shall be placed at least one foot from any wall, and
the wall shall be protected by a smooth, nonporous metal shield to splash
height. A hood shall be provided and suspended at least seven feet above the
floor and extending at least one foot beyond the edge of a frying kettle, and
shall be vented to the outside air and equipped with a fan or blower capable of
removing all smoke, odors, and vapor. No vent over the sidewalk will be
permitted.
   (C)   The term CUSTARD MIX and CUSTARD FILLER as used herein shall refer to
any product, consisting principally of flour, sugar, eggs, and milk, with or
without cornstarch, heated, cooled, and applied to pastry without subsequent
heating. The provisions of this section shall also apply to custard- filled
pastry commonly designated as cream puffs and eclairs which may be heated
subsequent to filling.
      (1)   The entire custard mix to be used in the manufacture of custard-
filled pastry shall be brought to a temperature of not less than 200°F,
maintained at not less than that temperature for a period of not less than ten
minutes, and within one hour thereafter placed in a refrigerating temperature
of not over 50°F and kept at or below that temperature until applied to the
pastry.
      (2)   No custard-filled pastry shall be sold either wholesale or retail
or transported for retail delivery unless it shall bear prominently displayed
on the outside thereof in legible letters the name of the manufacturing baker,
the day of manufacture, and the statement, “Refrigerate.”
      (3)   No custard-filled pastry shall be kept, displayed, or offered for
sale in or from any bakery, store, place or vehicle unless it shall have been
refrigerated at a temperature not over 50°F from the time of manufacture until
the time of delivery to the consumer.
   (D)   Only wholesome ingredients shall be used in the preparation of baked
goods.
   (E)   No baked goods shall be exposed to dust, dirt, or other contamination.
(‘83 Code, § 111.29) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.040 BULK FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.
   In addition to regulations set forth in
§ 111.038, bulk food establishments shall be subject to the following
additional regulations.
   (A)   Metal sinks shall be provided for the purpose of cleaning utensils and
tools used in the handling, display, or dispensing of foods.
   (B)   All dairy products and eggs must be kept under refrigeration at all
times at a temperature of 50°F or below.
   (C)   Raw fruit and raw vegetable displays shall be elevated at least 12
inches above the floor. Sidewalk displays shall be elevated at least 24 inches.
   (D)   Surplus stocks of bulk foods shall be stored in a special room
provided for that purpose, and if not in waterproof containers shall be
elevated at least 12 inches above the floor.
(‘83 Code, § 111.30) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.041 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   The Health Officer may formulate and promulgate such reasonable rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, as he may
deem necessary to govern the inspection and operation of food establishments
within the city; and no person shall disobey any such rule or regulation.
(‘83 Code, § 111.31) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
MEAT MARKETS AND VENDORS
§ 111.055 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH. The Wayne County Department of Health.
   FOOD HANDLER. One engaged in handling or processing food or the utensils
with which it is prepared or served.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Wayne County Health Officer or his duly authorized
representative.
   MEAT FOOD PRODUCTS.  Any article of food or any article which enters into
the composition of food for human consumption which is derived or prepared, in
whole or in part, from any portion of the carcass of any cattle, sheep, swine,
goat, fowl, or any other edible meat, except such articles as organotherapeutic
substances, meat juice, meat extract, and the like, which are for medicinal
purposes and are advertised only to the medical profession.
   MEAT VENDOR. One who purchases meat or meat food products from a farm, meat
food products establishment, or other source and sells, offers for sale, or has
in his possession with intent to sell the products for human consumption, when
activity is conducted other than at a licensed wholesale or retail meat market.
   WHOLESALE OR RETAIL MEAT MARKET. Every place where meat or meat food
products are sold at wholesale or retail for human consumption, except
establishments where all meats or meat food products purchased are prepacked in
hermetically sealed glass or metal containers.
(‘83 Code, § 111.35)
§ 111.056 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the delivery or distribution of meat or meat food
products, or offer the same for sale, without first having obtained a license
from the Clerk in accordance with Chapter 110 of this code. No license shall be
issued except upon certification of the Health Officer.
(‘83 Code, § 111.36) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.057 UNWHOLESOME MEAT; REMOVAL.
   No person shall sell, or offer or expose for sale, any meat or meat food
products which are diseased, decayed, unwholesome, or for any cause unfit for
human food. Upon the discovery of any meat or meat food products exposed or
held for sale within the city which are diseased, decayed, unwholesome, or for
any cause unfit for human food, the Department of Health shall give the person
in charge thereof, notice to at once remove it from display, storage, or sale,
or to destroy it as directed by the sanitarians. No person shall fail to obey
any such order forthwith. Meat or meat food products found in any premises
shall be prima facie evidence of its being offered for sale.
(‘83 Code, § 111.37) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.058 SANITARY TRANSPORTATION REQUIRED.
   No person shall transport through any thoroughfare in the city any meat or
meat food products unless it is so covered as to be protected from dust, dirt,
insects, or any other substances that will render it unclean, unwholesome, or
detrimental to health. Every container and every vehicle shall be maintained in
a sanitary condition at all times.
(‘83 Code, § 111.38) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.059 ADULTERANTS; DISEASES.
   No person shall sell or deliver or have in his possession for sale in the
city any meat or meat food products which contain any unhealthful ingredient,
constituent, or substance; or which has been transported, handled, or stored in
an unclean manner; or which was produced from any animal which was diseased;
nor shall any meat food product be sold or delivered in the city which is
procured from any farm, slaughter house, or meat food products manufacturing
establishment where any contagious, infectious, or communicable disease exists.
(‘83 Code, § 111.39) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.060 MEAT VENDORS.
   Meat vendors shall be subject to the following requirements.
   (A)   All meat and meat food product supplies must be obtained from firms
licensed or approved by the Department of Health. Approval shall be granted
where the source is licensed or approved by an inspecting authority with equal
requirements enforced to the satisfaction of the Department of Health.
   (B)   The name of the licensee must be legibly and conspicuously painted or
permanently affixed in letters at least three inches high on each outer side of
all vehicles.
   (C)   The Department of Health shall be notified immediately of any change
of address of a licensee, or any change in the place where food is stored.
   (D)   Retail vending of meats from a vehicle is prohibited.
   (E)   Vehicles must be constructed so as to protect all meat and meat food
products from dirt, dust, insects, or any substance which is unwholesome or
detrimental to public health.
   (F)   All vehicles and all containers therein must be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition at all times.
   (G)   From May 1 to October 1, all vehicles distributing fresh meats must be
equipped with refrigeration, when on routes that cannot be covered in less than
three hours. Refrigeration shall be capable of maintaining a temperature of
50°F or below.
   (H)   Fresh meats and meat food products must not be left in any vehicle
overnight unless the vehicle is provided with refrigeration.
   (I)   Meat and meat food products must not be stored in private homes, or in
the basement of homes, or in places other than a licensed establishment.
   (J)   All vendors must wear clean, washable clothing.
(‘83 Code, § 111.40) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.061 MEAT MARKETS.
   Wholesale and retail meat markets shall be subject to the following
requirements.
   (A)   All wholesale and retail meat markets in the city shall have a
separate sink to which is piped hot and cold water under pressure for the
purpose of cleansing tools and utensils. Hot water shall be available at a
temperature not less than 170°F. Where a storage tank is used, it shall be of a
capacity of not less than 30 gallons.
   (B)   Tools and utensils shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition at all times.
   (C)   Adequate refrigeration to hold eggs, dairy products, meat, and
perishable meat food products at a temperature of 50°F or below shall be
provided. The drain for ice boxes shall be discharged into an open waste drain
sink.
   (D)   No food of any kind, unless securely wrapped, shall be exposed to
dust, dirt, or other contamination; however, this regulation does not apply to
the display of fresh fruits and vegetables which may be cooked or washed before
eating.
   (E)   All cartons, sacks, and boxes containing foods shall be stored in such
manner as to prevent contamination, and shall be elevated at least 12 inches
above the floor.
   (F)   An adequate supply of potable water under pressure from a source
approved by the Department of Health shall be provided.
   (G)   All plumbing shall be done in accordance with the applicable
provisions of Title XV of this Code. No exposed overhead sewer pipe will be
permitted in a room where food is stored, processed, or offered for sale.
   (H)   Connection shall be made to the city sanitary sewerage system.
   (I)   Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of in a manner which will not
create a nuisance. Water- tight, properly covered containers must be provided.
   (J)   No living quarters shall be in direct connection with any food
handling establishment.
   (K)   Rubbish or unused equipment shall not be stored in any part of the
premises.
   (L)   All gas ovens, ranges, and water heaters must be equipped with fume
pipes extended out of the building.
   (M) Basement floors shall be hard, smooth-finish cement with three-inch
coverbase throughout, properly pitched to drains to facilitate flushing.
   (N)   Adequate toilet facilities shall be maintained for both men and women
employees. Each toilet room must be provided with a flush toilet, handwash
basin, soap, and individual sanitary towels.
(‘83 Code, § 111.41) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
SOFT DRINKS
§ 111.075 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR SALE.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall conduct or maintain any room, stand,
booth, place, or building where beverages of any kind commonly called “soft
drinks” are dispensed or sold within the limits of the city without first
having obtained a license therefor from the City Clerk.
(‘83 Code, § 111.45) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.076 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE.
   (A)   Every person, firm, or corporation desiring to engage in the business
of conducting or maintaining any room, stand, booth, place, or building where
beverages of any kind commonly called “soft drinks” are dispensed or sold,
shall make application to the City Clerk for a license for that purpose. The
application shall state whether the applicant is a citizen of the United
States, the name under which the room, stand, booth, place, building, or
business shall be operated, the owner of the premises where the business is to
be conducted, the name of the holder of the lease of the premises if they are
held under lease, and whether or not the applicant has been convicted
theretofore of violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter. (‘83
Code, § 111.46)
   (B)   (1)   Every person, firm, or corporation to whom a license shall be
granted under
§ 111.075 shall pay to the city treasury a fee in accordance with the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule in Chapter 12 of this Code.
      (2)   The license fee shall be submitted with the application; however,
any person, firm, or corporation having been operating one year or more under
the provisions of this subchapter shall not be required to file an application
as provided in this subchapter, but may renew their license annually by paying
the required license fee. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall not be transferable without the approval of the City Clerk, and any
license so granted may be revoked and canceled at the pleasure of the City
Clerk.
(‘83 Code, § 111.47) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.077 LICENSE TO BE POSTED.
   Every person, firm, or corporation licensed to sell under this subchapter
shall procure from the City Clerk a copy of the license, and post it in a
conspicuous place in his, her, or their place of business.
(‘83 Code, § 111.48) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 111.078 DISORDERLY CONDUCT PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm, or corporation licensed under this subchapter shall permit
any disorderly conduct or the use of any immoral, profane, or indecent language
in any place of business; or shall permit the sale, giving away, or delivery
therein of any so-called home-brew, or any vinous, malt, brew, fermented,
spiritous, or intoxicating liquors, or any other beverage containing more than
0.5% of alcohol; or shall have connected with any room, stand, booth, building,
or place of business by adjoining rooms, side entrance, or otherwise any bar,
saloon, room, or place where such beverages are sold or given away; or shall
permit the room, stand, booth, building, or place of business to become a place
of resort for disorderly persons.
(‘83 Code, § 111.49)
MOBILE FOOD VENDING
§ 111.080 INTENT.
   In the interest of permitting mobile food vendors in the city and also to
provide a framework under which such businesses operate, this chapter is
established.
(Ord. 21-009, passed 8-9-21)
§ 111.081 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and terms shall be defined for the purposes of this
chapter. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
   CITY APPROVED COMMUNITY EVENT. An event that is approved or sponsored by the
city through a Council resolution, special event permit, rental agreement or
affiliation. The event would be community based hosted by a non-profit
organization and proposed to attract more than a small gathering of related
people.
     MOBILE FOOD VENDING. Vending, serving, or offering for sale food or
beverages from a mobile food vending unit, along with ancillary sales of
branded items consistent with the food or mobile food vendor, such as a tee
shirt that bears the name of the company, restaurant or organization engaged in
mobile food vending.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDING UNIT. A vehicle or trailer with a self-contained
kitchen, equipped to create, prepare or package food for the purpose of
vending, service or offering for sale that is licensed to operate on a highway.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. Any individual, company, restaurant or organization
operating a mobile food vending unit.
   OPERATES. Engaging in activities associated with the conduct of business,
including setup and takedown and/or hours of operation and locations where the
mobile food vending units are allowed to be open for business.
(Ord. 21-009, passed 8-9-21)
§ 111.082 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No mobile food vendor shall operate a mobile food vending unit without
a permit issued by the city authorizing such operation. The City Clerk shall
prescribe the form of available permits and the application for such permits.
The City Council shall, by resolution, establish appropriate fees for the
available permit.
   (B)   All permits shall be prominently displayed on the mobile food vending
unit. No vending through a mobile food vending unit of food or other human
consumables shall be permitted unless it meets the definition of mobile food
vending as defined by this chapter.
   (C)   No permit shall be required for a mobile food vending unit which is
operated in conjunction with any city approved community event but separate
approval may be required from the hosting organization. The requirements of §
111.086 shall still apply.
(Ord. 21-009, passed 8-9-21; Am. Ord. 25-008, passed 10-20-25)
§ 111.083 DURATION OF PERMIT.
   Permits issued by the City Clerk shall be valid for one year from the date
of issuance for the mobile food vending unit identified on the permit. Any
permit issued under this chapter is not transferable.
(Ord. 21-009, passed 8-9-21; Am. Ord. 25-008, passed 10-20-25)
§ 111.084 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Any mobile food vendor desiring to engage in mobile food vending in
the city shall submit a completed application to the City Clerk for a permit
under this chapter. The submitted application must include all required
information including:
      (1)   The name of the business/mobile food vendor; the business/mobile
food vendor registered business address, including county of location;
      (2)   The name of the business/mobile food vendor owner; the owner's
address;
      (3)   A copy of applicant's ID;
      (4)   A copy of the food service license issued by the State of Michigan,
Michigan Department of Agriculture and Rural Development, or successor agency;
      (5)   Proof of an insurance policy in an amount not less than $100,000
for property damage and injuries, including injury resulting in death caused by
the operation of the mobile food vending unit;
      (6)   A copy of vehicle registration and vehicle insurance; and
      (7)   In addition to the application requirements under this division,
each applicant must successfully pass an annual fire inspection to ensure they
are in compliance with all relevant requirements of city Fire Code.
   (B)   The applicant shall truthfully state, in full, all information
requested on the application for a permit issued by the City Clerk's Office.
Additionally, the application shall provide all documentation, such as proof of
insurance, as required by the chapter or by resolution of the City Council. The
application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee as identified in the
city Fee Schedule and adopted by City Council.
   (C)   Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Clerk shall forward
a copy of the application to the Fire Marshall to schedule an inspection of the
mobile food vending unit for compliance with the Fire Prevention Code.
   (D)   Filing an application for a food truck license shall constitute
consent to inspection by the Fire Department for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with the Fire Prevention Code.
(Ord. 21-009, passed 8-9-21; Am. Ord. 25-008, passed 10-20-25)
§ 111.085 FEES.
   An annual permit fee, in an amount established by adoption of the Fee
Schedule by the City Council, shall be required prior to the issuance of a
mobile food vending permit.
   (B)   An annual fire inspection fee in an amount as established by adoption
of the Fee Schedule by the City Council shall be required to be paid following
the completion of an annual fire inspection by Fire Marshall and prior to
issuance of a mobile food vending permit.
   (C)   The permit fee shall be non-refundable.
(Ord. 21-009, passed 8-9-21; Am. Ord. 25-008, passed 10-20-25)
§ 111.086 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Mobile food vending units may operate on private property on parcels
zoned C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, PD, CBD, VP, PR, and HS if in compliance with the
applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. Sites in permitted district
shall be permitted to have mobile food vending unit operating on site not more
than 12 total days either consecutively or throughout the year in a calendar
year.
   (B)   Mobile food vendors shall not operate on city-owned property or on
public streets or right-of-ways unless approval is obtained for street closure
and except as such times and in such locations permitted by the City Council.
When mobile food vendors are permitted to operate on public streets, no food
service shall be allowed on the driving lane side of the mobile food vending
unit.
   (C)   No food shall be sold, prepared or displayed outside of the mobile
food vending unit while on the location noted on the permit.
   (D)   Mobile food vendors shall provide appropriate waste and recycling
receptacles at the site of the unit and remove all litter, debris and other
wastes attributable to the mobile food vendor or customers on a daily basis.
Spills of food or food by-products shall be cleaned up by the vendor, and no
dumping of gray water on the ground or streets.
   (E)   Mobile food vendors shall not use any flashing, blinking or strobe
lights, or similar effects to draw attention to the mobile food vending unit:
all exterior lights over 60 watts shall contain opaque hood shields to direct
the illumination downward.
   (F)   Mobile food vendors shall not use loud music, amplification devices,
video/LED screens or any other audible methods to gain attention which causes a
disruption or safety hazard as determined by the city.
   (G)   There shall be no signage used by mobile food vendors except for what
is on the mobile vending unit itself and one 2 x 3 foot weighted A-frame sign
not placed in the right-of-way.
   (H)   When operating the mobile food vendor shall not place personal
property outside of the unit including but not limited to dining furniture,
fixtures and equipment.
   (I)   No mobile food vendor or unit shall utilize any electricity or power
without the prior written authorization of the power customer; no power cable
shall or similar device shall be extended across any street, sidewalk or
parking lot except in a safe manner as approved by the Building Official.
   (J)   No mobile food vendor or unit shall utilize any power from utility
poles or directly from the power company.
   (K)   Mobile food vendors shall comply with all applicable city, county and
state laws, regulations and ordinances, including those regulating noise,
signage and loitering.
   (L)   Mobile food vendors must submit written permission from the property
owner to the City Clerk's office before beginning operations at a site. Upon
approval, the City Clerk's office shall issue a license identifying the dates
the mobile food vendor is allowed to operate. This license must be clearly
displayed on the mobile food unit to allow the city to verify compliance.
   (M)   Only one mobile food vendor shall operate per zoning lot at any one
time unless permitted by the city.
   (N)   The location of the mobile food vendor on the lot shall not create any
unsafe access to the business or vendor. No mobile food vendor shall conduct
business in such a way as would increase traffic congestion or delay,
constitute a hazard to life or property, interfere with an abutting property
owner, or obstruct access to emergency vehicles.
   (O)   Mobile food vendors must comply with the site frequency limit
established in division (A) above. This pertains to all lots or parcels with
shared usage such as strip malls. Site frequency is exempt for grand opening
events at new businesses. The site frequency limit shall apply to 12 days total
per calendar year, not 12 days per mobile food vendor.
   (P)   Mobile food vendors shall operate between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. The vehicle must leave the lot and no overnight parking of the
vehicle is permitted.
   (Q)   Mobile food vendors shall include in the application a copy of the
local health department permit for safe food handling and any other permit
provided by the health department and the State of Michigan. Mobile food
vendors must provide to the city a EIN tax number from the state.
   (R)   Mobile food vendors shall include a sketch of the proposed location of
the unit on the property.
   (S)   Mobile food vendors shall not represent the granting of a permit under
this chapter as an endorsement of the city.
   (T)   Prior to approval, the property owner or lessee must be in compliance
with the city’s code of ordinances including outstanding ordinance enforcement
actions such as pavement condition, overgrown grass and weeds, open storage,
etc., any open permits, unpaid taxes or water bills.
   (U)   Installation of a grease interceptor, or other alternative treatment
technology, is required, and is subject to all applicable requirements under
the law, including but not limited to the Michigan Plumbing Code and applicable
plumbing and sanitation requirements found in the city's code of ordinances.
Disposal of waste grease into city storm or sanitary sewer is prohibited per §
51.017.
   (V)   All generators or auxiliary power unites used in connection with a
licensed mobile food vending unit shall be operated and maintained at a level
that does not exceed 60 decibels (dBA), as measured at or beyond the nearest
residential property line.
   (W)   Mobile food vendors shall not be permitted to operate within 100 feet
of the front door of a brick and mortar restaurant establishment.
(Ord. 21-009, passed 8-9-21; Am. Ord. 25-008, passed 10-20-25)
§ 111.087 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The City Clerk shall revoke the permit of any mobile food vendor engaged in
mobile food vending who ceases to meet any requirement of this chapter or
violates federal, state, county or local law, ordinance or regulation; makes a
false statement on the permit application; or conducts activity in a manner
that is adverse to the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any
revocation shall have immediate effect and remain in effect unless and until
reversed by the City Clerk.
(Ord. 21-009, passed 8-9-21)
§ 111.088 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who violates this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal
civil infraction subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day that a
violation continues shall be a separate violation.
(Ord. 21-009, passed 8-9-21)
CHAPTER 112: TEMPORARY BUSINESSES AND SALES
Section
Transient Merchants
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   License required
   
112.03   Application for license
   
112.04   Investigation; issuance
   
112.05   License fees
   
112.06   License bond
   
112.07   Established businesses
   
112.08   Posting of license
   
112.09   Transfer
   
112.10   Revocation of license
Peddlers
   
112.20   Peddler defined
   
112.21   License required
   
112.22   Regulation of peddlers
   
112.23   Interference with traffic prohibited
   
112.24   Exemptions
   
112.25   Selling from private property prohibited; exception
Solicitors
   
112.35   Solicitor defined
   
112.36   License required
   
112.37   License application; fees
   
112.38   Exemptions
   
112.39   Hours of solicitation
Handbill Solicitation
   
112.50   Purpose
   
112.51   Definitions
   
112.52   Prohibited distribution
   
112.53   Exemptions
   
112.54   Certain existing ordinances unaffected
Garage Sales
   
112.60   Purpose
   
112.61   Definition
   
112.62   Permit required; exception
   
112.63   Conditions
   
112.64   Signs
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, a TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT,
or ITINERANT VENDOR is any person, firm, or corporation, whether an owner,
agent, consignee, or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who
engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, and
merchandise within the city, and who in furtherance of that purpose, hires,
leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, public
room in hotels, lodging house, apartment, shops, or any street, alley, or other
place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, and
merchandise, either privately or at public auction. This definition shall not
be construed to include any person, firm, or corporation who, while occupying a
temporary location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for the
purpose of securing orders for future delivery. The person, firm, or
corporation so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions
of this chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local
dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient
business in connection with, as part of, or in the name of any local dealer,
trader, merchant, or auctioneer.
(‘83 Code, § 112.01)
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No transient merchant, itinerant merchant, or itinerant vendor shall engage
in business within the city without obtaining a license therefor in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(‘83 Code, § 112.02) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 112.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   An applicant for a license under this subchapter, whether a person, firm, or
corporation, shall file a written sworn application or form furnished by the
City Clerk, signed by the applicant if an individual, by all partners if a
partnership, and by the president if a corporation. The application shall be
filed with the City Clerk, and shall provide the following information.
   (A)   The full name, permanent residence, and local address, if other than
the foregoing, of the applicant.
   (B)   The name of the firm or corporation represented, if any, together with
the address of the central or district office of the firm or corporation.
   (C)   The address or location of the place within the city at which the
applicant proposes to engage in business.
   (D)   A statement of the nature, character, and quality of the goods, wares,
inventory, or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by applicant in the
city, and the invoice value of the goods, as well as the book value of any
furniture, fixtures, machines, or equipment used in connection with the
business.
   (E)   The length of time for which the license is desired.
   (F)   Whether the applicant has ever held a transient merchant's license
within the city, or has applied for a license previous to the present
application, together with the years in which any previous licenses were held
or applications were made.
   (G)   Any other reasonable information as to the identity or character of
the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's
business or the method or plan of doing business as the City Clerk may deem
proper to fulfill the purpose of this chapter in the protection of public
goods.
   (H)   The affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the statements
contained in the application, signed by the applicant.
(‘83 Code, § 112.03) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 112.04 INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, the City Clerk shall notify the Chief
of Police, who shall cause an investigation of the applicant's business
responsibility or moral character to be made as the Chief of Police deems
necessary to the protection of the public good. If, as a result of the
investigation, the applicant's character and business responsibility are found
to be unsatisfactory, the application shall be denied. If, as a result of the
investigation, the character and business reputation appear to be satisfactory,
the Chief of Police shall so certify in writing, and a license shall be issued
by the City Clerk upon approval of the City Council.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall keep a full record in his office of all licenses
issued. The record shall contain the number of the license, the date that it
was issued, the nature of the business authorized to be carried on, the amount
of the license fee paid, the expiration date of the license, the place where
the business may be carried on under the license, and the name or names of the
person or persons authorized to carry on the business.
(‘83 Code, § 112.04)
§ 112.05 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   A license fee charged in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule in Chapter 12 of this Code for various classifications of business
shall be collected by the City Clerk before issuing an initial merchant's
license. The fees shall be determined according to the principal business of
the establishment.
   (B)   The above license fees shall be in addition to any annual license fees
now required by law or ordinance and not in lieu thereof.
(‘83 Code, § 112.05) (Ord. 79-017, passed 9-4-79)
Cross-reference:
   License fees, see
Ch. 110
§ 112.06 LICENSE BOND.
   (A)   Before any license shall be issued under
§ 112.02, each applicant shall deposit with the City Treasurer a cash bond of
not less than $1,000 and in a sum sufficient to equal the estimated city,
county, school, and state tax, if any, which would be assessed against his
personal property in the event he remains in business in the city a sufficient
length of time to have the property assessed. The applicant shall secure a
statement from the City Assessor indicating the estimated total amount of any
assessment, and shall present this statement to the City Treasurer with the
amount of money required as a result of the statement. The applicant shall
furnish the City Assessor with any true and accurate information as shall
enable him to make an accurate estimate.
   (B)   In the event that the personal property used or owned in the business
by any transient merchant does, in fact, become subject to assessment and is
duly assessed by the City Assessor, and the taxes paid thereon for a period of
one year, then the amount of the bond shall be refunded forthwith or credited
upon the payment of any taxes, in the discretion of the licensee.
   (C)   In the event that any transient merchant fails to continue in business
for a sufficient length of time so that any personal property shall become
subject to assessment and taxes paid thereon for a period of one year, then the
cash bond so deposited shall become the property of the city and shall be
deposited in the general fund.
(‘83 Code, § 112.06) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 112.07 ESTABLISHED BUSINESSES.
   Merchants who on September 14, 1970, were already lawfully engaged in
business, shall not be required to procure an initial merchant's license as
provided in this chapter, it being the intent of this chapter to apply only to
the merchants starting in business after that date.
(‘83 Code, § 112.07)
§ 112.08 POSTING OF LICENSE.
   The license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be posted
conspicuously in the place of business named therein. In the event that the
person applying for a license desires to do business in more than one place
within the city, separate licenses may be issued for each place of business.
(‘83 Code, § 112.08) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
  § 112.09 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No license shall be transferred without written consent from the Mayor and
Council, as evidenced by an endorsement on the face of the license by the City
Clerk, showing to whom the license is transferred and the date of the transfer.
(‘83 Code, § 112.09) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 112.10 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The permits and licenses issued pursuant to this subchapter may be
revoked by the Mayor and Council of the city, after notice and hearing, for any
of the following causes.
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for license.
      (2)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection
with the selling of goods, wares, or merchandise.
      (3)   Any violation of this subchapter.
      (4)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude.
      (5)   Conducting the business licensed under this subchapter in an
unlawful manner, or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, or
to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
   (B)   Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time
and place of the hearing. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
licensee, at his last known address, at least five days prior to the date set
for the hearing.
(‘83 Code, § 112.10)
PEDDLERS
§ 112.20 PEDDLER DEFINED.
   The word PEDDLER, as used in this subchapter shall include any person
traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or other conveyance, from place
to place, from house to house, or from street to street; carrying, conveying,
or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits,
garden truck, farm products, or provisions; offering and exposing the same for
sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or without
traveling from place to place, selling or offering the same for sale from a
wagon, automotive vehicle, or other vehicle or conveyance. Any person who
solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as
part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this subchapter shall be
deemed a peddler. The word PEDDLER shall include the words STREET VENDOR and
FOOD TRUCK.
(‘83 Code, § 112.15) (Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21)
§ 112.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of peddling without obtaining a
license therefor. No license shall be granted except upon certification of the
Chief of Police.
(‘83 Code, § 112.16) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 112.22 REGULATION OF PEDDLERS.
   (A)   No person who operates as a street vendor shall create any undue noise
or disturbance by any instrument, horn, bell, radio, electrical appliance, or
noise-making device in connection with the solicitation of business, and in no
event shall any such instrument be employed for the solicitation of business on
the streets of the city before the hour of 8:00 a.m., or after the hour of 8:00
p.m.
   (B)   No street vendor shall sell or deal in unclean, unripe, or unwholesome
food which might be deleterious to health, and no licensee shall stop in any
one place longer than is necessary to make a sale, nor in any event shall stop
for the purpose of selling or offering to sell any food products within the
distance of 500 feet from any city park or any public, private, or parochial
school building, or the lands on which school buildings are located in the city
on any days during which the school is in session.
   (C)   No street vendor shall operate or conduct his business in any public
park, public parking lot, or recreational area in the city.
   (D)   No licensee operating as a street vendor shall transact any business
with any child, adult, or any person whatsoever while the person is standing on
the street side of any curb; and where there is no curb, no business shall be
transacted in the traveled portion of the public highway or five feet on either
side thereof.
(‘83 Code, § 112.17) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 112.23 INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.
   No peddler shall engage in peddling on any street, alley, or public place
after having been requested to desist by any police officer of the city because
of congested or dangerous traffic conditions.
(‘83 Code, § 112.18) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 112.24 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of §§
112.20 through
112.23, but shall be subject to the other provisions hereof.
   (A)   Farmers or truck gardeners selling or offering for sale any products
grown, raised, or produced by them, the sale of which is not otherwise
prohibited or regulated.
   (B)   Any person under 18 years of age, when engaged in peddling on foot in
the neighborhood of his residence under the direct supervision of any school or
recognized charitable or religious organization.
(‘83 Code, § 112.19)
§ 112.25 SELLING FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   No person shall vend, sell, offer for sale, or peddle any vegetables, fruit,
farm products, flowers, plants, or any goods, wares, and merchandise whatsoever
from trucks, motor vehicles, or portable stands parked or placed on private
property adjacent to any public street, highway, or alley; however, the
provisions of this section shall not apply to any person who sells or offers
for sale on his own property vegetables, fruit, produce, or other farm-grown
products grown or produced on that property.
(‘83 Code, § 112.20) (Ord. 72-010, passed 6-19-72) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
SOLICITORS
§ 112.35 SOLICITOR DEFINED.
   The word SOLICITOR as used in this subchapter shall include any individual,
whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon,
automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance from place to place,
from house to house, or from street to street; taking or attempting to take
orders for sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, books or magazines, insurance
policies of any kind, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future
delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future; whether
or not the individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject
of the sale, and whether he is collecting advance payments on sales or not.
This definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another
person, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent,
railroad box car, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any
other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and
taking orders for future delivery. The word SOLICITOR shall include the word
CANVASSER.
(‘83 Code, § 112.25)
§ 112.36 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of soliciting within the city without
obtaining a license. No license shall be granted except upon certification of
the Chief of Police.
(‘83 Code, § 112.26) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 112.37 LICENSE APPLICATION; FEES.
   (A)   The license application filed under the provisions of Chapter 110 of
this code shall furnish the following information.
      (1)   The name and a description of the applicant.
      (2)   The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant.
      (3)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold.
      (4)   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship.
      (5)   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
      (6)   The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or
orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where the
goods or products are located at the time the application is filed, and the
proposed method of delivery.
      (7)   A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately
prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two
inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a
clear and distinguishing manner.
      (8)   The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two
reliable property owners of the County of Wayne, State of Michigan, who will
certify as to the applicant's good character and business respectability; or in
lieu of the names of references, any other available evidence as to the good
character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an
investigator to properly evaluate character and business responsibility.
      (9)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature
of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
      (10) A statement by a reputable physician of the city, dated not more
than ten days prior to submission of the application, certifying the applicant
to be free of contagious, infectious, or communicable disease.
(‘83 Code, § 112.27)
   (B)   (1)   The fees for a solicitor's license shall be as specified in
Chapter 110 of this Code. No fee for a solicitor's license shall be so applied
as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case where a
license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to place an
undue burden upon interstate commerce, he may apply to the Mayor for an
adjustment of the fees so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable, or
unfair as to such commerce. The application may be made before, at, or within
six months after payment of the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by
affidavit and supporting testimony, show his method of business and gross
volume or estimated gross volume of business, and any other information as the
Mayor may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of undue
burden on interstate commerce. The Mayor shall then conduct an investigation,
comparing the applicant's business with other businesses of like nature, and
shall make findings of fact from which he shall determine whether the fee fixed
for the solicitor's license is unfair, unreasonable, or discriminatory as to
applicant's business; and he shall fix as the license fee for the applicant an
amount that is fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or if the fee has
already been paid, he shall order a refund of the amount over and above the fee
so fixed.
      (2)   In fixing the fee to be charged, the Mayor shall have the power to
base the fee upon a percentage of gross sales, or any other method which will
assure that the fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses
of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the fee as
prescribed by Chapter 110 of this code. Should the Mayor determine the gross
sales measure of the fee to be the fair basis, he may require the applicant to
submit, either at the time of termination of applicant's business in the city
or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of the gross sales,
and to pay the amount of fee therefor; however, no additional fee during any
one license year shall be required after the licensee shall have paid an amount
equal to the annual license fee as prescribed in Chapter 110 of this Code.
(‘83 Code, § 112.28) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 112.38 EXEMPTIONS.
   Persons under 18 years of age, when engaged in soliciting on foot in the
neighborhood of their residence under the direct supervision of any school or
recognized charitable or religious organization, shall be exempt from the
licensing requirements of §§
112.35 through
112.37, but shall otherwise be subject to the provisions thereof.
(‘83 Code, § 112.29)
§ 112.39 HOURS OF SOLICITATION.
   No person shall engage in the business of soliciting within the city after
dusk.
(‘83 Code,§ 112.30) (Ord. 96-005, passed 5-13-96) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
HANDBILL SOLICITATION
§ 112.50 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the people against the nuisance
of the promiscuous distribution of handbills as herein defined, with the
resulting detriment and danger to public health and safety, the public
interest, convenience, and necessity require the regulation of handbill
solicitation. To that end, the further purposes of this subchapter are
specifically declared to be as follows.
   (A)   To protect local residents against trespassing by solicitors,
canvassers, or handbill distributors upon the private property of local
residents, if they have given reasonable notice that they do not wish to be
solicited by such persons or do not desire to receive handbills or advertising
matter.
   (B)   To protect the people against the health and safety menace and the
expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the
promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and commercial
handbills.
   (C)   To preserve to the people their constitutional right to receive and
disseminate information not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency,
good morals, and public order, by distinguishing between the nuisance created
by the promiscuous distribution of advertising and commercial circulars, and
the right to deliver noncommercial handbills to all who are willing to receive
the same.
(‘83 Code, § 112.35)
§ 112.51 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, sample, device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature as follows.
      (1)   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or
thing.
      (2)   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales.
      (3)   Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of
any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
   NEWSPAPER. Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law,
any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United
States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, any newspaper filed
and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and any
periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four
issues per year, and sold to the public.
   NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL.  Any printed or written matter, sample, device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or
any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or
literature not included in the definitions of COMMERCIAL HANDBILL or NEWSPAPER
with the exception of political and religious literature.
   OBSCENE. Any material that meets all of the following criteria:
      (1)   The average individual, applying contemporary community standards,
would find the material, taken as a whole, lacks serious literacy, artistic,
political, or scientific value.
      (2)   The reasonable person would find the material, taken as a whole,
lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
      (3)   The material depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently
offensive way.
(M.C.L.A. § 752.362)
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building, or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and any
yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or
appurtenant to a dwelling, house, building, or other structure.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, or
other public ways; and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas,
grounds, and buildings.
(‘83 Code, § 112.36)
§ 112.52 PROHIBITED DISTRIBUTION.
   (A)   No person shall deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast any commercial
handbills in or upon any public place within this city; and no person shall
hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place;
however, it shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute,
without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill in any
public place to any person willing to accept the noncommercial handbill. (‘83
Code, § 112.37)
   (B)   No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast
any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any automobile or other
vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the
handing, transmitting, or distributing of any noncommercial handbill to the
owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle who is willing to
accept the same. (‘83 Code, § 112.38)
   (C)   No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast
any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which
are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (‘83 Code, § 112.39)
   (D)   No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast
any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any premises, if requested by
anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises in a
conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words “No
Trespassing,” “No Peddlers or Agents,” “No Advertisement,” or any similar
notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not
desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have
any handbills left upon the premises. However, it shall be the duty of the
owner, landlord, or person in control of any premises remaining vacant for a
period of more than five days to post in a conspicuous position on the premises
a sign as is indicated by this section. The term "vacant" as used herein shall
not be deemed to include temporary absences from the premises by its regular
occupants. (‘83 Code, § 112.40)
   (E)   No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter, or cast
any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which
are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any handbill directly to the
owner, occupant, or any other person then present in or upon the private
premises. However, in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted
as provided in this subchapter, the distributor, unless requested by anyone
upon the premises not to do so, may place or deposit any handbill in or upon
any inhabited private premises, if the handbill is so placed or deposited as to
secure or prevent it from being blown or drifted about the premises or
elsewhere, except that mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal
laws or regulations. (‘83 Code, § 112.41)
   (F)   (1)   No person shall distribute, deposit, scatter, hand out, or
circulate any commercial or noncommercial handbill in any place, under any
circumstances, which does not have printed on the cover, front, or back
thereof, the name and address of the following.
         (a)   The person who printed, wrote, compiled, or manufactured the
handbill.
         (b)   The person who caused the handbill to be distributed.
      (2)   In the case of a fictitious person or club, in addition to the
fictitious name, the true names and addresses of the owners, managers, or
agents of the person sponsoring said handbill shall also appear thereon.
(‘83 Code, § 112.42)
   (G)   No person shall post, hand out, distribute, scatter, or transmit any
sign, or any commercial or noncommercial handbill as follows.
      (1)   Which may reasonably tend to incite riot or other public disorder,
or which advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of
this state by means of any artifice, scheme, or violence, or which urges any
unlawful conduct or encourages or tends to encourage a breach of the public
peace or good order of the community.
      (2)   Which is obscene.
(‘83 Code, § 112.43) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 112.53 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be deemed to apply to the
distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers as defined in
§ 112.51.
(‘83 Code, § 112.44)
§ 112.54 CERTAIN EXISTING ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be deemed to repeal, amend, or
modify any ordinance either prohibiting, regulating, or licensing canvassers,
hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants, or any person using the public streets
or places for any private business or enterprise or for commercial sales, not
covered herein.
(‘83 Code, § 112.45)
GARAGE SALES
§ 112.60 PURPOSE.
   It is the intent of this chapter to regulate the term and frequency of
personal property sales within residential areas so that the environment of
those areas is not disturbed or disrupted. It will also, in conjunction with
Chapter 156, Zoning, prohibit the establishment of businesses in residential
areas. It is not the intent of this chapter to seek control of sales by
individuals selling a few of their household goods or personal property.
(‘83 Code, § 99.01) (Ord. 76-014, passed 12-20-76)
§ 112.61 DEFINITION.
   BASEMENT SALE, GARAGE SALE, RUMMAGE SALE, or YARD SALE, including similar
terms such as ATTIC SALE, FLEA MARKET SALE or LAWN SALE and the like. Any sale
of tangible personal property, whether new, used, secondhand, damaged, or
discarded, not otherwise regulated in the code, advertised by any means whereby
the public at large is or can be aware of the sale.
(‘83 Code, § 99.02) (Ord. 76-014, passed 12-20-76)
§ 112.62 PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, organization, corporation,
partnership, or association of whatever description to conduct, advertise, or
promote any sales of new, used, secondhand, damaged, or discarded property of
any description whatsoever upon any property, public or private, within the
city unless the properly is licensed as provided in Chapters 110 and 113 of the
code or as further permitted herein. (‘83 Code, § 99.03)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant, or lessee of a residence
or charitable institution to conduct, advertise, or promote a garage sale
unless a permit is obtained as follows.
      (1)   A written application shall be filed with the City Clerk on forms
prescribed by the Clerk and shall contain the following information.
         (a)   Name and address of the person, association, or organization
conducting the sale.
         (b)   The location at which the sale is to be conducted.
         (c)   The number of days which the sale is to be conducted within the
limits hereinafter prescribed.
         (d)   A general description of the items proposed to be sold.
         (e)   The date, nature, and location of any past sale conducted by the
applicants.
      (2)   An affidavit signed by the applicant affirming that the items to be
sold are the sole property of the applicant must be filed with the application.
      (3)   The applicant shall pay the required fee to the City Clerk for the
issuance of the sale permit at the time of filing the application.
(‘83 Code, § 99.05)
   (C)   An owner, tenant, or lessee of a residence or charitable institution,
including churches, schools, and hospitals, may conduct a garage sale upon the
premises of his or her residence or the premises of the charitable institution,
as hereinafter provided. (‘83 Code, § 99.04)
(Ord. 76-014, passed 12-20-76; Am. Ord. 79-015, passed 9-4-79) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
Cross-reference:
   General Provisions, licensing, see
Ch. 110
   Junk dealers; Secondhand Merchants, see
Ch. 113
§ 112.63 CONDITIONS.
   Any sale as described in this chapter shall not be conducted for any period
in excess of three consecutive days. No permit shall be granted for more than
two sales within any 12 calendar months, provided however, that an additional
permit may be issued by the City Clerk during the 12-month period if the
applicant is in the process of moving into, out of, or within the city.
However, the City Clerk may not issue more than one additional permit during
the 12-month period for any reason. The permit authorizing the sale shall be
displayed in the front window or other prominent place, clearly visible from
the street, at each location where a sale is being conducted. The items offered
for sale shall not be displayed in the front yards of residences.
(‘83 Code, § 99.06) (Ord. 76-014, passed 12-20-76) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 112.64 SIGNS.
   (A)   One sign may be erected advertising a sale on the premises of the
sale. The sign shall not be in excess of four square feet and shall not be
artificially illuminated. Two other signs may be erected within the right-of-
way, but not including the traveled portion of a main thoroughfare of the city
within a half-mile radius of the sale during the period of the sale as
hereinbefore provided. Under no circumstances shall any signs be attached to
any tree, traffic-control device, street sign, or utility pole on any public
right-of-way or land either by nail, screw, wire, cord, or by any manner
whatsoever.
(‘83 Code, § 99.07)
   (B)   No sign placed for advertising any sale as described herein shall be
allowed to remain erected or displayed for a period longer than 24 hours after
the sale is terminated. The applicant for the required permit shall be
responsible for the removal of all signs within the time limit of this section.
(‘83 Code, § 99.08)
(Ord. 76-014, passed 12-20-76) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
CHAPTER 113: JUNK DEALERS AND SECONDHAND MERCHANTS
Section
Junk and Used Auto Parts Dealers
   
113.01   License required
   
113.02   Application for license
   
113.03   Licensed location
   
113.04   Regulations; records
Secondhand Merchants
   
113.15   License required
   
113.16   Regulations; records
JUNK AND USED AUTO PARTS DEALERS
§ 113.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of dealing in scrap iron, scrap
metal, scrap wood, used auto parts, or any form of goods commonly considered as
junk, nor assemble such goods at one location for the purpose of sale, without
obtaining a license. A person soliciting the purchase of, or acting as a
peddler of scrap iron, scrap metal, scrap wood, used auto parts, or any form of
goods commonly considered as junk, shall be deemed a JUNK AND USED AUTO PARTS
DEALER.
(‘83 Code, § 113.01) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 113.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   No person shall engage in business as a junk and used auto parts dealer
until he meets the following requirements.
   (A)   Certification of the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, and the Health
Officer.
   (B)   Written consent filed with his application, of 60% of the owners of
exclusively residential property within a radius of 500 feet of the property
where the applicant's business is to be conducted.
   (C)   Enclosure of the business property, if it is a vacant lot or partially
enclosed structure, with a properly maintained tight board fence or other tight
fence at least seven feet above the street grade, or if the fence line grade is
higher than that of the street, at least seven feet above the fence line grade;
and erected in such a manner as to conceal the premises from public view.
(‘83 Code, § 113.02) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 113.03 LICENSED LOCATION.
   Each license granted hereunder shall designate the particular place where
the AUTO PARTS licensed business is to be conducted, and no licensee shall
engage in business at any place other than that so designated.
(‘83 Code, § 113.03) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 113.04 REGULATIONS; RECORDS.
   (A)   No licensee shall purchase or receive any article:
      (1)   Between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;
      (2)   From any person under the age of 17 years, without the written
consent of parent or guardian;
      (3)   From a person known or suspected to be a thief or a receiver of
stolen property.
(‘83 Code, § 113.04)
   (B)   No licensee shall fail to keep a daily record of all purchases and
sales made by him, nor to report the same weekly to the Police Chief on forms
prescribed by the Police Chief. The Police Chief shall at all times have access
to the daily record. (‘83 Code, § 113.05)
   (C)   No person shall conduct or engage in business as a junk dealer or used
auto parts dealer in the city on the first day of each week, commonly called
Sunday; however, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any
person who conscientiously believes that the seventh day of the week, from
sunset Friday to sunset Saturday shall be observed as the Sabbath, and who
actually refrains from conducting or engaging in business or performing other
secular business on that day. (‘83 Code, § 113.06)
Penalty, see
§ 10.99
SECONDHAND MERCHANTS
§ 113.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business or occupation of dealing in
secondhand or used personal property without first obtaining a license
therefor. For the purpose of this section, dealing in secondhand or used
personal property shall include purchasing, selling, exchanging, or storing to
facilitate or promote the sale of secondhand or used personal property of any
kind or description; however, this subchapter shall not apply to persons
dealing in used motor vehicles and no other used personal property of any type.
(‘83 Code, § 113.10) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 113.16 REGULATIONS; RECORDS.
   (A)   No licensee shall purchase or receive any article:
      (1)   From any person under the age of 17 years, without the written
consent of parent or guardian;
      (2)   From a person known or suspected to be a thief or a receiver of
stolen property.
(‘83 Code, § 113.11)
   (B)   No licensee shall fail to keep a daily record of all persons with whom
he does business and, of all property coming into his possession, together with
a record of the disposition of each article, nor shall any licensee fail to
report the same weekly to the Police Chief on forms prescribed by the state, or
if no forms are prescribed by the state, by the Police Chief. The Police Chief
shall at all times have access to the daily record. (‘83 Code, § 113.12)
Penalty, see
§ 10.99
CHAPTER 114: TAXICAB REGULATIONS
Section
   
114.01   Definition
   
114.02   License required
   
114.03   Taximeters
   
114.04   New licenses; license plates
   
114.05   License transfers
   
114.06   Insurance; bonds
   
114.07   Rates
   
114.08   Taxicab driver’s license
   
114.09   Physical examination
   
114.10   Reciprocal recognition
   
114.11   Lost articles
   
114.12   Passengers   
   
114.13   Solicitation of bus passengers prohibited
   
114.14   Additional regulations
§ 114.01 DEFINITION.
   As used in this chapter the term TAXICAB shall mean a motor vehicle designed
for transportation of ten or less persons for hire upon a trip or mileage
basis, and not operating on regularly scheduled runs.
(‘83 Code, § 114.01)
§ 114.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of operating or causing to be
operated any taxicab upon the streets, alleys, or public ways of the city
without having obtained a license for each taxicab. No license shall be granted
except upon certification of the Chief of Police and upon approval of the City
Council. Picking up passengers within the city shall be deemed engaging in the
taxicab business, but discharging passengers in the city when the trip
originated from a point outside the city shall not be so construed.
(‘83 Code, § 114.02) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 114.03 TAXIMETERS.
   (A)   No license shall be issued until a taximeter has been installed in the
taxicab to be licensed, and the taximeter has been inspected, tested, and
approved by the Chief of Police, or by a person as he may designate. After
issuance of any license, taximeters shall be inspected, tested, and approved at
such time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by the Chief of Police by
regulation adopted pursuant to the terms of this chapter. A service fee of $.50
shall be charged for each inspection.
   (B)   Every taximeter shall have the case sealed and the cover and gear
intact. Every taximeter shall be sealed by or under the direction of the Chief
of Police. No person shall remove or tamper with the seal of any taximeter. No
person shall engage in business with any taxicab when the taximeter affixed
thereto is not in proper working order, or the seal of the taximeter is broken
or has been tampered with. Every taximeter shall be so affixed that the amount
of fare is plainly visible to the passengers, and after sundown the taximeter
shall be clearly illuminated. Upon any rate change made pursuant to this
chapter, every taximeter shall be reinspected and tested and approved. No rate
change shall be effective as to any taxicab until approval and resealing of the
taximeter of the taxicab by the Chief of Police.
(‘83 Code, § 114.03) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 114.04 NEW LICENSES; LICENSE PLATES.
   (A)   Upon application made for any new taxicab license, as distinguished
from any renewal thereof, the City Council shall first consider the question of
whether public convenience and necessity require the operation of the taxicab.
The Council shall consider the number of taxicabs operating in the city and
whether the demands of the public require additional taxicab service; traffic
conditions on the streets of the city and whether the additional taxicab
service will result in a greater hazard to the public; and other relevant facts
as the Council may deem advisable. The judgment of the Council on the question
of public necessity and convenience shall be conclusive. (‘83 Code, § 114.04)
   (B)   Upon issuance of any taxicab license, the City Clerk shall furnish the
licensee a metal license plate for each vehicle so licensed. (‘83 Code, §
114.07)
§ 114.05 LICENSE TRANSFERS.
   (A)   When the ownership of any taxicab shall change, whether by operation
of law or otherwise, the taxicab license pertaining to the taxicab shall be
automatically revoked. Any transfer of, or attempt to transfer, a taxicab
license to any other person shall automatically revoke the license. (‘83 Code,
§ 114.05)
   (B)   The owner of any licensed taxicab who desires to transfer the license
to another vehicle owned by him shall make application to the City Clerk on
forms provided therefor, and shall state under oath or affirmation any facts as
may be required for, or applicable to, the transfer. Upon approval of the Chief
of Police, the transfer shall be granted. (‘83 Code, § 114.06)
Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 114.06 INSURANCE; BONDS.
   (A)   (1)   Before any taxicab license is issued, the applicant shall
furnish one or more policies of insurance, issued by responsible insurance
companies, providing indemnity for the insured in the amounts specified herein,
and agreeing to pay, within the limits of those amounts on behalf of the
insured, all sums which the insured shall become obligated to pay by reason of
the liability imposed upon the insured by law for damages because of bodily
injury, including death, at any time resulting therefrom, or for damages to
property, or both, sustained by any person other than the employees of the
insured, and caused by accident and arising out of the ownership, maintenance,
or use of the licensed taxicab.
      (2)   The minimum amount of the insurance coverage as to any one licensed
taxicab shall be as follows.
         (a)   Due to injury to, or death of, any person in any one accident:
$50,000.
         (b)   Due to any one accident resulting in injury to or death of more
than one person: $100,000.
         (c)   Due to damage to property in any one accident: $5,000.
(‘83 Code, § 114.08)
   (B)   In lieu of insurance required by division (A) of this section, the
licensee may furnish a surety company bond or bonds, in a form to be approved
by the City Attorney, in penal sums of not less than the amounts specified for
insurance for each taxicab, and binding the principal and surety to the same
conditions as are required in insurance policies as set forth in division (A).
(‘83 Code, § 114.09)
   (C)   Every insurance policy or bond shall contain a clause obligating the
insurer or surety to give to the City Clerk, by registered mail, at least ten
days written notice before the cancellation, expiration, lapse, or other
termination of each insurance or bond, or the withdrawal of surety from any
bond. (‘83 Code, § 114.10)
(Ord. 71-011, passed 5-3-71) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 114.07 RATES.
   (A)   All fares and charges for the use of taxicabs shall be determined by
resolution of the City Council following a hearing held by the Council at a
regular meeting. All taxicab licensees shall be notified of any hearing by
mail. The term WAITING TIME, as used in any schedule of rates and charges,
shall include time when the taxicab is not in motion, beginning with the
arrival at the place to which it has been called, or the time consumed while
standing at the direction of any passenger, but shall not include time lost
because of inefficiency of the taxicab or its operator, or time consumed by
premature response to a call or traffic delays.
   (B)   Taxicab fare rates effective as of September 26, 1988 shall not exceed
the following amounts.
   Flag throw   $1.10
   Each mile or a fraction thereof (based upon increments of $.20)   $1.40
   Minimum charge   $3.00
   Waiting time   $.125 for each 45 seconds
(‘83 Code, § 114.11) (Ord. 78-019, passed 11-6-78; Am. Ord. 79-013, passed 9-4-
79; Am. Ord. 81-011, passed 5-18-81; Am. Ord. 88-034, passed 9-19-88) Penalty,
see
§ 10.99
§ 114.08 TAXICAB DRIVER LICENSES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall drive a taxicab on the streets of the city
without first having obtained a taxicab driver license. Applications for a
license shall be made to and licenses issued by the Police Department. No
license shall be granted except upon certification by the Chief of Police, and
filing of a photograph and complete set of the fingerprints of the applicant in
the noncriminal identification file of the Police Department. Two photographic
pictures of each applicant shall be furnished at the time of application. The
size and form of the photographs shall be prescribed by the Police Department.
      (2)   That part of Chapter 110 requiring licensees to carry licenses on
their persons shall not apply to taxicab drivers. The license issued to a
taxicab driver shall be conspicuously displayed on the inside of the taxicab
operated by him and illuminated at night.
      (3)   Every applicant shall be 18 years of age or over and able to read
and write and be issued a Michigan chauffeur's license. Every applicant shall
furnish the Police Department with any information as it may require, and as
may be reasonably necessary in order to investigate the background and
character of the applicant. The Chief of Police shall refuse to certify any
person whose record of previous driving violations is such as to indicate that
he is not habitually a careful, skilled, and prudent driver. In the discretion
of the Chief of Police, a temporary taxicab driver license, valid for a period
not to exceed 20 days, may be issued to any applicant pending certification by
him.
(‘83 Code, § 114.12)
   (B)   No person having a taxicab driver license shall allow any other person
to use or attempt to use the license for any purpose. No person shall use or
have in his possession while operating a taxicab in the city, any taxicab
driver license which has been issued to any other person. No taxicab licensee
shall permit any person not having a taxicab driver license to operate any
taxicab. (‘83 Code, § 114.14)
Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 114.09 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION.
   Each applicant for a taxicab driver license shall, at his own expense, be
required to submit to a medical examination by a duly licensed physician of his
own choosing, and the results of the examination shall be reduced to writing by
the physician on a form furnished by the Police Department. The report of
examination signed by the physician shall be attached to the application for a
taxicab driver license. Upon any application for a taxicab driver license from
a person who then holds a license, the physical examination herein required
shall be waived, unless the applicant has not had an examination and furnished
a report of it to the city, for longer than two years immediately preceding the
application.
(‘83 Code, § 114.13) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 114.10 RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION.
   Any taxicab lawfully licensed to be operated or any taxicab driver lawfully
licensed to drive a taxicab in any municipality in the county may be operated
or permitted to drive a taxicab in the city upon registration of the taxicab
license or the taxicab driver's license with the City Clerk. There shall be no
charge for registration and it shall expire concurrently with the license of
the issuing municipality. This section shall not apply unless the ordinance
under which the license or licenses are issued is substantially equal to the
requirements of this Code, nor unless the licensing municipality reciprocates
in recognizing taxicab and taxicab drivers' licenses issued under the
provisions of this Code by granting the same operating and driving privileges
upon registration without charge.
(‘83 Code, § 114.15)
§ 114.11 LOST ARTICLES.
   Every taxicab driver, immediately after the termination of any hiring or
employment, shall carefully search the taxicab for any property lost or left
therein, and any property, unless first claimed or delivered to the owner,
shall be taken to the headquarters of the Police Department and deposited with
the officer in charge within 24 hours after the finding of that property.
(‘83 Code, § 114.16) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 114.12 PASSENGERS.
   Every taxicab driver shall have the right to demand payment of the legal
fare in advance, and may refuse employment until so prepaid, but no taxicab
driver shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or
persons upon request anywhere in the city unless previously engaged or unable
to do so. No driver of any licensed taxicab shall carry any other person than
the passenger first employing a taxicab without the consent of the passenger.
(‘83 Code, § 114.17) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 114.13 SOLICITATION OF BUS PASSENGERS PROHIBITED.
   No driver of any taxicab shall solicit persons who are waiting to take
passage on a bus at an established loading point for a bus.
(‘83 Code, § 114.18) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 114.14 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   The Chief of Police is empowered, subject to approval by the City Council,
to make rules and regulations regarding the dress and conduct of drivers, and
the maintenance, marking, and operation of taxicabs as may be necessary in the
interest of providing safe and orderly service to passengers. No person shall
fail to comply with any rule or regulation. Upon adoption or change in any rule
or regulation, notice thereof shall be furnished to each taxicab licensee and
taxicab driver licensee. The Chief of Police may require periodic reports to be
submitted by operators and drivers in order to assist in the enforcement of the
rules and regulations or the provisions of this chapter. Until changed or added
to in the manner provided in this section, the following rules and regulations
shall be applicable to taxicabs and taxicab drivers.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person driving or operating a taxicab to
be courteous; to refrain from smoking while actually carrying passengers in his
taxicab; to refrain from swearing, loud talking, or boisterous conduct; to
drive his motor vehicle carefully and in full compliance with the traffic
regulations of the city and orders of the police officers of the city; to
promptly answer all court notices, traffic violation notices, or police
notices; and to deal honestly with the public and with his employer.
   (B)   Any taxicab licensee who is a member of any cooperative association
shall furnish the Police Department with the name of the association and shall
notify the Police Department of any change in his membership or affiliation
within 48 hours after the change.
   (C)   All taxicabs shall be kept in good running condition and clean and fit
for public use. Each taxicab shall be inspected at intervals as the Chief of
Police may direct.
   (D)   Only licensed taxicabs in a number as may be designated on any taxicab
stand sign shall remain at that stand while waiting for employment, and each
taxicab shall be parked in single file. The taxicab standing at the head of the
parked line shall not be permitted to refuse to carry any orderly person who
offers to hire the taxicab and agrees to pay the proper rate of fare, but any
person desiring to hire any taxicab shall be free to select any taxicab he may
desire on the stand whether it be at the head of the line or not. As the
taxicabs leave the taxicab stand with passengers, those in the rear shall move
up, and any taxicab entering the stand shall enter at the rear thereof and
shall move up as closely as possible to the last taxicab on the stand.
   (E)   No person shall charge any fare for the hire of any taxicab other than
in accordance with the current schedule of rates.
   (F)   No taxicab, while awaiting employment by passengers, shall stand on
any public street or place other than upon a taxicab stand; nor shall any
taxicab driver seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his
taxicab to and fro in a short space before, or by otherwise interfering with,
the proper and orderly access to or egress from any theater, hall, hotel,
public resort, bus station, or other place of public gathering, or by in any
other manner obstructing or impeding traffic. However, any taxicab driver may
solicit employment by driving through any public street or place without stops
other than those due to traffic and at a speed so as not to interfere with or
impede traffic, and may pass and repass any theater, hall, hotel, public
resort, bus station, or other place of public gathering, provided that after
passing the public place he shall not turn and repass until he shall have gone
a distance of two blocks beyond that place.
   (G)   No person shall solicit passengers for a public taxicab upon the
streets of the city except the driver of the taxicab when sitting upon the
driver's box of his vehicle. Every taxicab driver shall remain on the driver's
seat or inside his vehicle at all times when the vehicle is standing upon any
taxicab stand or when actually engaged in carrying passengers; however, every
taxicab driver shall be permitted to leave his taxicab to assist passengers
into or out of the taxicab. Any taxicab driver may leave his taxicab on a
taxicab stand to take care of the calls of nature and during any absences his
taxicab shall be parked at the rear of the taxicab stand, and no absence shall
be longer than 30 minutes.
   (H)   Any taxicab licensee may place advertising matter on or in any
licensed taxicab, but the form and content thereof shall first be approved by
the Chief of Police.
   (I)   No taxicab driver shall drink any intoxicating beverage while on duty,
nor immediately prior thereto.
   (J)   No color scheme or insignia designating the vehicle or vehicles of any
taxicab licensee shall be the same or similar to that of any other licensed
city taxicab service.
(‘83 Code, § 114.19) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
CHAPTER 115: HAULING AND TRUCKING
Section
   
115.01   Vehicle defined
   
115.02   License required
   
115.03   License application
   
115.04   Dropped material
§ 115.01 VEHICLE DEFINED.
   VEHICLE. Any automobile, truck, trailer, semi-trailer, tractor, or any self-
propelled or mechanically-driven vehicle; any vehicle in any way attached to,
connected with, or drawn by any self- propelled or mechanically-driven vehicle;
or any conveyance, whether self-propelled or mechanically- driven, used for the
transportation of property.
(‘83 Code, § 115.01)
§ 115.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate, use, or cause to be driven or used upon the
streets, alleys, or public ways of the city any vehicle transporting or
delivering earth, dirt, gravel, ashes, sand, slag, cinders, fill material,
sawdust, hay, straw, waste concrete, mortar, ice, manure, shaving, refuse,
rubbish, or other similar material without first having obtained a license
therefor.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to any person transporting or delivering
material over the streets, alleys, or public ways of the city for his own use
or in connection with his own business in a vehicle owned by him.
   (C)   Persons engaged in the construction or excavation business, or
operating a gravel pit, quarry, stock pile, cinder storage, or similar
business, who haul or cart materials for use by other persons, for hire or upon
order or purchase by the latter, shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
(‘83 Code, § 115.02) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 115.03 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Every person subject to the license requirements of this chapter shall make
application to the City Clerk and pay the license fee as prescribed in Chapter
110. Upon approval of an application for a license, the City Clerk shall issue
a license to the person and vehicle covered thereby, to be known as a “Hauler's
license.” He shall at that time give to the licensee a plate which shall be
attached on the licensed vehicle in a conspicuous place. In the event that the
plate is lost or destroyed, an additional fee of $1 shall be required for its
replacement. It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle for the purposes set
forth in this chapter without the plate being attached.
(‘83 Code, § 115.03) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Procedure for issuance of license, see
§ 110.06
§ 115.04 DROPPED MATERIAL.
   (A)   No person, operating any vehicle licensed under this chapter, shall
permit any of the materials being hauled to be scattered or dropped on any
street or public place. No person shall use any vehicle for conveying shavings,
sawdust, ashes, unbaled waste paper, or other substances which are likely to be
blown off by the wind, without first securely covering the load or material by
a canvas or other suitable cover so as to prevent any material escaping the
vehicle.
   (B)   No person operating or owning any vehicle hauling materials of any
kind, whether licensed or not and whether for hire or not, shall spill, strew,
or drop or permit to be spilled, strewn, or dropped any materials onto any
street or public place in the city, nor shall any owner or operator have
sticking or fastened to the wheels or tires of any vehicle any mud or soft
earth which is being, or is likely to be, shaken or thrown or dropped off onto
any paved street in noticeable quantities. This section shall apply regardless
of whether the mud or soft earth clinging to the wheels or tires of any vehicle
shall have been acquired from the roadbed of an unpaved street or from any
other source. The owner or operator of any vehicle depositing mud or dirt on
any paved street surface in violation of this section shall be guilty of a
violation of this Code. If the owner or operator is operating under any permit
or license issued by the city, the permit or license shall be subject to
immediate suspension or revocation and the vehicle so driven may be impounded
until the owner or operator shall post a cash bond in the amount of $100
conditioned upon the prompt daily removal, to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent of Public Works, of the mud or dirt so deposited upon a paved
street surface.
(‘83 Code, § 115.04) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
CHAPTER 116: AMUSEMENTS
Section
Tavern, Bar or Cabaret
   
116.001   Definitions
   
116.002   License required
   
116.003   License application
   
116.004   Authority of council
   
116.005   License expiration
   
116.006   Compliance with code
   
116.007   Prohibitions
   
116.008   License not transferable
Dance Halls
   
116.020   Definitions
   
116.021   License required; exceptions
   
116.022   Application for license; investigation
   
116.023   Building requirements
   
116.024   Prohibitions on licensee
   
116.025   License fees; transfers
   
116.026   Teen-age dances; supervision
Skating Rinks
   
116.040   License required
Circuses, Shows and Exhibitions
   
116.050   License required
   
116.051   Animal shows and exhibitions
   
116.052   Theaters
   
116.053   Prohibited amusements
Mechanical Amusement Devices
   
116.065   Definitions
   
116.066   License required
   
116.067   License application; investigation
   
116.068   License renewal
   
116.069   Transfer or misuse of license
   
116.070   License requirements
   
116.071   Suspension or revocation
   
116.072   Prohibitions
   
116.073   Authorization for arcades and amusement devices
   
116.074   Conduct
   
116.075   Gambling devices prohibited
   
116.076   Right of entry
   
116.077   Fee schedule
  Carnivals, Outdoor Festivals and Amusement Rides
   
116.090   License required
   
116.091   Regulations
   
116.092   Revocation of license
   
116.093   Penalty
Pool and Billiards
   
116.105   License required
   
116.106   Hours of operation
   
116.107   Minors prohibited
   
116.108   Gambling prohibited
TAVERN, BAR OR CABARET
§ 116.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BAR, CABARET, COCKTAIL LOUNGE, RESTAURANT, or TAVERN. Any commercial
establishment, private club, or organization, where food and/or any type of
alcoholic beverage is sold on the premises and where the patrons are provided
with entertainment or space for dancing.
   KARAOKE. An electronic device used by patron/singers of an establishment to
enhance the singing of patrons by pre-recorded music and visual display of the
required lyrics on closed circuit television; provided, however, in accordance
with any regulations adopted by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, that
the same may not be re-broadcast as an actual performance.
   OPERATOR. Any person or persons (whether licensed by the state Liquor
Control Commission or not), agent, or employee, operating any tavern, bar,
cocktail lounge, restaurant, or cabaret.
   OVER-CROWDING.  Any number of person in excess of the maximum number
approved for the licensed premises by the City Fire Department.
   PERSON. Any person, copartnership, firm, corporation, society, club,
association, or organization which engages in, sponsors, or conducts the
operation of any tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, restaurant, or cabaret as
defined herein.
(‘83 Code, § 116.01)
§ 116.002 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Within the meaning of this chapter it shall be unlawful for any person to
operate any tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, restaurant, or cabaret in the city
without having obtained a license and paying any annual license fee charged in
accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in Chapter 12 of this Code. A
“one-night” license may be obtained upon payment of a license fee charged in
accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in Chapter 12 of this Code.
(‘83 Code, § 116.02) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.003 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every person or operator desiring to obtain a license as required by
this subchapter shall file a written application on forms approved by the City
Clerk, together with the license fee as provided in
§ 116.002. The application shall include the following information.
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of each person engaging in,
conducting, or sponsoring the operation of any tavern, bar, cocktail lounge,
restaurant, or cabaret.
      (2)   The location of any tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, restaurant, or
cabaret.
      (3)   The name to be used by the applicant in conducting the commercial
establishment.
      (4)   Any other information required by the Clerk or the Police
Department to aid in determining the moral character of the applicant.
   (B)   All applicants must be at least 21 years of age and shall not have
been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude.
(‘83 Code, § 116.03) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.004 AUTHORITY OF COUNCIL.
   (A)   Before any license shall be issued, the City Clerk shall cause an
inspection of the place to be licensed. Upon full compliance of the city code
and all pertinent rules or regulations of the Building Division, the Department
of Health, the Fire Department, and the Police Department relating to the
safety, health, convenience, comfort, and morals of the public, and upon
completion of the inspection by the City Clerk and/or other departments
involved, the City Clerk shall report the findings of his inspection along with
the reports of the other departments involved, to the Council for their
determination as to whether or not a license shall be issued. (‘83 Code, §
116.04)
   (B)   The Council may refuse to issue a license to the operator of any
tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, restaurant, or cabaret for good and satisfactory
reasons where it appears that issuance of the license would be detrimental to
the health, safety, welfare, or morals of the citizens of the city. The City
Council shall also have the authority to revoke or suspend a license issued
hereunder, or to refuse to renew a license when it finds any of the following.
      (1)   That the licensee is operating in violation of this subchapter or
any other governing law, ordinance, or regulation.
      (2)   That the licensee is operating so as to constitute a nuisance, by
reason of disorderly conduct or immoral activity on the premises. Prior to
revoking or suspending a license, or refusing to renew a license, a hearing
shall be held by the City Council, at which time the licensee shall have an
opportunity to show cause why his license should be renewed or should not be
revoked or suspended.
(‘83 Code, § 116.06) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.005 LICENSE EXPIRATION.
   Licenses issued shall expire on April 1 of each year.
(‘83 Code, § 116.05)
§ 116.006 COMPLIANCE WITH CODES.
   In addition to opening each and every portion of the licensed premises for
the inspection of the Building Department and other necessary city departments,
the licensee shall comply with the Building Code, Fire Code and other pertinent
ordinances required by the city, as far as they relate to the licensed premises
and to the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(‘83 Code, § 116.07) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Building Code, see
Ch. 150
   Fire Code, see
Ch. 91
§ 116.007 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No licensee, by himself/herself, directly or indirectly, or by any
servant, agent, or employee, shall permit or be engaged in any illegal act or
occupation under the state or the ordinance of the city on the licensed
premises.
   (B)   Permit the licensed premises to become a resort for criminal activity
or other disorderly conduct.
   (C)   Permit any immoral, vulgar, suggestive entertainment which includes
dancing or entertainment commonly known as “topless dancing,” or “bottomless
dancing.”
   (D)   Permit smoking in the area designated for dancing.
   (E)   Permit gambling or the use, possession, or presence of gambling
paraphernalia on the premises.
   (F)   Permit over-crowding in the area designated for dancing or provide
less than 200 square feet of dance space.
   (G)   Permit any intoxicated person to be sold or served any alcoholic
beverage, or permit the person to dance or loiter on the premises.
   (H)   Employ any entertainers without demanding a certificate of birth as
proof of the age of any entertainer thus employed. Entertainers shall comply
with the labor laws of the state.
   (I)   Permit or allow male and female entertainers, if entertainment is
provided, to use the same dressing rooms.
(‘83 Code, § 116.08) (Ord. 73-012, passed 6-4-73; Am. Ord. 91-016, passed 12-2-
91) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.008 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable.
(‘83 Code, § 116.10) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
DANCE HALLS
§ 116.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL DANCE. Any dance sponsored or conducted in conjunction with
commercial recreation or other sports events.
   MUNICIPAL DANCE. Any dance or ball which is sponsored by the Board of
Education, the Department of Parks and Recreation or the schools of the city
and conducted in a building owned or leased by the city or the school district
of the city.
   OPERATOR. Any operator, proprietor, lessee, manager, or employee of any
public dance hall.
   OVER-CROWDING. Any number of persons in excess of the maximum number
approved for the hall or building by the City Fire Department.
   PERSON. Any person, co-partnership, firm, corporation, society, club,
organization, or association, sponsoring or conducting any public dance or
ball.
   PUBLIC DANCE HALLS. Any place enclosed or unenclosed, building, or that
portion of any building which is primarily used for public dances or balls,
where the public may gain admission with or without payment of a fee.
   SPECIAL DANCE. Any dance or ball conducted or sponsored by any person in a
rented or leased building, hall, or other location approved by the city.
   TEENAGE DANCE. Any dance or ball where admission is granted to minors 13 to
16 years of age, inclusive.
(‘83 Code, § 116.15)
§ 116.021 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall conduct or sponsor any public dance or ball for
hire without first being duly licensed as required in
§ 116.022(A).
      (2)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to municipal
dances, dances, or balls conducted by a religious or fraternal organization in
a hall which is owned or leased and operated by the organization and the dance
or ball is not open to the public.
      (3)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to private
receptions or to taverns or cocktail lounges, and other facilities licensed
under the laws of the state.
(‘83 Code, § 116.16)
   (B)   No operator shall allow or permit the use of any public dance hall
unless a license for that use has been obtained from the City Clerk. (‘83 Code,
§ 116.17)
Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.022 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   (1)   Every person or operator desiring to obtain a license shall file
a written application at least two weeks prior to the date on which the license
is desired on forms approved by the City Clerk for the city, together with the
license fee. The application shall include the following information.
         (a)   The name, address, and telephone number of each person
conducting the public dance hall, public dance, or public ball.
         (b)   The location of the public dance hall or the place where the
dance or ball is to be conducted.
         (c)   The name to be used by the applicant.
         (d)   Any other information required by the Clerk of the city or the
Police Department to aid in determining the moral character of the applicant.
      (2)   All applicants must be at least 21 years of age and shall not have
been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude.
(‘83 Code, § 116.18)
   (B)   Before any public dance hall license or any license for any dance
shall be issued, the City Clerk shall cause an inspection of the place to be
licensed, or where the dance is to be held. Upon full compliance of all
pertinent rules or regulations of the Building Division, Department of Health,
the Fire Department, and the Police Department relating to the safety, health,
convenience, comfort, and morals of the public, and upon completion of the
inspection by the City Clerk and/or other departments involved, the City Clerk
may issue a license for the place to be used as a public dance hall or for a
public dance or ball. (‘83 Code, § 116.19)
§ 116.023 BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Each licensee shall do the following.
      (1)   At all times open each and every portion of the licensed premises
for inspection by the Police Department and/or other city departments for the
purpose of enforcing any other provisions of this subchapter or other
ordinances relating to the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
      (2)   At all times display the license granted hereunder in a conspicuous
place near the entrance to the licensed establishment.
      (3)   Provide proper ventilation, either natural or mechanical so that
each person in the hall will be supplied with 1,200 cubic feet of air per hour.
      (4)   Provide sufficient toilet conveniences so that there will be at
least one women's toilet in good sanitary condition per 2,000 square feet of
floor space or fraction thereof; at least one men's toilet and urinal in good
sanitary condition per 4,000 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof,
and provision made for the privacy therein; at least one wash stand in each
toilet provided with soap and sanitary towels.
      (5)   At all time provide adequate lighting in every part of the licensed
premises.
      (6)   Provide at least one sanitary drinking fountain, either on the
dance floor or reasonably accessible thereto for each 4,000 square feet of
floor space or fraction thereof. The sanitary drinking fountain shall not be
located with the toilet rooms.
      (7)   Provide sufficient fire exits free from all rubbish and inflammable
materials as required by the regulations of the State Fire Marshal and/or
ordinances of the city.
   (B)   No license shall be issued for any place in which public dances are to
be held unless the building code, fire code, and other pertinent ordinances
required by the city, as far as can be determined, are being complied with.
(‘83 Code, § 116.20) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Building code, see
Ch. 150
   Fire Code, see
Ch. 91
§ 116.024 PROHIBITIONS.
   No licensee, by himself, directly or indirectly, or by any servant, agent,
or employee shall do any of the following.
   (A)   Permit any indecent, immoral, or profane language, or indecent,
immoral, or disorderly conduct.
   (B)   Permit the licensed premises to become a resort for disorderly persons
of any type.
   (C)   Permit immoral, vulgar, lewd, obscene, or improper dancing.
   (D)   Permit smoking in the area designated for dancing.
   (E)   Permit gambling or the use, possession or presence of gambling
paraphernalia on the premises.
   (F)   Permit over-crowding in the area designated for dancing.
   (G)   Permit intoxicated persons to dance or loiter on the premises.
   (H)   Employ a person who is under the age of 18 years.
   (I)   Permit any person under the age of 17 years to be upon the premises
unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, excepting where this chapter
expressly allows persons between the ages of 13 and 16 inclusive, to attend.
   (J)   Permit the possession or use of any alcoholic liquor on the premises,
nor shall the licensed premises be accessible in any way with any place where
alcoholic liquor is kept, sold, distributed, or given away. This prohibition
shall not apply while a Michigan Liquor Control Commission Special Beer and
Wine License is in effect at the licensed premises.
   (K)   Permit dancing on the licensed premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 7:30 a.m. without first having obtained a special permit from the Chief of
Police. Application for a special permit shall be filed with the Chief of
Police at the time of filing the application.
(‘83 Code, § 116.21) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.025 LICENSE FEES; TRANSFERS.
   (A)   A fee, charged in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in
Chapter 12 of this Code, shall be paid for licenses issued hereunder.
   (B)   Licenses issued under the provisions of this subchapter are not
transferable.
(‘83 Code, § 116.22) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.026 TEENAGE DANCES; SUPERVISION.
   A licensee conducting or sponsoring a teen-age dance shall, while the teen-
age dance license is in effect:
   (A)   Be permitted to admit minors 13 to 16 years inclusive;
   (B)   Not permit admission of the general public;
   (C)   Not permit dancing between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 7:30 a.m.;
   (D)   Provide proper and adequate adult supervision. Supervision shall be in
the minimum ratio of one adult to every 20 teenagers unless additional
supervision is found to be necessary by the Chief of Police upon investigation
of the application for the license. The applicant shall be informed in writing
as to the necessity of any additional adult supervisors within one week of
filing the application.
(‘83 Code, § 116.23) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
SKATING RINKS
§ 116.040 SKATING RINKS.
   No person shall conduct, maintain, or operate any place open to the public
for ice skating or roller skating without obtaining a license to operate a
skating rink in the manner provided in Chapter 110 of this code. No license
shall be granted except upon certification of the Chief of Police and the Fire
Chief.
(‘83 Code, § 116.30) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
CIRCUSES, SHOWS AND EXHIBITIONS
§ 116.050 SHOW LICENSE.
   No person shall conduct a circus or show, except in a theater licensed under
the provisions of this chapter, without obtaining a license which shall be
known as a “Show License.”
(‘83 Code, § 116.35) Penalty, see § 116.99
§ 116.051 ANIMAL SHOWS AND EXHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct any dog or pony show or menagerie, without
first obtaining a license therefor. The license shall be known as an Animal
Show License.
   (B)   No person shall conduct any panorama, exhibition of statuary or
painting, or any other exhibition, not otherwise licensed under this chapter,
and for which an admission fee is charged, without first obtaining a license
therefor to be known as an Exhibition License.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any fair
held under the direct management and supervision of any recognized agricultural
association or society, nonprofit association or corporation, at which are
exhibited agricultural or industrial products, principally.
(‘83 Code, § 116.36) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.052 THEATERS.
   No person shall conduct a moving picture show, vaudeville, opera house,
theater, or other place for the giving of plays, and other theatrical
exhibitions where an admission fee is charged, without obtaining a license to
be known as a “Theater License.” The requirements of this section shall not be
applicable to exhibitions or shows given for charity or for the benefit of
schools or benevolent, educational, fraternal, or religious societies.
(‘83 Code, § 116.37) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.053 PROHIBITED AMUSEMENTS.
   (A)   The following listed amusements and every component part thereof,
constitute public nuisances contrary to the safety, health, morals, and welfare
of the public. These amusements are commonly known as follows.
      (1)   Street fairs or street shows, including medicine shows.
      (2)   Shooting galleries.
      (3)   Endurance contests or marathons.
      (4)   Freak shows, where artificial or natural curiosities are exhibited.
   (B)   No person shall conduct, participate in, attend or sell or purchase
tickets for any such affair in the city.
(‘83 Code, § 116.38) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 116.065 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   ARCADE. Any place, premises, or establishment or room set aside within which
are located three or more amusement devices.
   AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any device, machine or apparatus activated or operated for
the purpose of playing, exhibiting, emitting, producing, or displaying
entertainment or amusement in the form of games, motion pictures, videos, audio
recordings, live performances, or similar types of entertainment. The term
shall not apply to devices commonly referred to as “kiddie rides,” or vending
machines used to dispense foodstuffs, toys, or other products for use and
consumption.
   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association
engaged in the business of providing or placing, or who or which provides or
places, amusement devices in any type of establishment, including arcades, for
operation by another.
   LICENSEE. Any person to whom a license, permit, or tag is issued under the
terms of this subchapter.
   OWNER. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation who
owns, leases, operates, or has under his or its control any amusement device as
defined herein.
   OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation who
owns, maintains, operates, or controls an arcade.
   PROPRIETOR. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
club, or employee or agent of same, who, as the operator, manager, owner,
lessee, or agent, has under his or its control, any place or premises at which
any amusement device is located, but which is not licensed as an arcade.
(‘83 Code, § 116.55) (Ord. 87-006, passed 8-17-87; Am. Ord. 88-016, passed 4-4-
88) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.066 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   All arcade operators shall be required to obtain from the city an
annual arcade license prior to establishing, operating, conducting, or
maintaining any arcade within the city. All arcade licenses shall expire one
year from the date of issuance. Fees for arcade licenses shall be set by
appropriate resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   All proprietors shall be required to obtain an annual location permit
prior to placing or allowing the placement of any amusement device in any
establishment in the city. Fees for permits shall be set by appropriate
resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   Every amusement device placed for use or operation in any
establishment in the city shall conspicuously bear an annual identification tag
issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter,
bearing the name (including assumed name or corporate name, if registered) and
address of the owner and the distributor thereof.
   (D)   Distributors shall apply for and obtain an identification tag for each
device placed or located within any establishment in the city. The annual fee
for each identification tag shall be established by appropriate resolution of
the City Council.
(‘83 Code, § 116.57) (Ord. 87-006, passed 8-17-87; Am. Ord. 88-016, passed 4-4-
88)
§ 116.067 LICENSE APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   (1)   All applications for licenses, permits, and tags under this
subchapter shall be made at the office of the City Clerk on application forms
provided by that office, together with an application fee. The application
shall include the following documents, information, and data.
         (a)   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; if the
applicant is a partnership, club, society, organization, or association, the
names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all partners, board members, or
officers shall be included; if the applicant is a corporation, a certified copy
of the articles of incorporation shall accompany the application, as well as
the names and addresses of all principal shareholders.
         (b)   A copy of the building permit or certificate of occupancy issued
by the city, indicating that the proposed location is approved for use as an
arcade under all pertinent provisions of the city building, zoning, health, and
fire regulations, must accompany all applications.
         (c)   The business or assumed name to be used by the applicant; a copy
of the certificate of conducting business under an assumed name shall accompany
the application.
         (d)   The applicant's social security number, federal identification
number and/or state sales tax number.
         (e)   The name, address, and telephone number of the agent authorized
to submit the application for license on behalf of the applicant, if the
applicant is not an individual.
         (f)   A plan or drawing depicting or describing the area within the
building where all amusement devices will be placed.
         (g)   A copy of the certificate of insurance, indicating coverage for
premises liability and/or product liability.
      (2)   All applications must be signed and verified by the individual
applicant or authorized agent of the applicant. The applicant or his or its
authorized agent shall attest to the fact that all information provided is true
to his knowledge or belief.
      (3)   Upon submission of a properly completed application and application
fee, the City Clerk shall direct the application to the Police Department for
review and investigation in accordance with the provisions of division (B) of
this section. Except for applications for location permits submitted by persons
or establishments licensed by the State Liquor Control Commission for
consumption of liquor on the premises, the Clerk shall forward all
applications, police reports, and all documentation submitted and required
under this subchapter to the City Council for review and approval in accordance
with the provisions of
§ 116.073.
      (4)   All persons and establishments licensed by the State Liquor Control
Commission, having less than three amusement devices, shall not be required to
submit to the procedures set forth in
§ 116.073. The City Clerk shall issue a location permit to such persons and
establishments upon submission of a proper application and fee.
(‘83 Code, § 116.58)
   (B)   Before issuing any license, location permit, or identification tag,
the Clerk's office shall refer all applications to the Chief of Police, who
shall do the following.
      (1)   Investigate the applicant and his or its authorized agents and
principals relative to any record of arrests, investigations by law enforcement
agencies, criminal convictions, and the truthfulness of the information
supplied by the applicant.
      (2)   Prepare and submit to the City Council a written report which
discloses all non-privileged information obtained pursuant to the
investigation, along with any recommendation or comments.
(‘83 Code, § 116.59)
(Ord. 87-006, passed 8-17-87; Am. Ord. 88-016, passed 4-4-88) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.068 LICENSE RENEWAL.
   (A)   Applications for renewal shall be filed no less than 60 days prior to
the annual expiration date. Renewal applications shall be available at the
office of the City Clerk. All licenses, permits, and tags shall be renewed upon
application and payment of the appropriate renewal fee. However, no license or
permit shall be renewed if the licensee or permittee has received any notice of
revocation or suspension of his or its license or permit, or there has been a
change in the name, address, status, or condition of the licensee or permittee.
   (B)   All fees for the renewal of any license, permit, or tag which are not
paid at the time the fees shall be due shall be paid as late fees, with an
additional 25% of the license, permit, or tag fee required for any licenses,
permits, or tags under the provisions of this subchapter and the fee schedule,
for the first 15 days that the license, permit, or tag fee remains unpaid; and
thereafter the license, permit, or tag fee shall be that stipulated for
licenses, permits, or tags by the fee schedule plus 50% of the fee. All persons
submitting late renewals must appear before the City Council for approval.
(‘83 Code, § 116.61) (Ord. 87-006, passed 8-17-87; Am. Ord. 88-016, passed 4-4-
88) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.069 TRANSFER OR MISUSE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   No license, permit, or tag issued under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be transferable unless specifically authorized by the City
Council. No licensee or permittee shall, unless specifically authorized by the
provisions of this subchapter, transfer or attempt to transfer his license or
permit to another, nor shall he make any alteration to, or improper use of, the
same. Submission of a transfer application and transfer fees must be paid prior
to the approval of any transfer of a license. Transfer applications shall be
available at the office of the City Clerk and shall be processed in the same
manner as new applications. Transfer fees shall be set by resolution of the
City Council.
   (B)   No amusement device shall be moved from one location in the city to
another which is not licensed as an arcade or permitted as a proprietorship.
(‘83 Code, § 116.62) (Ord. 87-006, passed 8-17-87; Am. Ord. 88-016, passed 4-4-
88) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.070 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All arcades shall provide adult supervision, and be required, at a
minimum, to maintain the following.
      (1)   A responsible adult person, not less than 21 years of age, must be
on the premises of any arcade during all hours of operation.
      (2)   A security guard, as defined by Public Act 330 of 1968, as amended,
being M.C.L.A. 338.1051 through 338.1079, and licensed by the state, must be on
the premises of all arcades during all operating hours to maintain the peace
and orderly conduct of the business and the safety of its patrons.
      (3)   In the event that an arcade is located within a larger, multiple-
use building, and that building provides adequate security guard protection for
all building uses, no security guard is required to be directly on the arcade
premises.
   (B)   No operator or proprietor shall permit operation of the devices by any
person under 16 years of age during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays, holidays, and days when school is not in session,
or the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day.
   (C)   All licensees and permittees shall maintain a minimum of 40 square
feet of floor area for each amusement device. This footage must be devoted
exclusively to the use of each amusement device, and may not be used for any
other purpose.
   (D)   Any arcade licensed under this subchapter must provide adequate and
proper toilet facilities which conform to the standards set forth in the city
plumbing and health codes. The locations of public restroom facilities shall be
clearly accessible and identifiable during all hours of operation. The
restrooms shall be clearly marked “Public Restroom” and be open for use by
patrons during all hours of operation.
   (E)   No proprietor, or operator, servant, agent, or employee thereof, shall
permit the playing or operation of an amusement device unless all fire aisles,
passageways, and exits are clear. Such persons shall take all necessary steps,
including stopping the operations of the device or devices, to insure that all
persons in the establishment have free access to fire aisles, passageways, and
exits.
(‘83 Code, § 116.63) (Ord. 87-006, passed 8-17-87; Am. Ord. 88-016, passed 4-4-
88) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.071 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   Any license, permit or tag issued by the city may be suspended or
revoked for cause. The licensee and/or permittee shall have the right to a
hearing before the City Council prior to a final decision on any action,
provided a written request therefor is filed with the City Clerk within ten
days after receipt of notice of suspension or revocation. The City Council may
confirm the suspension or revoke or reinstate any license or permit. The action
taken by the City Council shall be final. Upon suspension or revocation of any
license or permit, the fee paid therefor shall not be refunded. The licensee or
permittee whose license or permit has been revoked shall not be eligible to
apply for a new license or permit for a period of two years after revocation.
   (B)   The term CAUSE shall include the commission or omission of any act, or
allowing any condition to exist in connection with any amusement device which
is prohibited by this subchapter, or the failure to comply with any
requirements set forth herein. The following acts or omissions may also
constitute cause for the purpose of this subchapter.
      (1)   Repeated disturbances of public peace, or disorderly conduct, which
have occurred and have been reported to the Police Department, within the
licensed establishment or upon any parking area, sidewalks, walkways, access
ways, or grounds immediately adjacent to the licensed premises.
      (2)   An act, omission, or condition on the premises which constitutes a
nuisance.
      (3)   Any act, omission, or condition forbidden by the provisions of this
subchapter or any other applicable ordinance or statute.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, partnership,
or corporation to conduct any business or activity regulated by the provisions
of this subchapter without a valid, current license therefor. No business or
activity may be conducted when a license or permit issued under this subchapter
has been suspended or revoked.
(‘83 Code, § 116.64) (Ord. 87-006, passed 8-17-87; Am. Ord. 88-016, passed 4-4-
88) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.072 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any individual person, firm, association,
partnership, or corporation to maintain for the purpose of distribution, or to
distribute, any amusement device(s) within the city without first applying for
and obtaining identification tags for each device as provided in this
subchapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to knowingly allow the
placement or operation of an amusement device in any type of establishment,
without affixing thereto and displaying a current identification tag on each
device. The identification tag, evidencing compliance with this subchapter,
shall be affixed to and in plain view under the glass panel of each device in
any retail or commercial establishment, including an arcade as defined herein.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any individual, association, firm,
partnership, or corporation to maintain or operate an arcade without first
obtaining an arcade license as provided in this subchapter.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to permit the use and
operation of an amusement device in any establishment or premises which has not
been issued a license and location permit as provided in this subchapter.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any individual, association, firm,
partnership, or corporation, or their agents, to install, affix, place, or
allow the placement, use, or operation of any amusement device in any
enclosure, booth, curtained or sectioned area, or in a room having an area of
less than 100 square feet. All devices, playing, viewing, or entertainment
areas where devices are located must be visible from a continuous main aisle,
and must not be obscured by any curtain, door, panel, wall, or other enclosure.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful to permit any person under the age of 12 years to
use or operate any amusement device unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
   (G)   Except for establishments which are licensed by the state for the sale
and consumption of liquor on the premises, it shall be unlawful to operate or
cause to be operated, an arcade between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
except on Fridays, Saturdays, and legal holidays, when the prohibited hours
shall be between 12:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. Establishments which are licensed by
the state for the sale and consumption of liquor on the premises shall be
permitted to allow the operation of properly approved amusement devices on the
premises during the hours that the establishments are permitted to offer liquor
for sale and consumption on the premises.
(‘83 Code, § 116.56) (Ord. 87-006, passed 8-17-87; Am. Ord. 88-016, passed 4-4-
88) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.073 AUTHORIZATION FOR ARCADES AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a license or tag as required by
this subchapter, the City Council shall review the information contained
therein, the police investigation report, and any other pertinent information
to determine whether the applicant has met all requirements prescribed by this
subchapter. The City Council may choose to interview the applicant to determine
the veracity of the applicant and his or its ability to comply with all
requirements in this subchapter. The City Council shall authorize the issuance
of a license or permit and tags by the office of the City Clerk upon
determining that the applicant has demonstrated his or its ability to comply
with all requirements contained in this subchapter.
   (B)   If the City Council determines that the applicant has failed to meet
any of the requirements contained in this subchapter, it shall deny approval of
the application, and no license, permit, or tag shall be issued. The reason or
reasons for the denial shall be set out in a written decision as fully as
possible and practicable.
   (C)   Once the City Council has approved an application for a license,
permit, or tag required by this subchapter, and the appropriate fees have been
paid, the City Clerk shall issue the appropriate license, permit, or tag to the
applicant.
(‘83 Code, § 116.60) (Ord. 87-006, passed 8-17-87; Am. Ord. 88-016, passed 4-4-
88)
§ 116.074 CONDUCT ON PREMISES.
   (A)   No person, licensee, tenant, lessee, owner, or operator of any
amusement device or arcade, or any servant, agent, or employee of a licensee or
owner of an amusement device or arcade, shall permit upon the premises housing
an amusement device any of the following.
      (1)   Any indecent, immoral, or profane language, or indecent, unlawful,
or disorderly conduct.
      (2)   Any fighting, loitering, or destruction of property on the
premises; or permit the premises to become a resort for disorderly persons.
      (3)   Any prostitution, accosting, soliciting, sexual activity, drug use,
or drug trading.
      (4)   Gambling, or the use, possession, or presence of gambling
paraphernalia on the premises.
      (5)   Intoxicated persons to loiter on the premises.
      (6)   The possession or use of any alcoholic liquor on the premises of an
arcade, or permit the premises of an arcade to be accessible in any way with
any place where alcoholic liquor is kept, sold, distributed, or given away.
This division shall not apply to establishments which are licensed by the state
for consumption of liquor on the premises.
      (7)   The possession or use of any drug, narcotic, or controlled
substance, including marijuana, on the premises.
      (8)   Noise or music to emanate from the premises which is disturbing to
the surrounding area.
      (9)   Accept or receive anything of value other than cash as
consideration for the use or operation of any amusement device.
   (B)   Any operator or proprietor shall presumptively be deemed to have
permitted the conduct enumerated above if it occurs on the premises housing an
amusement device.
(‘83 Code, § 116.65) (Ord. 87-006, passed 8-17-87; Am. Ord. 88-016, passed 4-4-
88) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.075 GAMBLING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall in any way be construed to authorize,
license, or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has
been judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary to
law. Any and all such devices will be confiscated.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, by himself or another, to give
any prize, award, merchandise, gift, favor, or service, or anything of value
other than free games, to any player, or to any operator of any amusement
device, or to any contestant, for a high score made thereon.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any amusement device
containing any automatic or semi-automatic payoff device for the return or
discharge of coins, tokens, slugs, merchandise, or check to operators thereof.
(‘83 Code, § 116.66) (Ord. 87-006, passed 8-17-87; Am. Ord. 88-016, passed 4-4-
88) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.076 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Any member of the Police or Fire Department or Building Department shall
have the right to enter the place or business of any licensee or permittee
under this subchapter at any reasonable hour of the day or night for the
purpose of making an inspection and survey of the premises and the equipment
therein or either of them, and to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. It
shall be unlawful for any person to resist or attempt to prevent any of the
above-named officers or employees of the city from carrying out of purposes set
forth; provided, however, that every officer and employee shall have in his
possession and carry upon his person at all times while performing the duties
above outlined, sufficient credentials identifying himself as an officer or
city employee, which credentials shall be exhibited by the bearer on demand to
any person in charge of any premises which the officer or employee is about to
enter.
(‘83 Code, § 116.67) (Ord. 87-006, passed 8-17-87; Am. Ord. 88-016, passed 4-4-
88) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.077 FEE SCHEDULE.
Editor's note:
    Please see the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in Chapter 12 of this Code for
fees and charges relating to places of amusement, arcades, and coin-operated
amusement devices.
CARNIVALS, OUTDOOR FESTIVALS AND AMUSEMENT RIDES
§ 116.090 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, association, firm, corporation, or organization shall establish,
maintain, or operate in the city, any carnival, outdoor festival, amusement
rides, or games, as they are commonly defined, unless a license has been
obtained upon approval of the City Council and in accordance with
Chapter 110 and payment of a license fee charged in accordance with the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule in
Chapter 12 of this Code.
(‘83 Code, § 116.80) (Ord. 79-019, passed 9-4-79; Am. Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-
21; Am. Ord. 25-002, passed 3-17-25)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.091 REGULATIONS.
   In addition to the applicable regulations of
Chapter 110 as provided for licensing of businesses and trades, a license shall
be granted only after compliance by the licensee with the following
regulations.
   (A)   No carnival, outdoor festival, amusement rides, or games shall be
permitted if the location shall interfere with access to and expected use of
the adjacent/surrounding properties. No carnival, outdoor festival, amusement
rides, or games shall be permitted on or be situated on any property near a
heavily traveled highway or road that shall interfere with or restrict normal
flow of traffic. The specific location of the carnival, outdoor festival,
amusement rides, or games shall be submitted to the Police Department 60 days
prior to the date of the scheduled event for approval before a permit is
issued. In addition, the applicant shall provide sufficient evidence that all
business and property owners of land on which carnival operations (including
but not limited to rides, games, vendors, tents, animals, parking, and housing)
will take place have given their approval.
   (B)   No carnival, outdoor festival, amusement rides, or games shall be
permitted to operate between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 12:00 noon. Carnivals
are limited to five days per calendar year per property. Not more than one
carnival shall be permitted to operate within the city at any one time.
   (C)   Any carnival operating within the city shall be required to provide
for law enforcement personnel, at their expense, for the duration that the
carnival is in operation. The number of officers required shall be determined
by the Garden City Police Department based upon the size and nature of the
event.
   (D)   A bond in the amount of $1,000 is required to guarantee that the site
used by the carnival, outdoor festival, amusement rides, or games be left in a
clean and sanitary condition, and that the equipment necessary in the operation
of the carnival, outdoor festival, amusement rides, or games be removed within
48 hours after termination of the license. The bond may be forfeited upon
noncompliance with this section.
   (E)   The site and operation of the carnival, outdoor festival, amusement
rides, or games shall be inspected and approved by the Police, Fire and
Building Departments.
   (F)   A completed and signed application and all bonds and fees shall be
submitted prior to any approval being granted to operate a carnival within the
city.
(‘83 Code, § 116.81) (Ord. 82-045, passed 11-1-82; Am. Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-
21; Am. Ord. 25-002, passed 3-17-25) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.092 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The city shall have the authority to revoke or suspend a license
issued hereunder, or to refuse to renew a license when it finds that any of the
following apply:
      (1)   That the licensee is operating in violation of this subchapter or
any other governing law, ordinance, or regulation.
      (2)   That the licensee is operating so as to constitute a nuisance, by
reason of noise, disorderly conduct, or immoral activity on the premises.
(‘83 Code, § 116.82) (Ord. 21-002, passed 2-8-21; Am. Ord. 25-002, passed 3-17-
25)
§ 116.093 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any operation of a carnival without a valid approved license issued by
the city is prohibited.
   (B)   Any carnival that operates without first receiving a license to
operate within the city shall be deemed in violation of the provisions of this
subchapter and fined at a rate of $5,000 per day in which a violation occurs.
   (C)   Any operation of a carnival whose license has been suspended or
revoked will result in full forfeiture of submitted bond and application fees
and fined $5,000 per day for every day in which a violation occurs.
   (D)   The city shall refuse to renew or issue any future licenses for
applicants found in violation of this section.
(Ord. 25-002, passed 3-17-25)
POOL AND BILLIARDS
§ 116.105 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, club, firm, corporation, or partnership shall conduct, maintain,
or operate any place open to the public for playing pool or billiards without
first obtaining a license and paying the license fee as required by Chapter
110.
(‘83 Code, § 116.85) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.106 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No person, club, firm, corporation, or partnership shall keep open any room,
hall, or building licensed hereunder for a pool or billiard establishment
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(‘83 Code, § 116.86) (Ord. 71-022, passed 12-6-71; Am. Ord. 81-025, passed 9-
21-81) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 116.107 MINORS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall be permitted to play pool or billiards, or remain or loiter
in or about any pool or billiard room, who is under the age of 15 years, unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian, except regular employees who are
performing the necessary work within the premises. No person shall misrepresent
himself to have reached the age of 15 in order to obtain admittance to a
billiard or pool room. It is the duty of all proprietors, owners, managers, or
employees connected with the business or operating or maintaining any pool or
billiard room to ascertain the age or ages of the persons referred to in this
section; nor shall the licensee thereof permit any minor to play pool or
billiards, or to remain or loiter therein.
(‘83 Code, § 116.87) (Ord. 71-002, passed 12-6-71; Am. Ord. 81-025, passed 9-
21-81) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Offenses involving minors, see
Ch. 135
§ 116.108 GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
   No dice shall be thrown nor shall a pinball or shake-ball be used, nor shall
cards, raffles or other games of chance or any form of gambling be permitted in
any billiard room in the city or in the room in which pool or billiard tables
are located, or at any cigar, cigarette, or refreshment stand or any other
business in the same room, whether or not the room is divided by a partition,
nor shall any checks be given which can be redeemed for merchandise or cash;
nor shall the licensee permit on the licensed premises any obstruction of the
public view by the use of drawn shades, blinds, screens or other obstructions,
either permanent or movable.
(‘83 Code, § 116.88) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
CHAPTER 117: SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRIES; DRY CLEANERS
Section
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   Maintenance and operation
   
117.03   Inspection
   
117.99   Penalty
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATTENDANT. Any person of adult age who is either the operator of the self-
service laundry or dry cleaner or an authorized employee of the operator.
   OPERATORS OF SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRIES AND DRY CLEANERS. Any person who keeps
or maintains a commercial establishment open to the general public, which
establishment is equipped with washing machines, drying machines, and/or dry
cleaning machines for the purpose of cleaning, washing, dry cleaning, and/or
drying laundry and other materials, and which washing, drying, and dry cleaning
machines are self-operated by the general public upon payment of a charge to an
attendant or to a coin collection mechanism.
   SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRIES AND DRY CLEANERS. Laundry establishments which
provide self-operated washing, drying facilities and/or dry cleaning which are
open and available to the general public. The term does not include any
establishments wherein the laundry services or dry cleaning are performed by
employees of the operator of the laundry or dry cleaning establishment, nor
does this term as used herein include self-service laundry or dry cleaning
facilities which are provided for or established in apartment or multiple
rental units, as long as the self-service laundries or dry cleaners are not
open to the general public and are restricted in their availability to the
tenants or inhabitants of the apartment or multiple rental units.
(‘83 Code, § 117.01)
§ 117.02 MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION.
   All self-service laundries and dry cleaners shall be maintained and operated
in compliance with all applicable fire, health, and public safety laws of the
state and the ordinances of the city. The operators shall be responsible for
the following.
   (A)   Maintain an attendant who shall be present on the immediate premises
established for the self- service laundry and/or dry cleaners during the hours
of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. while business is open.
   (B)   Keep the establishment clean and free from any accumulation of
combustible materials, and to remove from the drying machines and from the
vicinity thereof, all accumulation of lint and any other combustible materials.
The removal of lint and combustible materials must be performed at least once
every 24 hours that the establishment is open for business.
   (C)   Install and keep available fire extinguishers recommended and approved
by the city Fire Department in the premises provided for the self-service
laundry and dry cleaner.
(‘83 Code, § 117.02) Penalty, see
§ 117.99
§ 117.03 INSPECTION.
   It shall be the duty of the Fire Marshall to inspect each and every self-
service laundry or dry cleaner at least once every three months for the purpose
of determining whether or not the owner or operator thereof is observing and
abiding by the rules and regulations of this chapter.
(‘83 Code, § 117.03)
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of this chapter or failure to comply with any provision
of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $300, or by
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both. Each day a violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   This chapter applies to all existing and future installations.
(‘83 Code, § 117.99)
CHAPTER 118: PET SHOPS
Section
   
118.01   License required; application of Building Code
   
118.02   Definitions
   
118.03   License issuance
   
118.04   Certificate from Health Department; sanitary requirements
   
118.05   Denial or revocation
   
118.06   Suspension of permit
   
118.07   Selling sick or diseased pets prohibited
   
118.08   Humane treatment required
§ 118.01 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION OF BUILDING CODE,
   No person shall operate or cause to be operated within the city a pet shop
business unless the business is operated in a permanent structure or building
meeting the requirements of the Building Code of the city, and the person
obtains a license from the city, and complies with the terms of this chapter.
(‘83 Code, § 118.01)
§ 118.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FOR SALE or OFFERED FOR SALE. All animals or birds found on the premises
indicated in the license of the premises, except those sick, diseased, or
maimed animals or birds which are housed in an entirely separate part of the
premises or in cages or kennels with a “not for sale” sign attached to the
front of each cage or kennel.
   PERSON. All persons, firms, co-partnerships, or corporations, irrespective
of residence or business address, who sell or offer for sale any animals or
birds in the city.
   PET SHOP. Any place, structure, building, lot, or enclosure wherein dogs,
cats, monkeys, rabbits, birds, and other household animals are offered for
sale.
(‘83 Code, § 118.02)
§ 118.03 LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   The City Clerk is authorized to grant a license to any person of good
character, or to any copartnership or corporation, to engage in the pet shop
business in the city, upon compliance with the general licensing provisions of
the city code and upon the payment of the license fee, charged in accordance
with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in Chapter 12 of this Code. The license
shall cover one place of business, which shall be stated therein. Every license
shall expire on March 31 of each year.
(‘83 Code, § 118.04)
§ 118.04 CERTIFICATE FROM HEALTH DEPARTMENT; SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Before the City Clerk shall issue any license provided for in
§ 118.01, the applicant shall furnish him a certificate from the Health
Department stating that the establishment where the applicant conducts or
intends to conduct such a business is a proper place to conduct that business.
(‘83 Code, § 118.05)
   (B)   Blank applications for certificates shall be issued by the City Clerk.
The applications shall contain information as shall be required by the Health
Department, and shall contain an agreement by which the applicant consents to
have an Inspector of the Health Department, or any duly accredited Humane
Officers, enter, examine, and inspect any part of the premises used in
connection with the business. Premises occupied shall be provided with proper
sanitary refuse receptacles and with floors that can be properly cleansed and
flushed. The application shall further contain an agreement that the applicant
agrees to conform to the rules and regulations of the Health Department with
reference to the conduct of the business. The Health Department is authorized
to issue the certificates upon applications of any person, desirous of engaging
in or continuing to engage in the business after determining that the place or
establishment where the business is conducted or intended to be conducted is a
proper place. No determination shall be made until the Health Department
determines by inspection that the premises meet with all the requirements of
this section. (‘83 Code, § 118.06) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 118.05 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Council is authorized to refuse or to revoke a license or to refuse the
same upon satisfactory proof that the applicant is not of good character, or is
not the proper person to have such a license, the applicant conducts the place
or establishment in violation of the rules of the Health Department, the place
or establishment where he conducts the business is not a proper place in which
to conduct the business, the place or establishment does not comply with all of
the requirements of
§ 118.05, the place or establishment is not kept and maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition at all times.
(‘83 Code, § 118.07)
§ 118.06 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   The conviction of any licensee on the charge of having violated any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be cause for suspension or revocation of his
license.
(‘83 Code, § 118.08)
§ 118.07 SALE OF SICK OR DISEASED PETS.
   (A)   No person conducting a pet shop in the city shall sell or offer for
sale any sick, maimed, or diseased animals or birds. All animals or birds
offered for sale must be confined in kennels or cages that shall be approved by
the Health Department.
   (B)   No person shall misrepresent in any way the health, condition, or
pedigree of any animal offered for sale, or refuse to issue a written guarantee
of health at the time of sale or pedigree if requested to do so.
   (C)   No person shall dispose of dead animals in any manner, except as
approved by the Health Department.
(‘83 Code, § 118.03) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 118.08 HUMANE TREATMENT REQUIRED.
   Every licensee shall treat all animals in his possession or custody humanely
and in accordance with the rules and regulations which may be promulgated from
time to time by the Health Department or the Department of Police, and any
licensee who fails or refuses to humanely treat the animals in his care,
possession, or custody, shall be deemed guilty of violating this chapter, and
in addition to the penalties prescribed herein may have his license suspended
or revoked by the council.
(‘83 Code, § 118.09) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
CHAPTER 119: VENDING MACHINES
Section
   
119.01   Definitions
   
119.02   License required
   
119.03   Application; required information
   
119.04   Investigation and inspection
   
119.05   License fees
   
119.06   Display of license
   
119.07   Revocation of license
§ 119.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULTERATED. A food is adulterated if any of the following apply.
      (1)   If it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance
which may be injurious to health.
      (2)   If it bears or contains any added poisonous or deleterious
substance for which no safe tolerance has been established by regulation, or in
excess of the tolerance if one has been established.
      (3)   If it consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid, or
decomposed substance, or if it is otherwise unfit for human consumption.
      (4)   If it has been prepared, packed, or stored under insanitary
conditions where it has become contaminated with filth or rendered injurious to
health.
      (5)   If the container is composed, in whole or in part, of a poisonous
or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health.
   APPROVED. Approved by the Commissioner of Health or his duly designated
representative.
   BULK FOOD. Any food, drink, or ingredient which comes in direct contact with
any surface of the vending machine, appurtenances, or containers.
   CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINE. Any automatic vending machine used for the sale
of cigarettes, cigars, or other confections and controlled by the insertion of
coin, coins, or tokens.
   COLD LIQUID FOOD OR BEVERAGE. Liquid food or beverage, the temperature of
which at the time of service to the consumer is less than 150°F.
   COMMISSARY. Any place where food, beverages, ingredients, containers, or
supplies are handled, prepared, packaged, or stored, and directly from which
vending machines are serviced.
   EMPLOYEE. Any operator or any person employed by him who handles any food,
beverage, or ingredient to be dispensed through vending machines, or who comes
into contact with food, contacts surfaces of containers, equipment, utensils,
or packaging materials used in connection with vending machine operations, or
who otherwise services or maintains one or more machines.
   FOOD. Any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, beverage, or
ingredient used or intended for use, in whole or in part, for human
consumption.
   FOOD HANDLER. One engaged in the direct handling or processing of food or
drink or the utensils in which they are prepared or stored in the establishment
licensed under this chapter, the nature of whose work shall be declared by the
Department of Health as involving definite danger of infectious contamination.
   HOT LIQUID. Liquid food or beverage, the temperature of which at the time of
service to the consumer is at least 150°F.
   JUKE BOX. Any music vending machine, contrivance, or device which upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, disc, or key into any slot, crevice, or other
opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated for the
emission of songs, music, or similar amusement.
   MACHINE LOCATION. The room, enclosure, space, or area where one or more
vending machines are installed and operated.
   MISBRANDING. The use of any written, printed, or graphic matter upon or
accompanying products or containers dispensed from vending machines, including
signs or placards displayed in relation to products so dispensed, which is
false or misleading, or which violates any applicable local, state, or federal
labeling requirements.
   OPERATOR. Any person who, by contract agreement or ownership, takes
responsibility for furnishing, installing, servicing, operating, or maintaining
one or more vending machines. This term shall also mean and include any person
who stocks or replenishes the vending machines and may or may not collect the
money, and may or may not have a proprietary right in the vending machines.
   PACKAGED FOODS. Nonperishable foods that have been completely wrapped or
placed in completely closed or sealed bags, boxes, or containers in an approved
sanitary manner. The following food items and these items only, are classed as
packaged foods for the purpose of license classification in this chapter:
candy, crackers, cracker-sandwiches (peanut butter or cured cheese), potato
chips, pretzels, nuts, cookies, popcorn, carmel corn, cracker-jack, gum.
   PRODUCT CONTACT SURFACE. Any surface of the vending machine, appurtenances,
or containers which comes into direct contact with any food, beverage, or
ingredient.
   READILY PERISHABLE FOODS. Any food, beverage, or ingredients consisting in
whole or in part of milk, milk products, eggs, meat, fish, poultry, or other
food capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of microorganisms which
can cause food infections or food intoxication. However, products in
hermetically sealed containers, processed by heat to prevent spoilage, and
dehydrated, dry or powdered products so low in moisture content as to preclude
development of microorganisms are excluded from the terms of this definition.
   SINGLE-SERVICE ARTICLES. Any utensil, container, implement, or wrapper
intended for use only once in the preparation, storage, display, service, or
consumption of food or beverage.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any self-service device offered for public use, which upon
insertion of a coin, or token, or by other means, dispenses unit servings of
food or beverage, either in bulk or in package, without the necessity of
replenishing the device between each vending operation.
   WAREHOUSE. Any place where food, ingredients, containers, and supplies are
kept or stored in the original carton, case, or wrapping and directly from
which vending machines dispensing packaged foods may be serviced.
(‘83 Code, § 121.01) (Ord. 71-004, passed 3-26-71)
§ 119.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall keep, install, maintain, or engage in the operation of one
or more cigarette, juke box, food, and beverage vending machines in the city
without first having obtained a license therefor from the City Clerk.
(‘83 Code, § 121.02) (Ord. 71-004, passed 3-26-71) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 119.03 APPLICATION; REQUIRED INFORMATION.
   (A)   Application for a license under this chapter shall be made at the
office of the City Clerk. Blank applications for this purpose shall be issued
by the City Clerk. The applications shall contain information as shall be
required by the Clerk or duly authorized representative, and shall further
contain an agreement by which the applicant consents to have the inspectors of
the Departments of Health, Police, Fire and Buildings to enter, examine, and
inspect any part of the premises or vehicles used in conducting the business or
any product or food manufactured or sold, and to take samples for the purpose
of analysis. Each application shall further contain an agreement by the
applicant to conform to the rules and regulations of the Department of Health
relative to the conduct of the business for which he is seeking a license. (‘83
Code, § 121.03)
   (B)   (1)   The application for a license shall contain at least the
following information.
         (a)   Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth.
         (b)   Prior convictions of applicant, if any.
         (c)   Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and
the business conducted at that place.
         (d)   Description of machine to be covered by the license, mechanical
features, name of manufacturer, serial number.
      (2)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he shall be over
21 years of age and a citizen of the United States.
(‘83 Code, § 121.04) (Ord. 71-004, passed 3-26-71) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 119.04 INVESTIGATION AND INSPECTION.
   Application for license shall be made out in triplicate, with the copies
referred to the Police Department, Fire Department and Building Division.
Licenses shall be issued only after investigation, inspection and approval of
the application.
(‘83 Code, § 121.05) (Ord. 71-004, passed 3-26-71) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 119.05 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Every applicant, before being granted a license shall pay the annual
license fee, charged in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in
Chapter 12 of this Code, for the privilege of operating and maintaining for
operation, each vending machine.
   (B)   Each license shall expire on March 31 of each year. No license under
this section shall be assignable without written consent of the City Clerk and
upon payment of a transfer fee charged in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule in Chapter 12 of this Code.
(‘83 Code, § 121.06) (Ord. 73-004, passed 2-7-72) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 119.06 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   The license or licenses herein provided for shall be posted permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the
machine or device is to be operated or maintained to be operated. Any vending
machine without a valid license may be seized by the police and impounded. If,
upon trial of the licensee for failure to have a valid license, the licensee is
found guilty, the vending machine may be destroyed. The reasonable costs of the
seizure and destruction are chargeable to the licensee.
(‘83 Code, § 121.07) (Ord. 72-001, passed 1-3-72) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 119.07 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Every license issued under this chapter is subject to the right, which is
expressly reserved, to revoke the same should the licensee, directly or
indirectly, permit the operation of any vending machine contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, the code of the city, or laws of the state. The
license may be revoked by the City Council after written notice to the
licensee, which notice shall specify the ordinance or law violations with which
the licensee is charged, and if, after a hearing, the licensee is found to be
guilty of the violations. Ten days notice of the hearing shall be given the
licensee. At the hearing the licensee and his attorney may present evidence in
his defense.
(‘83 Code, § 121.08) (Ord. 71-004, passed 3-26-71) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
CHAPTER 120: MASSAGE PARLORS
Section
   
120.01   Definition
   
120.02   License required
   
120.03   County Health Department certificate of approval
   
120.04   License fees
   
120.05   Qualifications
   
120.06   Display of license
   
120.07   License refusal or revocation
   
120.08   Examination of applicants
   
120.09   Compliance agreement; inspection
   
120.10   Regulations available on premises
   
120.11   Apprentices and students
   
120.12   Regulations
§ 120.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MASSAGE PARLOR. Any building, room, place, or establishment, other than a
regularly licensed hospital or dispensary, where non-medical and non-surgical
manipulative exercises are practiced upon the human body, for other than
cosmetic or beautifying purposes, with or without the use of mechanical or
bathing devices, by anyone not a physician or surgeon or of a similarly
registered status.
(‘83 Code, § 122.01) (Ord. 72-020, passed 9-5-72)
§ 120.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No owner or conductor of any shop or establishment regulated by this
chapter shall employ any person to engage in the practices defined in this
chapter unless the person is a licensed operator or registered apprentice, as
provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   No owner or conductor of any school for the teaching of any of the
practices regulated by this chapter shall himself engage in the teaching of
those practices or employ any person to teach in the school unless the person
is a licensed instructor.
(‘83 Code, § 122.02) (Ord. 72-020, passed 9-5-72) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 120.03 COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL.
   The applicant for a license under the provisions of this chapter shall file
with the Secretary of the Department of Health a written application therefor,
under oath, on a form prescribed and supplied by the Department of Health, and
shall submit satisfactory proof of the required age, educational
qualifications, and good moral character, as provided in this chapter. If
qualified, the applicant shall receive a certificate of approval from the
Department of Health, a copy of which certificate shall be delivered to the
License Officer with the application for license. Any fee charged by the
Department of Health for their services shall be paid by the applicant.
(‘83 Code, § 122.03) (Ord. 72-020, passed 9-5-72) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 120.04 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Any person engaged in the practice of massage or owning or conducting
any massage parlor shall obtain a license therefor. The annual license fee for
a practitioner shall be charged in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule in Chapter 12 of this Code, and for each owner or operator of a
massage parlor, the annual license fee shall be charged in accordance with the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule in Chapter 12 of this Code for each establishment.
(‘83 Code, § 122.04)
   (B)   Instructors in any school in which the practices defined in this
chapter are taught shall obtain a license. The annual license fee shall be
charged in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in Chapter 12 of this
Code for each instructor. (‘83 Code, § 120.05)
(Ord. 72-020, passed 9-5-72) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 120.05 QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Applicants for licenses shall meet the following qualifications.
      (1)   The apprentice or student shall be at least 18 years of age, of
good moral character, and have an education equivalent to the completion of
grammar school.
      (2)   Operators shall be at least 20 years of age, of good moral
character, have an education equivalent to the completion of grammar school,
and have not less than one year's practice under the supervision of a
registered operator or instructor as an apprentice, or shall have graduated
from a qualified training school. Operators’ licenses shall be granted only to
those persons who are able to pass the examination arranged by the Department
of Health, and whose course of instruction meets with their approval.
      (3)   The owners or conductors of any massage parlor shall be of good
moral character, or, if a corporation, its officers shall be of good moral
character. The premises on which the establishment is located shall be sanitary
and suitable for the conduct of the business.
      (4)   The owner or conductor of a school (and if a corporation, its
officers) for any of the practices defined in this chapter shall be of good
moral character. The premises on which the school is to be conducted shall be
sanitary and suitable for the purpose and meet the approval of the Department
of Health as to its sanitary condition.
      (5)   An instructor in a school for any of the practices defined in this
chapter shall be a person of good moral character, shall be a graduate of a
grammar school, and shall have been a licensed operator for a period of at
least one year and pass examination given in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Department of Health, as provided in this chapter.
(‘83 Code, § 122.06)
   (B)   Instructors’ licenses shall be granted only to those persons who are
graduates of a grammar school, have been operators for a period of one year,
and who are able to pass the examination set by the Department of Health for
instructors. Operators who apply for instructors' licenses shall have been
licensed operators for one year. (‘83 Code, § 122.07)
(Ord. 72-020, passed 9-5-72) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 120.06 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   All license certificates issued under this chapter shall be displayed by the
licensee at or near the place where the licensee is engaging in the practice or
occupation for which he has obtained a license. (‘83 Code, § 122.08) (Ord. 72-
020, passed 9-5-72) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 120.07 LICENSE REFUSAL OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The License Officer is authorized to issue licenses upon application
therefor or to refuse to issue a license or revoke the same if he has
satisfactory proof that the applicant is not qualified, as provided by the
terms of this chapter, is not the proper or suitable person to conduct or
engage in the practices defined in this chapter, that the applicant has
violated any of the rules of the Department of Health, or has been convicted of
a felony or of a violation of any of the laws of the state or city with
reference to alcoholic beverages, drugs, sanitation, or prostitution.
   (B)   Failure to conform with the rules and regulations of the Department of
Health and with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered sufficient
cause for a request to the License Officer by the Department of Health for the
revocation of the license.
(Ord. 72-020, passed 9-5-72) (‘83 Code, § 122.09)
§ 120.08 EXAMINATION OF APPLICANTS.
   (A)   Before the License Officer shall issue any license for the practice of
massage or the operation of a massage parlor, the application shall be referred
to the Department of Health, who shall examine into the qualifications and
fitness of the applicant. The Department of Health shall, after examination,
certify its approval or disapproval of the applicant. If it disapproves of the
applicant, it shall state in writing its reasons therefor, and give a copy of
the reasons for disapproval to the License Officer and the applicant.
   (B)   The examination conducted by the Department of Health shall be in
accord with the rules adopted by that Department. The examination may include
practical demonstrations and oral or written tests consistent with the
practical and theoretical requirements of the occupation.
   (C)   If the owner of a massage parlor intends to personally attend patrons,
he shall pass the examination for an operator as arranged by the Department of
Health.
(‘83 Code, § 122.10) (Ord. 72-020, passed 9-5-72) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 120.09 COMPLIANCE AGREEMENT; INSPECTION.
   (A)   A license shall be issued to the owner of a massage parlor if he
agrees to conform to the rules and regulations set forth in this chapter and to
employ as operators only those persons who are licensed by the Department of
Health under this chapter. The license shall be granted only after an
inspection has been made by a representative of the Department of Health, and
the type, location, and sanitary condition of the premises and equipment
approved. (‘83 Code, § 122.11)
   (B)   Every massage parlor shall, at reasonable business hours, be held open
for inspection by duly authorized representatives of city departments concerned
with the licensing and supervision of such establishments. The Department of
Health shall have general sanitary supervision thereof. Other supervision of
the same shall be directed by the other city departments concerned. (‘83 Code,
§ 122.12)
(Ord. 72-020, passed 9-5-72) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 120.10 REGULATIONS AVAILABLE ON PREMISES.
   The Department of Health shall cause copies of the rules and regulations
provided for by this chapter to be printed and be furnished the licensees under
this chapter. Every licensee shall cause the rules and regulations to be placed
in a public place in each establishment or shop regulated by this chapter.
(‘83 Code, § 120.13) (Ord. 72-020, passed 9-5-72) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 120.11 APPRENTICES AND STUDENTS.
   (A)   Apprentices or students shall, upon entering the practices defined in
this chapter, register at the Department of Health, and shall be subject to the
rules and regulations of the Department of Health, whereupon they shall be
given a certificate of registration which shall be displayed in or near the
place where the student or apprentice is engaged.
   (B)   No apprentice will receive registration from the Department of Health
unless he is receiving his training in a qualified school and is now employed
in an establishment under the instruction of a licensed operator.
(‘83 Code, § 122.14) (Ord. 72-020, passed 9-5-72) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 120.12 REGULATIONS.
   Licensees under this chapter shall be subject to the following rules and
regulations.
   (A)   Service in massage parlors licensed under this chapter shall be
limited to exercise, baths, and massage. Medical treatment of any kind shall
not be given to any patron without a prescription from a registered physician.
The use of heat lamps and sun-ray lamps only will be permitted.
   (B)   No person who has any visible symptoms of a communicable disease, such
as a rash, discharge, or fever, or who is complaining of a sore throat, may be
attended by any licensee under this chapter or any person engaged in the
practice of massage.
   (C)   Serving or attending in a massage parlor of patrons of the opposite
sex is prohibited. This provision shall not apply in cases in which serving or
attending is under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, or
osteopath.
   (D)   Each applicant for a license under this chapter shall present a
certificate from a registered physician, certifying that he is free from
communicable disease.
   (E)   Advertising that there is a nurse in attendance is prohibited unless
there is a registered graduate nurse constantly in attendance during the
business hours of the massage parlor.
   (F)   Advertising that there is a doctor in attendance is prohibited unless
there is a registered physician constantly in attendance during the business
hours of the massage parlor.
   (G)   Licensees shall exercise every precaution for the safety of patrons.
They shall watch for early signs of fatigue or weakness and immediately
discontinue whatever form of service is being given upon the appearance of such
signs.
   (H)   No massage parlor shall be conducted in direct connection with living
quarters, unless especially approved by the Department of Health.
   (I)   The premises used for a massage parlor shall be well lighted and
ventilated. They shall be kept clean, and the furniture and equipment shall be
maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. There shall be an adequate supply
of running hot and cold water during business hours. Bathing devices shall be
thoroughly cleaned before the use of each patron.
   (J)   All robes, towels, blankets, and linens furnished for the use of one
patron shall be thoroughly laundered before being offered to another.
   (K)   Uniforms or garments worn by an owner, instructor, operator, or
apprentice while attending patrons shall be of washable material and shall be
kept in clean condition. The sleeves shall not reach below the elbow.
   (L)   The skin of the hands of those attending patrons shall be clean and in
healthy condition, and the nails shall be kept short. The hands shall be washed
thoroughly before giving the patron any attention.
   (M) Licensees shall be restricted in the exercise of their license to the
places set forth in their certificate; except that the giving of massage,
baths, and exercise in the patron's place of residence is permitted.
   (N)   Licensees shall notify the Department of Health of any change of name
or address of their homes or business.
(‘83 Code, § 122.15) (Ord. 72-020, passed 9-5-72) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
CHAPTER 121: CABLE TV REGULATIONS
Section
Franchise
   
121.01   Definitions
   
121.02   Grant of authority
   
121.03   Duration; renewal
   
121.04   Territory
   
121.05   Connection requirements
   
121.06   Construction and technical standards
   
121.07   Transfers and assignments
   
121.08   Compliance with rate regulations
   
121.09   Franchise fee: payment
   
121.10   Required services and facilities
   
121.11   Use of streets and easements
   
121.12   Indemnification
   
121.13   Letter of credit required
   
121.14   Reconstruction bond
   
121.15   Customer service standards
   
121.16   Continuity of service required
   
121.17   Complaints
   
121.18   Availability of records upon request
   
121.19   Fiscal reports
   
121.20   Forfeiture and termination
   
121.21   Discrimination prohibited
   
121.22   Acceptance of franchise
   
121.23   Violations
   
121.24   Incorporation of application
Cable Communications Commission
   
121.35   Establishment; membership
   
121.36   Powers and duties
Rate Regulation
   
121.50   Definitions
   
121.51   Purpose
   
121.52   Compliance with FCC rate regulations
   
121.53   Filing; burden of proof
   
121.54   Proprietary information
   
121.55   Public notice; initial review of rates
   
121.56   Tolling order
   
121.57   Public notice; hearing following tolling deadline
   
121.58   Staff or consultant report; written response
   
121.59   Rate decisions and orders
   
121.60   Refunds; notice
   
121.61   Written decisions; public notice
   
121.62   Additional regulations
   
121.63   Failure to give notice
   
121.64   Additional hearings
   
121.65   Additional powers
   
121.66   Failure to comply; remedies
   
121.99   Penalty
FRANCHISE
§ 121.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
    CABLECASTING. Programming carried on a cable system, exclusive of broadcast
signals, whether originated by the Grantee or any other party.
   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM or CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM or CABLE SYSTEM or
CATV SYSTEM. A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and
associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed
and used to provide cable services to subscribers within the city, but this
term does not include a facility that serves only to re-transmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations; a facility that serves
only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings, unless the facility
uses any public right-of-way; a facility of a common or private carrier which
is subject in whole or in part to the provisions of Title II of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such a facility shall be
considered a Cable
Communications System to the extent the facility is used in the transmission of
video programming directly to subscribers.
   CABLE ORDINANCE. Chapter 121 of the City Code.
   CABLE SERVICES. Shall mean the following only.
      (1)   The one-way transmission to all subscribers of video programming,
or other programming services, such as digital cable radio service.
      (2)   Subscriber interaction, including but not limited to that which is
used for the selection of video programming or other programming services,
selecting from various on-screen options, downloading programs or data, or
ordering merchandise.
      (3)   Where VIDEO PROGRAMMING is used, means programming provided by, or
generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television
broadcast station, including cablecasting.
   CITY. Garden City in its present incorporated form or as it may be changed
by annexation.
   COUNCIL. The governing body of Garden City.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. The separate agreement with each person awarding them a
franchise under this chapter.
   GRANTEE. The party or parties to which by franchise agreement a franchise
under this chapter is granted by the Council, and its or their lawful
successors and assigns.
   GROSS REVENUES. Any and all compensation, in whatever forms, exchange or
otherwise, derived from the provision of all cable services in the city, which
shall include all sources attributable to operations of the Grantee within the
city, except that city may by franchise agreement modify the definition of
gross revenues applicable to a particular Grantee.
   SUBSCRIBER. A lawful recipient of cable services.
   TWO-WAY COMMUNICATIONS. The transmission of telecommunications signals from
subscriber locations or other points throughout the system back to the system's
control center as well as transmission of signals from the control center to
subscriber locations.
   USER. A party utilizing a cable television system channel for purposes of
production or transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted with
receipt in a subscriber capacity.
(‘83 Code, § 123.01) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96)
§ 121.02 GRANT OF AUTHORITY.
   (A)   There is granted by the city to the Grantee named in a franchise
agreement, the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain,
in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under the streets, alleys, public
ways, and public places flow laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof,
and additions thereto in the city, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes, and other cable conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance
and operation in the city of a cable communications system, to be used for the
sale and distribution of cable services to the residents of and institutions in
the city.
   (B)   The Grantee shall, at all times during the operation of its franchise,
be subject to lawful exercise of the police power as may be hereafter provided
by the city.
   (C)   The city may, in its discretion, by franchise agreement for a
particular Grantee provide for special or relaxed procedures pursuant to
§ 121.07(A); modify the definition of gross revenues in
§ 121.01; modify the effective percentage rate in
§ 121.09 or modify pursuant to
§ 121.10(E) the matters set forth in
§ 121.10(C) and (D) (collectively "modification") upon a demonstration that
there are exceptional and extraordinary circumstances which warrant
modification, such as an increase in competition in cable services by
increasing the number of Grantees providing the service in the city; the
modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare;
and the modification will not impair the intent and purposes of this chapter
and its several sections.
(‘83 Code, § 123.02) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96)
§ 121.03 DURATION; RENEWAL.
   (A)   Duration period. The duration of the rights, privileges, and
authorizations hereby granted shall be no more than 15 years from the date the
franchise is awarded. Renewal procedures shall be as set forth in Title VI of
the Communications Act of 1934 (as from time to time in effect) and other
applicable state or federal law. In the absence of such laws, the franchise may
be renewed by the city upon application of the Grantee pursuant to the
procedure established in division (B) of this section and in accordance with
the then applicable law.
   (B)   Renewal procedures.
      (1)   At least 15 months prior to the expiration of the franchise, the
Grantee shall inform the city in writing of its intent to seek renewal of the
franchise and thereupon file with the city a proposal for services.
      (2)   After giving public notice, the city shall proceed to determine
whether the Grantee has satisfactorily performed its obligations under the
franchise. To determine satisfactory performance, the city shall consider
technical developments and performance of the system, programming, other
services offered, cost of services, and any other particular requirements set
in the chapter; also, the city shall consider the Grantee's proposal and its
annual reports made to the city and the FCC; industry performance on a national
basis shall also be considered. Provision shall be made for public comment.
      (3)   A four-month period shall be provided to determine the Grantee's
eligibility for renewal.
      (4)   The city shall then prepare within two months any amendments to
this chapter that it believes necessary.
      (5)   If, based upon the Grantee's performance during this franchise
term, the Grantee's new proposal, and report thereon, and the public hearings,
the Council finds a renewal of the franchise with the Grantee is in the public
interest, Council may enter into a renewal of the franchise with the Grantee
under terms and conditions as are appropriate and for an additional term not to
exceed 15 years.
      (6)   In the event the Grantee is determined by the city to have
performed satisfactorily, new applicants may be sought and evaluated and a
franchise award may be made by the city.
(‘83 Code, § 123.03) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96)
§ 121.04 TERRITORY.
   The franchise is for the present territorial limits of the city and for any
area henceforth added thereto during the term of this franchise, but excluding
areas that are within the territorial limits solely due to agreements executed
under the authority of Public Act 425 of 1984, being M.C.L.A. 124.21 through
124.49, unless the Act 425 Agreement expressly so provides and a Grantee
desiring to serve such area consents thereto.
(‘83 Code, § 123.04) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96)
§ 121.05 CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Within 18 months from the date of award of a franchise, a Grantee must
make cable television service available to every dwelling unit within the city.
   (B)   Any delay beyond the terms of this timetable, unless specifically
approved by the Council, will be considered a violation of this chapter, for
which the provisions of either §§
121.20 or
121.99 shall apply, as determined by the Council.
   (C)   With respect to requests for connection requiring an aerial drop line
in excess of 150 feet, the Grantee must extend and make available cable
services to the residents at a connection charge not to exceed the actual
installation costs incurred by the Grantee for the distance exceeding 150 feet.
(‘83 Code, § 123.05) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.06 CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   The Grantee shall construct, install, operate, and maintain its Cable
Communications System in a manner consistent with all applicable laws,
ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical
standards, and with all detailed standards submitted by the Grantee as part of
its application (if any), which standards are incorporated by reference herein.
In addition, the Grantee shall provide the city, upon request, with a written
report of the results of the Grantee's annual proof of performance tests or
other tests conducted pursuant to FCC standards and requirements.
   (B)   Construction, installation, and maintenance of the cable
communications system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner.
All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric
and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in
parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations.
      (1)   The Grantee shall at all times comply with the following.
         (a)   National Electrical Safety Code of the Institute of Electrical
and Electronic Engineers.
         (b)   National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection
Association.
         (c)   Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction.
         (d)   Applicable FCC or other federal, state and local regulations.
         (e)   The charter and ordinances of the city including provisions
regulating public utility franchises.
      (2)   The Grantee's cable communications system shall be located,
erected, and maintained so that none of its facilities shall endanger or
interfere with the lives of persons or property, or interfere with any
improvements the city may deem proper to make, or unnecessarily hinder or
obstruct the free use of streets, alleys, easements, or public property.
   (C)   The following shall apply to Grantee's testing and compliance with the
FCC regulations relating to cable television technical standards currently set
forth in 47 CFR 76, subpart K.
      (1)   The Grantee shall provide city with a report of its testing for
compliance with the regulations upon request.
      (2)   The Grantee shall establish the following procedure for resolving
complaints from subscribers about the quality of the television signal
delivered to them: all complaints shall go initially to a person designated by
the Grantee. All matters not resolved by that person shall at the Grantee's or
the subscriber's option be referred to the city for it to resolve. All matters
not resolved by the city may be referred to the FCC for it to resolve. The
Grantee shall annually notify its subscribers of the preceding.
(‘83 Code, § 123.06) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.07 TRANSFERS AND ASSIGNMENTS.
   (A)   A franchise shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or
in part, or leased, sublet, or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title
thereto, either legal or equitable or any right, interest, or property therein,
pass to or vest in any person without the prior written consent of the city.
The proposed assignee or transferee must show financial responsibility as
determined by the city and must agree to comply with all provisions of the
franchise. The city shall not unreasonably withhold its consent to a proposed
transfer or assignment. The city may charge the assignee or transferee a
reasonable fee to assume the franchise consistent with the original franchise
fee and to cover all reasonable costs incurred in assuring itself that the
assignee or transferee is as qualified to administer the cable system as the
original Grantee. The city may in a franchise provide for special and relaxed
procedures for transfers or assignments to affiliates of a Grantee.
   (B)   The Grantee shall promptly notify the city of any actual or proposed
change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of control of the
Grantee. The word CONTROL as used herein is not limited to major stockholders
but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. There may be
no change in, transfer of, or acquisition of control without the prior consent
of the city, which will not unreasonably be withheld, and any such alteration
in control without consent shall make the franchise subject to revocation. For
the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to a change, transfer, or
acquisition of control, the city may inquire into the qualifications of the
prospective controlling party, and the Grantee shall assist the city in any
inquiry; and the party shall assume all reasonable costs incurred by the city
in so doing.
   (C)   The consent or approval of the Council to any transfer or assignment
of the franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the
city in and to the streets, and any transfer or assignment shall, by its terms,
be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of this franchise.
   (D)   In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the city will not
approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise or change in control prior
to substantial completion of construction of a proposed system.
   (E)   The Council reserves the right, consistent with federal law, to review
the purchase price of any transfer or assignment of the cable system. Any
assignee to this franchise expressly agrees that any negotiated sale value
which the Council (acting upon professional advice) deems unreasonable will not
be considered in the rate base for any subsequent request for rate increases.
   (F)   In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved
without the successor in interest becoming a signatory to the franchise
agreement.
(‘83 Code, § 123.07) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.08 COMPLIANCE WITH RATE REGULATIONS.
   A Grantee shall comply with any applicable cable television rate regulation
ordinances.
(‘83 Code, § 123.08) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.09 FRANCHISE FEE; PAYMENT.
   (A)   For the reason that the streets to be used by the Grantee in the
operation of its cable communications system within the boundaries of the city
are valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the city at great
expense to its taxpayers, and that the grant to the Grantee of the right to use
the streets is a valuable property right without which the Grantee would be
required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions,
and because the city will incur costs in regulating and administering the
franchise, and at the option of the Council, the city may make available a
portion of the franchise fee to further the development of public and community
uses of cable TV, a Grantee shall pay to the city an amount equal to 5% of the
Grantee's annual gross revenues.
   (B)   The city may by franchise agreement increase the effective percentage
rate or rates applicable to a particular Grantee.
   (C)   The franchise fee and any other cost or penalties assessed shall be
payable quarterly to the City Treasurer, in accordance with the Grantee's
fiscal year. The Grantee shall file a complete and accurate verified statement
of all gross revenues during the period for which a quarterly payment is made,
and the payment shall be made to the city not later than 30 days after the
expiration of each quarter.
   (D)   The city shall have the right to inspect and audit the Grantee's
records to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this chapter;
provided, however, that the audit shall take place within 36 months following
the close of each of the Grantee's fiscal years. Any additional amount due to
the city as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following
written notice to the Grantee by the city (which notice shall include a copy of
the audit report), unless contested by the Grantee within those 30 days.
   (E)   In the event that any franchise fee payment or recompute amount, cost,
or penalty, is not made on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified,
interest shall be charged dally from the date at the annual rate of either 12%
or the current prime interest rate, whichever is greater.
(‘83 Code, § 123.09) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.10 REQUIRED SERVICES AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   The cable television system shall have at least 35 channels available
for immediate use.
   (B)   The system shall maintain a plant having the technical capacity for
return, or two-way communications.
   (C)   Subject to division (E) of this section, a Grantee shall maintain the
following for the length of the franchise.
      (1)   At least one specially-designated, noncommercial public access
channel available on a first- come, nondiscriminatory basis at no cost to
users.
      (2)   At least one specially-designated channel for use by local
educational authorities at no cost to users.
      (3)   At least one specially-designated channel for local government's
uses at no cost to users.
      (4)   At least one specially-designated channel for leased access uses;
provided, however, these uses may be combined on one or more channels until
such time as additional channels become necessary.
      (5)   At least one specifically-designated channel available to senior
citizens' programming.
   (D)   Subject to division (E) of this section, a Grantee shall have
available within the city equipment for local production and presentation of
cablecast programs other than automated services, and shall permit its use for
the production and presentation of public access programs.
   (E)   The city may by franchise agreement modify the requirements of
division (C) and/or (D) for a particular Grantee. However, at minimum such a
Grantee shall provide and maintain for the length of the franchise agreement,
at no cost to the city or users, at least three channels, available 24 hours
per day, whose use the city will allocate among some or all of the following
types of uses, as the city from time to time determines best meets the cable-
related needs of the city and its residents.
      (1)   Public access usage.
      (2)   Usage by local public K-12 schools.
      (3)   Usage by the city.
      (4)   Usage by the Garden City Osteopathic Hospital.
      (5)   Usage by and for senior citizens.
      (6)   In addition, a Grantee shall maintain for the length of the
franchise agreement one educational channel for use by Schoolcraft Community
College, Garden City Campus, 24 hours per day, at no cost to that user, unless
the need for such an educational channel is removed by the Grantee otherwise
providing (by leased access or otherwise) the user a channel on the Cable
Communications System.
   (F)   (1)   A Grantee shall comply with applicable federal rules relating to
emergency alert systems.
      (2)   In the absence of such rules a Grantee shall incorporate into its
cable television system the capacity which will permit the city, in times of
emergency, to override, by remote control, the audio of all channels
simultaneously. The Grantee shall designate a channel which will be used for
emergency broadcasts of both audio and video. The Grantee shall cooperate with
the city in the use and operation of the emergency alert override system.
   (G)   (1)   The Grantee may be required to interconnect its system with
other broadband communications facilities. The interconnection shall be made
within the time limit established by the city, which time limit shall be
extended as necessary to obtain needed cooperation of third parties. The
interconnection shall, at the city's discretion, be accomplished according to
the method and technical standards determined by the city and generally
accepted in industry practices.
      (2)   BROADBAND COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY, as used herein, means any
network of cable, optical, electrical, or electronic equipment, including cable
television systems, used for the purpose of transmitting telecommunications
signals, but shall only include landline networks providing multi-channel video
programming generally considered comparable to programming provided by
television broadcast stations.
   (H)   (1)   The Grantee shall provide additional services and facilities as
are contained in its application (if any) or Franchise Agreement, which is
incorporated by reference herein.
      (2)   It is mutually agreed upon and understood that as the "state-of-
the-art" develops to allow additional channels, services, and other
improvements to the system, including two-way capability, those developments
may be incorporated into the system by the Grantee.
   (J)   The Grantee shall make available suitable channel capacity for leased
access by third parties unaffiliated with the Grantee to the extent from time
to time required by federal law and regulations. The Grantee shall have the
sole responsibility for all operating aspects and for the fixing of rates and
conditions for leased access use.
(‘83 Code, § 123.10) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
  § 121.11 USE OF STREETS AND EASEMENTS.
   (A)   All transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment
erected by the Grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum
interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who
adjoin any of the streets.
   (B)   In case of disturbance of any street or paved area the Grantee shall,
at its own cost and expense and in a manner reasonably approved by the city,
replace and restore the street or paved area in as good a condition as before
the work involving the disturbance was done.
   (C)   If at any time during the period of a franchise the city shall
lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, the Grantee, upon
reasonable notice by the city, shall remove, relay, and relocate its poles,
wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other fixtures at its own
expense.
   (D)   Any poles or other fixtures placed in or adjacent to any street by the
Grantee shall be placed in such a manner as to comply with all requirements of
the city.
   (E)   The Grantee shall, at the request of any person holding a moving
permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the
moving of buildings. The expense of temporary removal or raising or lowering of
wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the Grantee shall
have the authority to require payment in advance. The Grantee shall be given
not less than 72 hours' notice to arrange for temporary wire changes.
   (F)   The Grantee may trim trees or other vegetation owned by the city or
encroaching upon the public right-of-way to prevent their branches or leaves
from touching or otherwise interfering with its wires, cables or other
structures. All trimming or pruning shall be at the sole cost of the Grantee.
   (G)   In all sections of the city where the cables, wires, or other like
facilities of public utilities are placed underground, the Grantee shall place
its cables, wires, or other like facilities underground.
   (H)   At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted and
absent its renewal, or upon its termination and cancellation, as provided for
herein, the city shall have the right to require the Grantee to remove at its
own expense all portions of the cable television system within the city.
   (I)   In using any easements, the Grantee shall ensure the following.
      (1)   That the safety, functioning and appearance of the property and
convenience and the safety of other persons not be adversely affected by the
installation or construction of facilities necessary for the cable television
system.
      (2)   That the cost of the installation, construction, operation, or
removal of any facilities be borne by the Grantee or a subscriber, or a
combination of both.
      (3)   That the owner of property be justly compensated by the Grantee for
any damages caused by the installation, construction, operation or removal of
facilities by the Grantee.
(‘83 Code, § 123.11) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.12 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   It shall be expressly understood and agreed by and between the city
and any Grantee hereunder that the Grantee shall save the city and its agents
and employees harmless from and against all claims, damages, losses, and
expenses, including attorney's fees, sustained by the city on account of any
suit, judgment, execution, claim, or demand whatsoever arising out of but not
limited to copyright infringements and all other damages arising out of the
installation, operation, or maintenance of the cable system authorized herein,
whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or
prohibited by this subchapter and any franchise granted hereunder.
   (B)   The Grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of the franchise
specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the terms of the
franchise, liability insurance insuring the city and the Grantee in the minimum
amount of $5,000,000.
   (C)   The insurance policy obtained by the Grantee in compliance with this
section must be approved by the City Attorney, and the insurance policy, along
with written evidence of payment of required premiums, shall be filed and
maintained with the City Clerk during the term of the franchise. The Grantee
shall immediately advise the City Attorney of any litigation that may develop
that would affect this insurance.
   (D)   Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by
the city thereunder shall be construed to or limit the liability of the Grantee
under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages.
   (E)   All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this chapter shall
contain the following endorsement.
It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be
canceled by the surety, nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety
until 60 days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, of written notice
of intention to cancel or not to renew.
   (F)   The preceding are minimum requirements and the insurance and indemnity
terms of a franchise agreement with a Grantee shall control to the extent they
are stricter or more detailed than the preceding.
(‘83 Code, § 123.12) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.13 LETTER OF CREDIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   In accordance with the timing set forth in
§ 121.22(B), the Grantee shall deposit with the city a letter of credit from a
financial institution in the amount of $50,000. The form and content of the
letter of credit shall be reasonably approved by the City Attorney. The letter
of credit shall be used to insure the faithful performance by the Grantee of
all provisions of this franchise; and compliance with all orders, permits, and
directions of any agency, commission, board, department, division, or office of
the city having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under this franchise;
and the payment by the Grantee of any claims, liens, and taxes due the city
which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the
system.
   (B)   The letter of credit shall be maintained at $50,000 during the entire
term of this franchise, even if amounts have to be withdrawn pursuant to
divisions (A) or (C) of this section
   (C)   If the Grantee fails to pay to the city any compensation within the
time fixed herein, or fails, after ten days’ notice, to pay to the city any
taxes due and unpaid, or fails to repay the city, within ten days, any damages,
costs, or expenses which the city is compelled to pay by reason of any act or
default of the Grantee in connection with this franchise, or fails, after three
days’ notice of failure by the city to comply with any provision of this
franchise which the city reasonably determines can be remedied by demand on the
letter of credit, the city may immediately request payment of the amount
thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the letter of credit. Upon
request for payment, the city shall notify the Grantee of the amount and date
thereof.
   (D)   The rights reserved to the city with respect to the letter of credit
are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this
franchise or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding, or exercise of a
right with respect to the letter of credit shall affect any other right the
city may have.
   (E)   The letter of credit shall contain the following endorsement.
It is hereby understood and agreed that this letter of credit may not be
canceled by the surety, nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety
until 60 days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, of written notice
of intention to cancel or not to renew.
(‘83 Code, § 123.13) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.14 RECONSTRUCTION BOND.
   (A)   (1)   In accordance with the timing set forth in
§ 121.22(B), the Grantee shall obtain and maintain at its cost and expense, and
file with the City Clerk, a corporate surety bond from a company authorized to
do business in the state, and found acceptable by the City Attorney, in the
amount of $200,000, to guarantee the timely construction and full activation of
the cable television system.
      (2)   The bond shall provide, but not be limited to, the following
condition. There shall be recoverable by the city, jointly and severally from
the principal and surety, any and all damages, loss, or costs suffered by the
city resulting from the failure of the Grantee to satisfactorily complete and
fully activate the cable television system throughout the franchise area
pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter.
   (B)   Any extension to the prescribed time limit must be authorized by the
Council. The extension shall be authorized only when the Council finds that an
extension is necessary and appropriate due to causes beyond the control of the
Grantee.
   (C)   The construction bond shall be terminated only after the Council finds
that the Grantee has satisfactorily completed all construction and activation
of the cable television system pursuant to the terms and conditions of this
chapter.
   (D)   The rights reserved to the city with respect to the construction bond
are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this
chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding, or exercise of a right
with respect to the construction bond shall affect any other rights the city
may have.
   (E)   The construction bond shall contain the following endorsement.
It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the
surety, nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until 60 days
after receipt by the city, by registered mall, of written notice of intent to
cancel or not to renew.
(‘83 Code, § 123.14) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96)
§ 121.15 CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.
   (A)   The Grantee shall at all times comply with the customer service and
consumer protection standards of this chapter, the Franchise Agreement and the
Federal Communications Commission.
   (B)   The Grantee shall put, keep, and maintain all parts of the Cable
Communications System in suitable condition throughout the entire franchise
period.
   (C)   Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the Grantee shall
promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from the premises of the
subscriber upon the subscriber's request or the request of the owner of the
premises, if different than the subscriber.
   (D)   The Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest possible time.
   (E)   The Grantee shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere
with television reception of persons not served by Grantee, nor shall the
system interfere with, obstruct, or hinder in any manner, the operation of the
various utilities serving the residents of the city.
(‘83 Code, § 123.15) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.16 CONTINUITY OF SERVICE REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving
service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the Grantee are
honored. In the event that the Grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify, or
sell the system, or the city gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to
renew this franchise, the Grantee shall act so as to insure that all
subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted services regardless of the
circumstances.
      (2)   In the event of a change of franchisee, or in the event a new
operator acquires the system, the Grantee shall cooperate with the city, new
franchisee, or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all
subscribers. During this period, the Grantee shall be entitled to the revenues
for any period
during which it operates the system, and shall be entitled to reasonable costs
for its services when it no longer operates the system.
   (B)   In the event the Grantee fails to operate the system for four
consecutive days without prior approval of the city or without just cause, the
city may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such
time as the Grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city,
or a permanent operator is selected. If the city is required to fulfill this
obligation for the Grantee, the Grantee shall reimburse the city for all
reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from the system received by
the city that are the result of the Grantee's failure to perform.
(‘83 Code, § 123.16) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.17 COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   The City Manager is specified by the city as having primary
responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchise and
implementation of complaint procedures.
   (B)   The Grantee shall maintain an office or location in the city for the
payment of bills , which shall be open during all usual business hours. In
addition, the Grantee shall have a publicly listed telephone, and be so
operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be
received on a 24-hour basis.
   (C)   The Grantee shall maintain a repair and maintenance crew capable of
responding to subscriber complaints or requests for service within 24 hours
after receipt of the complaint or request.
   (D)   The Grantee shall establish procedures for receiving, acting upon, and
resolving subscriber complaints to the reasonable satisfaction of the City
Manager. The Grantee shall furnish a notice of these procedures to each
subscriber at the time of initial subscription to the system.
   (E)   In the event that a subscriber complaint is not resolved to the mutual
satisfaction of the subscriber or the Grantee, either the subscriber or the
Grantee may request that the matter be presented to the Council or to a body
designated by the Council for a hearing and resolution.
   (F)   When there have been similar complaints made or when there exists
other evidence, which, in the judgment of the Council, casts doubt on the
reliability or quality of cable service, the Council shall have the right and
authority to compel the Grantee to test, analyze, and report on the performance
of the System. The report shall be delivered to the Council no later than 14
days after the Council formally notifies the Grantee, and shall include the
nature of the complaints which precipitated the special tests; what system
component was tested, the equipment used, and procedures employed in testing;
the results of the tests; and the method in which the complaints were resolved.
   (G)   Tests and analyses shall be supervised by a professional engineer not
on the permanent staff of the company. The costs of these tests shall be paid
for by the Grantee, but the engineer shall be acting under the direction of the
city. The aforesaid engineer should sign all records of the special tests and
forward to the Council the records with a report interpreting the results of
the tests and recommending actions to be taken by the city.
(‘83 Code, § 123.17) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.18 AVAILABILITY OF RECORDS UPON REQUEST.
   (A)   The Grantee shall fully cooperate in making available at reasonable
times, and the City Clerk shall have the right on reasonable notice, to inspect
the relevant records, maps, plans, and other like materials of the Grantee
applicable to the cable television system, at any time during normal business
hours; provided where volume and convenience necessitate, the Grantee may
require the inspection to take place on the Grantee’s premises. (‘83 Code, §
123.18)
   (B)   Copies of all petitions, applications, communications, and reports
submitted by the Grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities
and Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or
agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting cable television
operations authorized pursuant to the franchise, shall be provided to the city
upon request.
(‘83 Code, § 123.19)
(Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.19 FISCAL REPORTS.
   The Grantee shall file annually with the City Clerk, no later than 120 days
after the end of the Grantee's fiscal year, a copy of a financial report
applicable to the Garden City Cable Television System, including a detailed
statement of gross revenues applicable to its operations during the preceding
12-month period. These reports shall be certified as correct by an authorized
officer of the Grantee and there shall be submitted along with them any other
reasonable information as the City Manager shall request with respect to the
Grantee's revenues and properties related to its cable television system
operations within the city.
(‘83 Code, § 123.20) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.20 FORFEITURE AND TERMINATION.
   (A)   In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the city under
this franchise or otherwise, the city reserves the right to forfeit and
terminate the franchise and all rights and privileges of the Grantee hereunder
in the event of a substantial breach of its material terms and conditions. A
substantial breach by the Grantee shall include, but shall not be limited to
the following.
      (1)   Violation of any material provision of the franchise or any
material rule, order, regulation, or determination of the city made pursuant to
the franchise.
      (2)   Attempt to evade any material provision of the franchise or
practices any fraud or deceit upon the city or its subscribers.
      (3)   Failure to begin or complete the system construction or system
extension as provided under the franchise.
      (4)   Failure to provide the types of services promised herein.
      (5)   Failure to restore service after 96 consecutive hours of
interrupted service, except when approval of interruption is obtained from the
city.
      (6)   Misrepresentation of material fact in the application for or
negotiation of the franchise.
   (B)   The foregoing shall not constitute a major breach if the violation
occurs but it is without fault of the Grantee or occurs as a result of
circumstances beyond its control. The Grantee shall not be excused by mere
economic hardship nor by misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers,
or employees.
   (C)   The city may make a written demand that the Grantee comply with any
provision, rule, order, or determination under or pursuant to this franchise.
If the violation by the Grantee continues for a period of 30 days following a
written demand without written proof that the corrective action has been taken
or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the issue of termination of the
franchise shall be brought before the Council. At least 20 days prior to the
date of such a Council meeting, a written notice of intent to request
termination and the time and place of the meeting shall be served upon the
Grantee. Public notice shall be given of the meeting and issue which the
Council is to consider.
   (D)   The Council shall hear and consider the issue and shall hear any
person interested therein, and shall determine in its discretion, whether or
not any violation by the Grantee has occurred.
   (E)   If the Council shall determine the violation by the Grantee was the
fault of the Grantee and within its control, the Council may, by resolution,
declare that the franchise of the Grantee shall be forfeited and terminated
unless there is compliance within a period as the Council may fix, the period
not to be less than 60 days, provided no opportunity for compliance need be
granted for fraud or misrepresentation.
   (F)   The issue of forfeiture and termination shall automatically be placed
upon the Council agenda at the expiration of the time set by it for compliance.
The Council then may terminate the franchise forthwith upon finding that the
Grantee has failed to achieve compliance or may further extend the period, in
its discretion.
(‘83 Code, § 123.21) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.21 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Grantee shall not deny access, or otherwise discriminate against
subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color,
religion, national origin or sex. The Grantee shall comply with all other
applicable and local laws and regulations, and all executive and administrative
orders relating to nondiscrimination which are hereby incorporated and made
part of this chapter by reference.
   (B)   The Grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity
requirements of federal, state and local regulations, as amended from time to
time.
   (C)   No signals shall be transmitted from a subscriber terminal for
purposes of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices without the
express written permission of the subscriber. The request for permission shall
be contained in a separate document with a prominent statement that the
subscriber is authorizing the permission in full knowledge of its provision.
The authorization shall be revocable at any time by the subscriber without
penalty of any kind whatsoever. The authorization is required for each type or
classification of two-way cable communications activity planned. However, the
Grantee shall be entitled to conduct system-wide or individually addressed
"sweeps" for the purpose of verifying system integrity, controlling return-path
transmission, or billing for pay services.
   (D)   The Grantee shall not deny or discriminate against any group of actual
or potential subscribers in the city on access to or the rates, terms and
conditions of cable services because of the income level or other demographics
of the local area in which the group may be located.
   (E)   The Grantee shall provide all subscribers with the option of obtaining
a device by which the subscriber can prohibit the viewing of a particular cable
service during periods selected by the subscriber.
(‘83 Code, § 123.23) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.22 ACCEPTANCE OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   No franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
become effective unless and until this chapter has become effective and, in
addition, unless and until all things required in this section are done and
completed, all of the things being hereby declared to be conditions precedent
to the effectiveness of any franchise granted hereunder. In the event any of
those things are not done and completed in the time and manner required, the
Council may declare the franchise null and void.
   (B)   Within 30 days after the awarding of a franchise agreement to a
Grantee, or within an extended period of time as the Council in its discretion
may authorize, the Grantee shall file with the City Clerk its written
acceptance, in form satisfactory to the City Attorney, of the Franchise
Agreement, together with the insurance policies, letter of credit and bond
required by
§§ 121.12,
121.13, and
121.14,respectively, and its agreement to be bound by and to comply with and to
do all things required of it by the provisions of this chapter and Franchise
Agreement. The acceptance and agreement shall be acknowledged by the Grantee
before a notary public and shall in form and content be satisfactory to and
approved by the City Attorney.
(‘83 Code, § 123.25) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.23 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to establish, operate, or to carry on the business of
operating a cable television system unless a franchise agreement therefor has
first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless the
franchise agreement is in full force and effect.
   (B)   From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to construct or maintain within any public street in
the city, or within any other public property of the city, or within any
privately-owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street
but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative
subdivision map approved by the city, any equipment or facilities for the
purpose of operating a cable television system, unless a franchise agreement
authorizing the use of the street or property or area has first been obtained
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless the franchise agreement
is in full force and effect.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make any
unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically,
inductively, or otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable television
system within this city for the purpose of enabling himself or others to
receive any cable service, without payment to the owner of the cable television
system.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner,
to wilfully tamper with, remove, or injure any cables, wires, or equipment used
for distribution of cable services.
(‘83 Code, § 123.26) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.24 INCORPORATION OF APPLICATION .
   By its acceptance of a franchise agreement, a Grantee specifically grants
and agrees that its application, if any, is thereby incorporated by reference
and made a part of this chapter. In the event of a conflict between proposed
services listed in the application and the provisions of this chapter, that
provision which, in the opinion of the Council, provides the greatest benefit
to the city, shall prevail. Failure to provide services as promised in the
Grantee's application as incorporated herein shall be deemed a breach of this
chapter to which the provisions of §§
121.20 or
121.99 shall apply.
(‘83 Code, § 123.27) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
§ 121.35 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP
   There is created a Cable Communications Commission consisting of seven
members to be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council. Each
member shall serve a term of three years; provided, however, that each of the
members currently appointed to the Commission shall continue to serve on the
Commission until the expiration of his/her current term. The Chairperson of the
Commission shall be selected by the members and have the right to vote. In his
absence, the Vice- Chairperson, who shall also be selected by the Commission,
shall act as Chairperson. Four members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum. Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation and may be
removed from office by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Any
vacancy in office shall be filled by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council for the remainder of the term. The Commission shall prescribe its own
rules and regulations for carrying out its functions and duties.
(‘83 Code, § 123.40) (Ord. 82-015, passed 5-3-82; Am. Ord. 99-004, passed 4-12-
99)
  § 121.36 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Cable Communications Commission shall be empowered as follows.
   (A)   To confer with and advise the Mayor and Council on all matters
concerning cable communications and television systems in the city.
   (B)   To collect data and information concerning the operations of cable
systems and to recommend to the Mayor and Council an orderly initiation and
expansion of cable communications and television systems for the city.
(‘83 Code, § 123.41) (Ord. 82-015, passed 5-3-82)
RATE REGULATION
§ 121.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All other
words and phrases used in this subchapter shall have the same meaning as
defined in the Act and FCC Rules.
    ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT. All equipment and services subject to regulation
pursuant to 47 CFR 76.923.
    ACT. The Communications Act of 1934, as amended (and specifically as
amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of
1992, Pub. L. 102-385), and as may be amended from time to time.
   BASIC CABLE SERVICE.   BASIC SERVICE as defined by the FCC Rules, and any
other cable television service which is subject to rate regulation by the city
pursuant to the Act and the FCC Rules.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   FCC RULES. All rules of the FCC promulgated from time to time pursuant to
the Act;
   INCREASE IN RATES. An increase in rates or a decrease in programming or
customer services.
(‘83 Code, § 123.50) (Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96)
§ 121.51 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to adopt regulations consistent with the
Act and the FCC Rules with respect to basic cable service rate regulation, and
prescribe procedures to provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of
the views of interested parties in connection with basic cable service rate
regulation by the city. This subchapter shall be implemented and interpreted
consistent with the Act and FCC Rules.
(‘83 Code, § 123.51) (Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96)
§ 121.52 COMPLIANCE WITH FCC RATE REGULATIONS.
   In connection with the regulation rates for basic cable service and
associated equipment, the city shall follow all FCC Rules.
(‘83 Code, § 123.52) (Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.53 FILING; BURDEN OF PROOF.
   (A)   A cable operator shall submit its schedule of rates for the basic
service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in rates in
accordance with the Act and the FCC Rules. The cable operator shall include as
part of its submission any information as is necessary to show that its
schedule of rates or its proposed increase in rates complies with the Act and
the FCC Rules. The cable operator shall file ten copies of the schedule or
proposed increase with the City Clerk. For purposes of this subchapter, the
filing of the cable operator shall be deemed to have been made when at least
ten copies have been received by the City Clerk. The City Council may, by
resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations prescribing the
information, data and calculations which must be included as part of the cable
operator's filing of the scheduled rates or a proposed increase.
   (B)   In addition to information and data required by rules and regulations
of the city pursuant to division (A) of this section, a cable operator shall
provide all information requested by the City Manager in connection with the
city's review and regulation of existing rates for the basic service tier and
associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates. The City Manager
may establish deadlines for submission of the requested information and the
cable operator shall comply with those deadlines.
   (C)   A cable operator has the burden of proving that its schedule of rates
for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a probed increase in
rates complies with the Act and the FCC Rules including, without limitation, 47
USC 543 and 47 CFR 76.922 and 76.923.
(‘83 Code, § 123.53) (Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96) Penalty, see
§ 121.99
§ 121.54 PROPRIETARY INFORMATION.
   (A)   If this subchapter, any rules or regulations adopted by the city
pursuant to
§ 121.53(A), or any request for information pursuant to
§ 121.53(B) requires the production of proprietary information, the cable
operator shall produce the information. However, at the time the allegedly
proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator may request that
specific, identified portions of its response be treated as confidential and
withheld from public disclosure. The request must state the reason why the
information should be treated as proprietary and the facts that support those
reasons. The request for confidentiality will be granted if the city determines
that the preponderance of the evidence shows that non-disclosure is consistent
with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 USC 552. The city
shall place in public file for inspection any decision that results in
information being withheld. If the cable operator requests confidentiality and
the request is denied, where the cable operator is proposing a rate increase,
it may withdraw the proposal, in which case the allegedly proprietary
information will be returned to it; or the cable operator may seek review
within five working days of the denial in any appropriate forum. Release of the
information will be stayed pending review.
   (B)   Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld
as proprietary with the city. The city shall weigh the policy considerations
favoring non-disclosure against the reasons cited for permitting inspection in
light of the facts of the particular case. It will then promptly notify the
requesting entity and the cable operator that submitted the information as to
the disposition of the request. It may grant, deny or condition a request. The
requesting party or the cable operator may seek review of the decision by
filing an appeal with any appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending
resolution of any appeal.
   (C)   The procedures set forth in this section shall be construed as
analogous to and consistent with the rules of the FCC regarding requests for
confidentiality including, without limitation, 47 CFR 0.459.
(‘83 Code, § 123.54) (Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96)
§ 121.55 PUBLIC NOTICE; INITIAL REVIEW OF RATES.
   Upon the filing of ten copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed
increase in rates pursuant to
§ 121.53(A), the City Clerk shall publish a public notice in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city which shall state that the filing has been
received by the City Clerk and (except those parts which may be withheld as
proprietary) is available for public inspection and copying, and interested
parties are encouraged to submit written comments on the filing to the City
Clerk no later than seven days after the public notice is published. The City
Clerk shall give notice to the cable operator of the date, time, and place of
the meeting at which the City Council shall first consider the schedule of
rates or the proposed increase. This notice shall be mailed by first-class mail
at least three days before the meeting. In addition, if a written staff or
consultant's report on the schedule of rates or the proposed increase is
prepared for consideration of the City Council, then the City Clerk shall mail
a copy of the report by first-class mail to the cable operator at least three
days before the meeting at which the City Council shall first consider the
schedule of rates or the proposed increase.
(‘83 Code, § 123.55) (Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96)
§ 121.56 TOLLING ORDER.
   After a cable operator has filed its existing schedule of rates or a
proposed increase in these rates, the existing schedule of rates will remain in
effect or the proposed increase in rates will become effective after 30 days
from the date of filing under
§ 121.53(A), unless the City Council (or other properly authorized body or
official) tolls the 30-day deadline pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933 by issuing a
brief written order, by resolution or otherwise, within 30 days of the date of
filing. The City Council may toll the 30-day deadline for an additional 90 days
in cases not involving cost-of-service showings and for an additional 150 days
in cases involving cost-of-service showings.
(‘83 Code, § 123.56) (Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96)
§ 121.57 PUBLIC NOTICE; HEARING FOLLOWING TOLLING DEADLINE.
   If a written order has been issued pursuant to
§ 121.56 and 47 CFR 76.933 to toll the effective date of existing rates for the
basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these
rates, the cable operator shall submit to the city any additional information
required or requested pursuant to
§ 121.53. In addition, the City Council shall hold a public hearing to consider
the comments of interested parties within the additional 90-day or 150-day
period, as the case may be. The City Clerk shall publish a public notice of the
public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which
shall state the date, time, and place at which the hearing shall be held.
Interested parties may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at the hearing
to submit comments on or objections to the existing rates or the proposed
increase in rates. Copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in
rates and related information (except those parties which may be withheld as
proprietary) are available for inspection or copying from the office of the
Clerk. The public notice shall be published not less than 15 days before the
hearing. In addition, the City Clerk shall mail by first-class mail a copy of
the public notice to the cable operator not less than 15 days before the
hearing.
(‘83 Code, § 123.57) (Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96)
§ 121.58 STAFF OR CONSULTANT REPORT; WRITTEN RESPONSE.
   Following the public hearing, the City Manager shall cause a report to be
prepared for the City Council which shall (based on the filing of the cable
operator, the comments or objections of interested parties, information
requested from the cable operator and its response, staff or consultant's
review, and other appropriate information) include a recommendation for the
decision of the City Council pursuant to
§ 121.59. The City Clerk shall mail a copy of the report to the cable operator
by first-class mail not less than 20 days before the City Council acts under
§ 121.59. The cable operator may file a written response to the report with the
City Clerk. If at least ten copies of the response are filed by the cable
operator with the City Clerk ten days after the report is mailed to the cable
operator, the City Clerk shall forward it to the City Council.
(‘83 Code, § 123.58) (Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96)
§ 121.59 RATE DECISIONS AND ORDERS.
   The City Council shall issue a written order, by resolution or otherwise,
which in whole or in part approves the existing rates for basic cable service
and associated equipment or a proposed increase in rates, denies the existing
rates or proposed increase, orders a rate reduction, prescribes a reasonable
rate, allows the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective
subject to refund, or orders other appropriate relief, in accordance with the
FCC Rules. If the City Council issues an order allowing the existing rates or
proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, it shall also direct
the cable operator to maintain an accounting pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933. The
order specified in this section shall be issued within 90 days of the tolling
order under
§ 121.56 in all cases not involving a cost-of-service showing. The order shall
be issued within 150 days after the tolling order under
§ 121.56 in all cases involving a cost-of-service showing.
(‘83 Code, § 123.59) (Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96)
§ 121.60 REFUNDS; NOTICE.
   The City Council may order a refund to subscribers as provided in 47 CFR
76.942. Before the City Council orders any refund to subscribers, the City
Clerk shall give at least seven days written notice to the cable operator by
first-class mail of the date, time, and place at which the City Council shall
consider issuing a refund order, and shall provide an opportunity for the cable
operator to comment. The cable operator may appear in person, by agent, or by
letter at that time for the purpose of submitting comments to the City Council.
(‘83 Code, § 123.60) (Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96)
§ 121.61 WRITTEN DECISIONS; PUBLIC NOTICE.
   Any order of the City Council pursuant to
§ 121.59 or
§ 121.60 shall be in writing, shall be effective upon adoption by the City
Council, and shall be deemed released to the public upon adoption. The Clerk
shall publish a public notice of any written order in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city which shall summarize the written decision and
state that copies of the text of the written decision are available for
inspection or copying from the office of the Clerk. In addition, the City Clerk
shall mail a copy of the text of the written decision to the cable operator by
first-class mail.
(‘83 Code, § 123.61) (Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96)
§ 121.62 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   In addition to rules promulgated pursuant to
§ 121.53, the City Council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and
regulations for basic cable service rate regulation proceedings (including,
without limitation, the conduct of hearings), consistent with the Act and the
FCC Rules.
(‘83 Code, § 123.62) (Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96)
§ 121.63 FAILURE TO GIVE NOTICE.
   The failure of the City Clerk to give the notices or to mail copies of
reports as required by this subchapter shall not invalidate the decisions or
proceedings of the City Council.
(‘83 Code, § 123.63) (Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96)
§ 121.64 ADDITIONAL HEARINGS.
   In addition to the requirements of this subchapter, the City Council may
hold additional public hearings upon reasonable notice as the City Council, in
its sole discretion, shall prescribe.
(‘83 Code, § 123.64) (Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96)
§ 121.65 ADDITIONAL POWERS.
   The city shall possess all powers conferred by the Act, the FCC Rules, the
cable operator's franchise, and all other applicable law. The powers exercised
pursuant to the Act, the FCC Rules, and this subchapter shall be in addition to
powers conferred by law or otherwise. The city may take any action not
prohibited by the Act and the FCC Rules to protect the public interest in
connection with basic cable service rate regulation.
(‘83 Code, § 123.65) (Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96)
§ 121.66 FAILURE TO COMPLY; REMEDIES.
   The city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against the
cable operator (including, without limitation, all remedies provided under a
cable operator's franchise with the city) for failure to comply with the Act,
the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this
subchapter, any requirements of this subchapter, or any rules or regulations
promulgated hereunder. Subject to applicable law, failure to comply with the
Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this
subchapter, any requirements of this chapter, or any rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder, shall also be sufficient grounds for revocation or
denial of renewal of a cable operator's franchise.
(‘83 Code, § 123.66) (Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-96)
§ 121.99 PENALTY.
   For the violation of any of the following provisions of this chapter,
penalties shall be chargeable to the letter of credit as follows.
   (A)   For failure to complete system construction in accordance with
§ 121.05, unless the Council specifically approves the delay by motion or
resolution, due to the occurrence of conditions beyond the Grantee's control,
the Grantee shall pay $500 per day for each calendar day, or part thereof, the
deficiency continues.
   (B)   For failure to provide documents, reports, information, or to
reasonably cooperate with the city during any application process or cable
television system review, the Grantee shall pay $100 per calendar day each
violation continues.
   (C)   For failure to test and report on the performance of the Cable
Communications System following a request pursuant to this chapter, the Grantee
shall pay the city $50 per day for each calendar day, or part thereof, that
noncompliance continues.
   (D)   Forty-five days following adoption of a resolution of determining a
failure of the Grantee comply with operational or maintenance standards, the
Grantee shall pay a minimum of $500, up to $1,000, for each calendar day, or
part thereof, that noncompliance continues.
   (E)   The City shall provide the Grantee with written notice of the
violation alleged to have occurred and the Grantee shall have 30 days in which
to cure the violation; or in the case of any alleged violation which cannot
reasonably be cured within the 30-day period, to commence and diligently pursue
a cure; or notify the city in writing that it disputes the city's claim of an
alleged violation. In the event that the Grantee disputes the city's claim, the
city shall, upon reasonable prior written notice, set a hearing before the City
Council at which the city, the Grantee and any interested party may present
evidence relating to the alleged violation. Following the hearing, the city
shall make a determination as to whether a violation has occurred. In the event
that the city reasonably determines that a violation has occupied, the city
shall notify the Grantee in writing of its finding, and shall provide the
Grantee 30 days in which to cure the violation, or in the case of a violation
which cannot reasonably be cured with a 30-day period, commence and diligently
pursue a cure. In the event that the Grantee fails to cure in the time period
provided or fails to diligently pursue a cure, the city shall have the right to
withdraw from the letter of credit the amount set forth as provided. Any
penalties shall be tolled during any 30-day period or the period during which
the Grantee is diligently pursuing a cure.
(‘83 Code, § 123.22) (Ord. 82-036, passed 6-21-82; Am. Ord. 96-003, passed 4-1-
96)
CHAPTER 122: TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
   
122.01   Purpose
   
122.02   Conflict
   
122.03   Definitions
   
122.04   Permit required
   
122.05   Issuance of permit
   
122.06   Construction engineering permit
   
122.07   Conduit or utility poles
   
122.08   Route maps
   
122.09   Repair of damage
   
122.10   Establishment and payment of maintenance fee
   
122.11   Modification of existing fees
   
122.12   Savings clause
   
122.13   Use of funds
   
122.14   Annual report
   
122.15   Cable television operators
   
122.16   Existing rights
   
122.17   Compliance
   
122.18   Reservation of police powers
   
122.19   Severability
   
122.20   Authorized city officials
   
122.21   Municipal civil infraction
§ 122.01 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use of
public right-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other
applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under
the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02)
§ 122.02 CONFLICT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict
with the Act or other applicable law.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02)
§ 122.03 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACT. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to
time.
      CITY. The City of Garden City.
      CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Garden City or its
designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or
function that is required by law to be made by the City Council.
      CITY MANAGER. The City Manager or his or her designee.
      PERMIT. A non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this
chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the
city for its telecommunications facilities.
   (B)   All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as
defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following:
      AUTHORITY. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the Act.
      MPSC. The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of
Consumer and Industry Services or equivalent Department, and shall have the
same meaning as the term "Commission" in the Act.
      PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity.
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway,
highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY does not
include a federal, state, or private right-of-way.
      TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES. The equipment or personal
property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits,
pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit,
carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES do not include antennas, supporting
structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary
equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed
commercial mobile service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of Title III
of the communications Act of 1932, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332
and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and
service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER and TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.
Those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act,
1991 PA 179, M.C.L.A. 484.2102. TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDER does not include a
person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed
commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of the
Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and
further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service
provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the
Act and this chapter only, a PROVIDER also includes all of the following:
         (a)   A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications
service.
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns
telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way.
         (c)   A person providing broadband internet transport access service.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02)
§ 122.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the
city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on
an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of the
Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with
the City Clerk, one copy with the City Manager, and one copy with the City
Attorney. Upon receipt, the City Clerk shall make copies of the application and
distribute a copy to additional recipients as required under the Act.
Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act,
including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's
existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act.
   (C)   Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that
any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application
contain trade secrets, proprietary, or confidential information, which is
exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, M.C.L.A. 15.231 to
15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider
shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map.
   (D)   Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the
application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee
in the amount of $500.
   (E)   Additional information. The City Manager may request an applicant to
submit such additional information which the City Manager deems reasonably
necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in
compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information
established by the City Manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on
the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or
the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act.
   (F)   Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act,
authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under Section 251 of
the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, M.C.L.A. 484.2251 and
authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers
prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications
Act, but after 1985, shall satisfy the permit requirements of this chapter.
   (G)   Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180
days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications
provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of
such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under
Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, M.C.L.A.
484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a
telecommunications provider submitting an application under this division is
not required to pay the $500 application fee required under division (D) above.
A provider under this division shall be given up to an additional 80 days to
submit the permit application if allowed by the Authority, as provided in
Section 5(4) of the Act.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 122.05 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application
for a permit is hereby delegated to the City Manager. Pursuant to Section 15(3)
of the Act, the City Manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit
within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application
for a permit under
§ 122.04(B) of this chapter for access to a public right-of-way within the
city. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act, the City Manager shall notify the
MPSC when the City Manager has granted or denied a permit, including
information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date
on which permit was granted or denied. The City Manager shall not unreasonably
deny an application for a permit.
   (B)   Form of permit. If an application for a permit is approved, the City
Manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or
without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1),
6(2) and 15 of the Act.
   (C)   Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the City Manager may
impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be
limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public
right-of-way.
   (D)   Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without
limitation on division (C) above, the City Manager may require that a bond be
posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a
bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the
public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the
telecommunications provider's access and use.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02)
§ 122.06 CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING PERMIT.
   A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over,
across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a
construction or engineering permit as required under Chapter 151 of this Code,
as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be
charged for such a construction or engineering permit.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02)
§ 122.07 CONDUIT OR UTILITY POLES.
   Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees
required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a telecommunications
provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02)
§ 122.08 ROUTE MAPS.
   Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall,
within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new
telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the
location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city.
The route maps should be in paper or electronic format unless and until the
Commission determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 122.09 REPAIR OF DAMAGE.
   Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider
undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications
facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public
right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all
damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or
within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-
way to its pre-existing condition.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 122.10 ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE FEE.
   In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set forth
in
§ 122.04(D) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications
facilities in the city's public rights-of way shall pay an annual maintenance
fee to the authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 122.11 MODIFICATION OF EXISTING FEES.
   In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the city
hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to
telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the
Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not
exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall
be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(4)
of the Act, the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers
with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's
boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under Section
8 of the Act. The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected
by the fee with a copy of this chapter, in compliance with the requirement of
Section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications
providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are
otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be
contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or
discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in
error.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02)
§ 122.12 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be
invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under
§ 122.11 above shall be void from the date the modification was made.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02)
§ 122.13 USE OF FUNDS.
   Pursuant to Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from
the Authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related
purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city
from the Authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or the
Local Street Fund maintained by the city under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of
1951.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02)
§ 122.14 ANNUAL REPORT.
   Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the City Manager shall file an annual
report with the Authority on the use and disposition of funds annually
distributed by the Authority.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02)
§ 122.15 CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS.
   Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable
television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an
obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this
Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from
charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through
broadband internet transport access services.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02)
§ 122.16 EXISTING RIGHTS.
   Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein
with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that a
telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the
city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider
related to the use of the public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02)
§ 122.17 COMPLIANCE.
   The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this chapter
is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof
should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall
comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not
limited to the following:
   (A)   Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976
PA 442, M.C.L.A. 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in
§ 122.04(C) of this chapter;
   (B)   Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit
requirements hereof, in accordance with
§ 122.04(F) of this chapter;
   (C)   Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an
application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500 application
fee, in accordance with
§ 122.04(G) of this chapter;
   (D)   Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from
the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for
access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance
with
§ 122.05(A) of this chapter;
   (E)   Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in
accordance with
§ 122.05(A) of this chapter;
   (F)   Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance
with
§ 122.05(A) of this chapter;
   (G)   Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in
§ 122.05(B) of this chapter;
   (H)   Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the
telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in
accordance with
§ 122.05(C) of this chapter;
   (I)   Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds
the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its
original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and
use, in accordance with
§ 122.05(D) of this chapter;
   (J)   Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for
construction or engineering permits, in accordance with
§ 122.06 of this chapter;
   (K)   Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's
right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with
§ 122.11 of this chapter;
   (L)   Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with
§ 122.14 of this chapter; and
   (M)   Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to
pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with
§ 122.15 of this chapter.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02)
§ 122.18 RESERVATION OF POLICE POWERS.
   Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this chapter shall not limit the
city's right to review and approve a telecommunications provider's access to
and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to
ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02)
§ 122.19 SEVERABILITY.
   The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this
chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph,
section, or clause of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or
validity of any remaining provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02)
§ 122.20 AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.
   The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the
authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations
(directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction
violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the Municipal
Chapter Violations Bureau) for violations under this chapter as provided by the
City Code.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02)
  § 122.21 MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION.
   A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or
conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and
shall be subject to
§ 10.99 of the City Code. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit
the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of
this chapter or a permit.
(Ord. 03-003, passed 10-28-02)
CHAPTER 123: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section
Eviction Property Disposal
   
123.01   Use of dumpster; removal of evicted tenant’s property
 
   
123.99   Penalty
EVICTION PROPERTY DISPOSAL
§ 123.01 USE OF DUMPSTER; REMOVAL OF EVICTED TENANT’S PROPERTY.
   Upon a tenant’s eviction by court order:
   (A)   The property owner or operator shall, concurrent with the eviction
order, place and use or cause to be placed and used, for disposal of the
tenant’s personal property, a dumpster(s) of sufficient size to hold the
tenant’s household furniture and goods, on the private area of the owner or
operator’s property, only, and not on any public area adjacent to the owner or
operator’s property;
   (B)   The tenant’s personal property shall be placed and disposed of, only,
in the dumpster(s) required by this section, provided, that the dumpster(s)
shall be of the type which will allow access from its side as opposed to access
solely through the top of the container;
   (C)   The dumpster(s) required by this section shall be removed from the
owner or operator’s property within 48 hours of its placement.
(Ord. 08-005, passed 5-19-08) Penalty, see §
123.99
§ 123.99 PENALTY.
   Unless otherwise provided, any person, corporation, partnership or any other
legal entity who violates the provisions of §
123.01 may, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, at the
discretion of the court.
(Ord. 08-005, passed 5-19-08)
CHAPTER 124: MARIJUANA REGULATIONS
Section
Medical Marijuana Regulations
   
124.01   Definitions
   
124.02   Prohibited activity
   
124.03   Permit required
   
124.04   Permit requirements
   
124.05   Application for permit
   
124.06   Inspections
   
124.07   Issuance of permit; term
   
124.08   Denial of permit; appeal hearing
   
124.09   Transfer or misuse of permit
   
124.10   Display
   
124.11   Revocation of permit; appeal
   
124.12   Surrender of permit on demand; return
Marihuana Prohibitions
   
124.35   Reserved
Medical Marijuana Facility Authorization and Licensing
   
124.40   Purpose and intent
   
124.41   Definitions
   
124.42   Authorized medical marijuana facilities
   
124.43   City medical marijuana facility license
   
124.44   General regulations regarding medical marijuana facilities
   
124.45   Annual medical marijuana facility fee
   
124.46   City license nonrenewal, suspension, revocation, transfers, extensions
and appeals
Adult Use Marijuana Establishment Authorization and Licensing
   
124.70   Purpose and intent
   
124.71   Definitions
   
124.72   Authorized adult use marijuana establishments
   
124.73   City adult use marijuana establishment license
   
124.74   General regulations regarding authorized adult use marijuana
establishments
   
124.75   Annual adult use marijuana establishment facility fee
   
124.76   City license nonrenewal, suspension, revocation, transfers, extensions
and appeals
 
   
124.99   Penalty
MEDICAL MARIJUANA REGULATIONS
§ 124.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Substances regulated under the Public Health Code,
Public Act 368 of 1978, as amended, and/or the United States Code.
   MICHIGAN MEDICAL MARIJUANA ACT. This refers to the Michigan Medical
Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, MCL 333.26421 et seq.
   PERMIT or PERMITTEE. Shall include respectively the words LICENSE or
LICENSEE, or the holder for any use or period of time of any similar privilege,
wherever relevant to any provision of this chapter or other law or ordinance.
   PRIMARY CAREGIVER OR CAREGIVER. A person who is at least 21 years old and
who has agreed to assist with a patient's medical use of marihuana and who has
not been convicted of any felony within the past 10 years and has never been
convicted of a felony involving illegal drugs or a felony that is an assaultive
crime as defined in section 9a of chapter X of the code of criminal procedure,
1927 PA 175, MCL 770.9a.
   QUALIFYING PATIENT OR PATIENT. A person who has been diagnosed by a
physician as having a debilitating medical condition.
   REGISTRY IDENTIFICATION CARD. A document issued by the Michigan Department
of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs that identifies a person as a registered
qualifying patient or registered primary caregiver.
(Ord. 10-010, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 20-008, passed 12-21-20; Am. Ord. 24-
009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.02 PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any business to provide assessments and/or
certifications under the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act without a permit under
this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a primary caregiver to grow marijuana for a
qualifying patient under the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act without a permit
under this chapter.
(Ord. 10-010, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 20-008, passed 12-21-20; Am. Ord. 24-
009, passed 10-28-24) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of Michigan Medical Marijuana
Act assessments and/or certifications without first obtaining a permit
therefor. No such permit shall be granted except upon approval of the City
Clerk.
   (B)   No person registered as a primary caregiver shall grow marijuana for
anything other than personal consumption without first obtaining a permit
therefor. No such permit shall be granted except upon approval of the City
Clerk.
   (C)   A primary caregiver in operation on the effective date of this chapter
may continue to operate provided they: (1) have applied to obtain a permit from
the City within 60 days of the effective date of this article; (2) complies
with the permit requirements imposed by §
124.04 of this chapter, as determined by the City Clerk, within 120 days of the
effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 10-010, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 20-008, passed 12-21-20; Am. Ord. 24-
009, passed 10-28-24) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.04 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   A person or business permitted under this chapter shall be subject to the
following conditions:
   (A)   Compliance with the requirements of this chapter, other applicable
City ordinances and codes and applicable state laws.
   (B)   Compliance with the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act.
   (C)   Shall obtain all necessary state and local license/permits before
commencing operations and shall maintain a valid license/permit during
operation.
   (D)   Shall only conduct all activity granted by the permit on a site that
is in compliance with all applicable City of Garden City Zoning Ordinance
regulations.
   (E)   Shall only display signs on the exterior and interior of the property
that are in compliance with all applicable sign ordinance regulations.
   (F)   Consumption or use of marijuana is prohibited on the premises.
   (G)   No persons under the age of 18 shall be allowed within any medical
marihuana facility, unless the individual is a qualifying patient and
accompanied by his/her primary caregiver- parent or documented legal guardian.
   (H)   No controlled substances shall be kept stored or distributed on site
where Michigan Medical Marijuana Act assessments and/or certifications take
place.
   (I)   An individual or business receiving a permit to grow marijuana as a
primary caregiver shall be subject to the following additional conditions:
      (1)   Shall only be allowed to grow the maximum number of plants
permitted for each qualifying patient to whom they are connected through the
Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs' registration process.
      (2)   The maximum allowed number of qualify patients connected to a
primary caregiver shall be five as cited in the Michigan Medical Marijuana Act,
Sec. 6(d), MCL 333.26426 et seq.
      (3)   Shall provide a copy of the registry identification card for each
qualifying patient that the primary caregiver is connected through the Michigan
Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs' registration process at the
time of permit application.
      (4)   Shall notify the City Clerk when the primary caregiver is newly
connected with a qualifying patient and provide a copy of the registry
identification cards for any new qualifying patients.
      (5)   Shall notify the City Clerk when a qualifying patient is no longer
connected with the primary caregiver.
(Ord. 10-010, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 20-008, passed 12-21-20; Am. Ord. 24-
009, passed 10-28-24) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.05 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Applications for permits required by this chapter shall be made upon
forms provided by the Clerk, which shall be signed and verified under oath by
the applicant, if an individual, or by the authorized agent for any firm,
partnership, association, corporation, company or organization and shall set
forth the following:
      (1)   If an individual, the name, address and telephone number of the
individual;
      (2)   If a partnership, the name, residence and business address and
telephone number of each partner and each partner's computerized criminal
history (CCH) and master driving record;
      (3)   If a corporation, the name, date and state under whose laws such
corporation was organized and, if a foreign corporation, whether authorized to
do business in the state, the names of the principal officers, directors and
local representatives, their residences and business addresses and telephone
numbers and their computerized criminal history (CCH) and master driving
record;
      (4)   If an employee, the name, residence and telephone number,
computerized criminal history (CCH), and master driving record of the employee
together with written credentials setting forth the exact nature of his
employment, including, where applicable, a copy of the employees medical
license;
      (5)   The length of time for which the right to do business is sought;
      (6)   For assessment and/or certification applications, a photograph of
the applicant or the agent for the applicant who is to do the actual
assessments and/or certification which photograph shall be two inches by two
inches showing head and shoulders of applicant or agent;
      (7)   A copy of the applicant's computerized criminal history (CCH);
      (8)   A copy of the applicant's master driving record;
      (9)   A brief description of the product, products or services involved;
      (10)   The name, address and telephone number of a Michigan resident who
is the registered agent of the individual, corporation or association, who has
the full power and authority to accept service of process for and on behalf of
applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the
business transacted under said permit with the result that service on said
agent shall be valid as if personally served on the applicant; and
      (11)   A history of the applicant's ordinance and state law license and
permit revocations and ordinance violations.
      (12)   For primary caregiver applications, a copy of a valid primary
caregiver's registry identification card and a copy of the registry
identification card for each qualifying patient that the primary caregiver is
connected through the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs'
registration process.
   (B)   The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application
fee to be established by resolution of the City Council and made part of the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 10-010, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 20-008, passed 12-21-20; Am. Ord. 24-
009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.06 INSPECTIONS.
   Upon receipt of an application, the City Clerk may request the assistance of
the city departments to determine that the premises comply with the provisions
of this chapter and any other ordinance of the city, including the zoning
ordinance, and that the applicant or the activity to be licensed do not
constitute an apparent danger to the health, safety and welfare of the people
of the city.
(Ord. 10-010, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 20-008, passed 12-21-20; Am. Ord. 24-
009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.07 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; TERM.
   The City Clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant unless the Clerk finds
reason for denial including that the applicant’s permit has previously been
revoked. The permit shall be for no more than one year in term. The standards
for denial of the application by the City Clerk are as follows:
   (A)   The application is not completely filled out as required by §
124.05.
   (B)   The applicant’s computerized criminal history (CCH) shows a conviction
or convictions for activities that pose a threat or a danger to the residents
of the city should a permit be granted. By way of example, but not exclusively,
such convictions would include reckless driving, drunk driving, disturbing the
peace, assault and battery or simple assault, domestic violence, stalking,
theft, dishonesty or deception, fraud, obstruction of justice, disorderly
person, trespassing, window peeping, criminal sexual conduct, felonious
assault, murder, assault with intent to commit any other crime, breaking and
entering and/or any other violation of the Criminal Code of the State of
Michigan, United States Code and/or local ordinances pertaining to criminal
conduct.
   (C)   The product or services being offered violate any provision of
federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations.
   (D)   Verification of any of the information required by §
124.05 shows the information provided by the applicant to be fraudulent, a
misrepresentation, or a false statement.
   (E)   An investigation through the City Police Department or any other law
enforcement agency shows a pattern and history of conduct which would justify a
revocation of the applicant’s permit under §
124.11.
   (F)   The applicant or any of the proposed employees of the applicant have a
history of business license/permit violations, revocations, or a history of
ordinance violations regardless of whether they have resulted in conviction.
   (G)   Failure to pay the nonrefundable application fee.
   (H)   No permit shall be issued to any applicant until such applicant shall
have obtained the age of 18 years.
   (I)   Any other competent, material and substantial evidence indicating the
applicant or any of the applicant’s proposed employees pose an apparent danger
to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city and/or the activity
proposed to be permitted constitutes an apparent danger to the health, safety
and welfare of the people of the city.
   (J)   The site upon which medical marijuana assessments/certifications or
primary caregiver growing of marijuana activity is conducted does not comply
with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable city ordinances,
including but not limited to, all zoning ordinance requirements and applicable
state laws.
(Ord. 10-010, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 20-008, passed 12-21-20; Am. Ord. 24-
009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.08 DENIAL OF PERMIT; APPEAL HEARING.
   (A)   The Clerk may refuse to issue a permit for the reasons stated in §
124.07.
   (B)   Any person whose permit application has been denied shall have the
right to petition the City Council for an appeal. The City Council shall grant
a public hearing on this appeal, and the applicant shall have the right to
appear and present evidence on his/her behalf. Following such hearing, the
Council shall submit to the applicant a written statement of its findings and
determinations. The Council’s determination shall be based upon competent,
material and substantial evidence showing failure to comply with the
requirements of §
124.07.
(Ord. 10-010, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 20-008, passed 12-21-20; Am. Ord. 24-
009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.09 TRANSFER OR MISUSE OF PERMIT.
   No permit issued hereunder shall be transferred to another business location
or represented as pertaining to any other business location.
(Ord. 10-010, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 20-008, passed 12-21-20; Am. Ord. 24-
009, passed 10-28-24) Penalty, see §
124.99
§ 124.10 DISPLAY.
   A permit issued hereunder shall be prominently displayed at the location at
all times.
(Ord. 10-010, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 20-008, passed 12-21-20; Am. Ord. 24-
009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.11 REVOCATION OF PERMIT; APPEAL.
   (A)   Permits issued pursuant to §
124.07 may be revoked by the City Clerk upon the Clerk’s findings based upon
competent, material and substantial evidence of any of the following causes:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for permit;
      (2)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the services and/or merchandise;
      (3)   Any violation of this chapter;
      (4)   Conviction by the permittee of any felony; or
      (5)   Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner
as to constitute breach of the peace.
   (B)   Notice of the revocation of a permit shall be given in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds for the revocation. Such notice shall be
mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at the address provided in the
application.
   (C)   Any permittee whose permit has been revoked as herein provided shall
have the right to appeal the revocation to the City Council as provided in §
124.08.
(Ord. 10-010, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 20-008, passed 12-21-20; Am. Ord. 24-
009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.12 SURRENDER OF PERMIT ON DEMAND; RETURN.
   The permit shall be surrendered on demand to a police officer based upon a
probable cause belief by the officer that the permittee is in violation of this
chapter. The permit shall be returned to the permittee within 48 hours upon
failure of the City Clerk to find cause to revoke the permit as provided in §
124.11.
(Ord. 10-010, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 20-008, passed 12-21-20; Am. Ord. 24-
009, passed 10-28-24)
MARIHUANA PROHIBITIONS
§ 124.35 RESERVED.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITY AUTHORIZATION AND LICENSING
§ 124.40 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to authorize and regulate medical
marijuana facilities in the city, to provide reasonable regulation of medical
marijuana facilities in order to protect the public health, safety and general
welfare of the city's residents and property owners, to provide a method to
defray administrative costs of such facilities, to coordinate city regulations
and license approvals with laws and regulations enacted by the State of
Michigan and to promote economic development by encouraging vertical
integration of such facilities and operations in the city. It is not the intent
of this subchapter to restrict or abrogate the protections for medical
marijuana facilities found in the Medical Marijuana Facilities Licensing Act,
PA 281 of 2016, as amended.
(Ord. 24-009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.41 DEFINITIONS.
   Words used herein shall have the definitions as provided for in the Medical
Marijuana Facilities Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016, as may be amended or any
administrative rules promulgated thereunder. For purposes of this subchapter,
the terms marihuana and marijuana are interchangeable. The words "the city" is
defined as permitting the use only as a Special Land Use in the M-1 Light
Industrial Zoning District Chapter §
154.165(C).
(Ord. 24-009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.42 AUTHORIZED MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITES.
   The following medical marijuana facilities may be authorized to operate
within the M-1 Light Industrial District within the city by the holder of a
state operating license, and the city may issue a city license for the same,
subject to compliance with the Medical Marijuana Facilities Licensing Act, PA
281 of 2016, as amended and any administrative rules promulgated thereunder and
this subchapter:
   (A)   Three growers shall be authorized in the city which number may include
Class A, B or C growers, in any combination.
   (B)   Three processors shall be authorized in the city, each of which must
be co-located with a grower.
   (C)   Three provisioning centers shall be authorized in the city, each of
which must be co-located with a grower and a processor.
   (D)   Zero secure transporters shall be authorized in the city.
   (E)   Zero safety compliance facilities shall be authorized in the city.
(Ord. 24-009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.43 CITY MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITY LICENSE.
   (A)   All applicants for a city medical marijuana facility license shall be
pre-qualified by the State of Michigan Cannabis Regulatory Agency and shall
provide proof of such approval from the state prior to or upon applying to the
city for a city license. The applicant must be the same person who received
pre-qualification from the Cannabis Regulatory Agency.
   (B)   All applicants for a city medical marijuana facility license must
provide proof to city of interest in the property which is the proposed
location for the marijuana facility, which proof may include, but is not
limited to, valid purchase agreement, valid option to purchase, deed or other
indicia of a property interest.
   (C)   On and after December 1, 2024, the city shall accept applications for
a city license to operate a medical marijuana facility within the city.
Application shall be made on a city form and must be submitted to the City
Clerk and/or other designee of the city (hereinafter referred to as the
"Clerk."). Once the Clerk receives a complete application including the initial
annual medical marijuana facility license fee, the application shall be time
and date stamped. All complete applications received on or after December 1,
2024, shall be considered for conditional authorization and/or city licensure.
   (D)   If an application is incomplete or missing information the City Clerk
shall notify the applicant of the incomplete or missing information in writing
by electronic mail sent to the address provided for notification by the
applicant. The applicant shall have ten business days from the date of mailing
by electronic mail of the written notice to provide the incomplete or missing
information to the City Clerk. Failure to provide the missing or incomplete
information within the time specified may result in denial of the application.
Applications with incomplete or missing information shall not be reviewed by
city staff or marked complete until all incomplete or missing information is
received by the City Clerk and that date will be used to determine the order of
review of the application in relation to other applications.
   (E)   Applications received may be denied by the City Clerk if the applicant
fails to provide missing or incomplete information within the time specified in
this section.
   (F)   The City Clerk shall deny an application for any of the following
reasons:
      (1)   The applicant has not been prequalified for a marijuana business
license by MR.
      (2)   The applicant did not pay the required application fee at the time
of submission of the application.
      (3)   The applicant has not provided satisfactory proof that the
applicant has or will have lawful possession of the premises proposed for the
location of the medical marijuana facility for the period during which the
permit will be issued.
      (4)   The applicant's proposed medical marijuana facility does not comply
with the zoning regulations in
Chapter 154 Zoning of the City Code.
      (5)   The City Clerk determines that the applicant has not satisfactorily
complied with all permit requirements in this chapter.
      (6)   The City Clerk determines that the applicant submitted an
application containing false, misleading, or fraudulent information, or who
intentionally omitted pertinent information on the application for a marijuana
business permit.
      (7)   The applicant is delinquent in the payment of any taxes, fees or
other charges owed to or collected by the city.
   (G)   Notice of denial of an application shall be sent to the applicant in
writing by electronic mail to the last known address of the applicant on file
with the city. An applicant whose application is denied may appeal denial to
the City Council in writing stating the basis for the appeal within ten days of
receipt of the notice of denial.
   (H)   If a conditionally licensed applicant is denied a state operating
license, then such conditional license will be canceled by the City Clerk and
the conditional license shall be available to the next applicant for the
specific type of medical marijuana facility license.
   (I)   A conditionally licensed applicant shall receive a license from the
city to operate the medical marijuana facility within the city upon the
applicant providing the Clerk proof that the applicant has received a state
operating license for the medial marijuana establishment in the city and the
applicant has met all other requirements of this subchapter for the operation
of a medical marijuana facility.
   (J)   If a conditionally licensed applicant fails to obtain a license from
the city within one year from the date of conditional license, then such
conditional license shall be canceled by the Clerk. The City Council shall have
the authority to extend the deadline to obtain a city license for a medical
marijuana facility pursuant to §
124.46.
   (K)   The City Council may approve a license application form, which shall
include, but is not limited to, waiver provisions. The application form may
include, but is not limited to, a waiver of an applicant's right to bring
claims against the city regarding the licensing process and/or other city
approval decisions.
   (L)   A licensee shall not operate a medical marijuana facility at any
location in the city other than the address provided in the application to the
city.
(Ord. 24-009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.44 GENERAL REGULATIONS REGARDING MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITIES.
   (A)   An authorized medical marijuana facility shall only be operated within
the city by the holder of a state operating license issued pursuant to the
Medical Marijuana Facilities Licensing Act, PA 281 of 2016, as may be amended,
and the rules promulgated thereunder. The facility shall only be operated as
long as the state operating license and the city license both remain in effect.
   (B)   Prior to operating an authorized medical marijuana facility within the
city pursuant to a state operating license, the facility must comply with all
city construction and building codes zoning ordinances, and all other
applicable city rules, regulations and ordinances. The facility shall only be
operated as long as it remains in compliance with all such ordinances now in
force or which hereinafter may be established or amended.
   (C)   Separation distance requirements. The following minimum setbacks apply
to all medical marijuana facilities.
      (1)   From residentially zoned districts. All lots containing a medical
marijuana facility must be located at least 300 feet from a residentially zoned
district (regardless of whether the residentially zoned district is located
within the municipal boundaries of Garden City), measured from the nearest lot
line of the medical marijuana facility to the nearest line of the residentially
zoned district.
      (2)   From child care facilities, schools, and like facilities. All lots
containing a medical marijuana facility must be located at least 500 feet from
the nearest lot line of any child care center, licensed day care facility,
preschool program center, primary, intermediate or secondary school, or like
facility, established pursuant to and in accordance with the Revised School
Code, P.A. 451 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 380.1 through 380.1853, as amended,
and/or the State School Aid Act of 1979, P.A. 94 of 1979, being M.C.L.A. §§
388.1601 through 388.1772, as amended.
      (3)   Public parks. All lots containing a medical marijuana facility must
be located at least 500 feet from any public park, measured from the nearest
lot line of the medical marijuana facility to the nearest lot line of the
public park.
   (D)   Distance from Ford Road. The minimum setbacks of medical marijuana
facilities and/or adult use marijuana establishments from the right-of-way of
Ford Road are as follows:
      (1)   All buildings on a lot containing a medical marijuana facility must
be located at least 300 feet from Ford Road, measured from the right-of-way of
Ford Road to the nearest building.
      (2)   All lots containing a medical marijuana facility must be located at
least 265 feet from Ford Road, measured from the right-of-way of Ford Road to
the nearest lot line of the medical marijuana facility.
   (E)   A medical marijuana facility shall consent to inspection of the
facility by city officials including city police, building officials and zoning
officials, among others, upon reasonable notice, to verify compliance with this
subchapter.
   (F)   It is hereby expressly declared that nothing in this subchapter be
held or construed to give or grant to any authorized medical marijuana facility
a vested right, license, privilege or permit to continued authorization from
the city for operations within the city.
   (G)   If city allows adult use marijuana establishments pursuant to the
MRTMA, a medical marijuana facility may co-locate with an adult use marijuana
establishment, as authorized by Section 6, subsection 5 of the Michigan
Regulation and Taxation of Marijuana Act (Initiated Law 1 of 2018) and if
further authorized under all applicable city ordinances, including but not
limited to, the zoning ordinance.
   (H)   No stacked grower licenses are authorized by the city.
   (I)   A medical marijuana facility shall prevent smoke, odors, debris, dust,
noise, lights, glare, heat, other emissions or discharge from interfering with
the reasonable and comfortable use and enjoyment of another's property. Whether
smoke, odors, debris, dust, noise, lights, glare, heat, other emissions or
discharge interfere with the reasonable and comfortable use and enjoyment of
property shall be measured against the objective standards of a reasonable
person of normal sensitivity.
   (J)   Wastewater. All medical marijuana facilities must be designed and
operated so as to minimize the amount of pesticides, fertilizers, nutrients,
marijuana, and any other potential contaminants discharged into the public
wastewater and/or stormwater systems.
   (K)   Odor. All medical marijuana facilities must be equipped with an
operable filtration, ventilation, and exhaust system that effectively confines
odors to the interior of the building from which the odor is generated.
   (L)   Separation of activities. All drying, soil mixing, testing,
processing, and other non-growing activities must take place in a separate room
from any growing activities.
   (M)   Security. All facilities must have an adequate and approved security
plan to prevent access to marijuana by non-authorized personnel, including
unauthorized removal. All rooms that contain marijuana, in any form, must be
individually locked and accessible only to authorized personnel. The building
(s) housing the medical marijuana facility shall all be equipped with security
cameras approved by the city Police Chief, maintained in operational order, and
installed in such a way as to monitor the entire perimeter of the building(s)
and capable of recording and storing a minimum of 120 continuous hours of the
perimeter monitoring. The security cameras shall be in operation 24-hours a
day, seven days a week, and shall be set to maintain the record of the prior
120 hours of continuous operation.
   (N)   Alarm system. An alarm system is required that is operated and
monitored by a recognized security company.
   (O)   Access record. Except as prohibited by state or federal law, a written
record of all individuals entering the medical marijuana facility shall be
maintained at the facility, which written record shall be available to the city
Police Department as needed for investigative purposes, but only to the extent
allowed by state or federal law.
   (P)   Unlawful activities. Any uses or activities found by the State of
Michigan or a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or
otherwise unlawful by state law may not be permitted by the city. In the event
that a court of competent jurisdiction declares some or all of this section
invalid, the city may suspend the acceptance or review of applications for
special land use permits pending the resolution of the legal matter in
question.
   (Q)   Indoor activity only. All activities of a medical marijuana facility
must be conducted indoors.
   (R)   Prohibited activities. No smoking, inhalation, or consumption of
marijuana shall take place on the premises of any medical marijuana facility.
   (S)   Waste disposal plan. All medical marijuana facilities must submit and
have approved a waste disposal plan specific to marijuana, marijuana plant
waste, and marijuana-infused products.
   (T)   Operations plan. All medical marijuana facilities must submit and have
approved an operations statement that describes, but is not limited to, the
life cycle of marijuana and marijuana-infused products entering, stored on,
grown, dried, and leaving the site. This statement may include how deliveries
are handled, methods of storage, cash handling, a floor plan, and other
pertinent information.
   (U)   City expressly reserves the right to amend or repeal this subchapter
in any way including, but not limited to, complete elimination of or reduction
in the type and/or number of licenses for medical marijuana facilities
authorized to operate within the city.
(Ord. 24-009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.45 ANNUAL MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITY FEE.
   There is hereby established an annual nonrefundable city medical marijuana
facility fee in the amount of $5,000 for each authorized medical marijuana
facility within the city. This fee is intended to help defray the city's
administrative and enforcement costs associated with authorizing and licensing
medical marijuana facilities. An initial annual medical marijuana facility fee
of $5,000 shall be payable at the time of application for city authorization
and licensing. Thereafter the same amount shall be payable each year by the
anniversary of the date of the city's issuance of a city license to operate the
medical marijuana facility.
(Ord. 24-009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.46 CITY LICENSE NONRENEWAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, TRANSFERS, EXTENSIONS
AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Each license is exclusive to the licensee and cannot be sold or
transferred without prior approval of the City Council. The attempted transfer,
sale or other conveyance of an interest in a license without prior approval of
the City Council is grounds for suspension or revocation of the license or for
other appropriate sanction. Any licensee seeking to transfer or sell a license
must request approval of such transfer or sale in writing to the City Council
at least 60 days prior to the proposed transfer or sales date. No transfer or
sale of a city license may occur prior to City Council approval.
   (B)   The City Council, after notice and hearing, may suspend, revoke or
refuse to renew a license for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   The applicant or licensee, or his/her agent, manager or employee,
has violated, does not meet or has failed to comply with any of the terms,
requirements, conditions of provisions of this subchapter, with city zoning
approvals or with any applicable state or local law or regulation; or
      (2)   The medical marijuana facility has operated in a manner that
adversely affects the public health, safety and welfare.
   (C)   Evidence to support a finding for nonrenewal, suspension or revocation
of a license may include, without limitation, a continuing pattern of conduct
of drug related criminal complaints within the premises of the medical
marijuana facility or in the immediate surrounding area or an ongoing nuisance
condition, including but not limited to odors, emanating from or caused by a
medical marijuana facility or such other ordinance violations.
   (D)   An applicant may appeal any city decision regarding licensure,
nonrenewal, suspension, revocation or transfer of a license to the full City
Council, upon written request. An applicant requesting such appeal shall submit
the request in writing to the City Clerk, which request shall include reasons
for the appeal. The City Clerk shall, within a reasonable time thereafter,
provide notice to the applicant of the time and date of the City Council
meeting at which the appeal will be heard. At such meeting, the applicant will
have the opportunity to present his/her case supporting their appeal request.
   (E)   A licensee may request an extension of their city license from the
City Council for a period of up to six months. Such request must be submitted
to the City Clerk in writing at least 60 days prior to the license expiration.
The City Council has the authority to grant up to two six-month extensions, but
may only grant one six-month extension at a time.
   (F)   An applicant seeking a license transfer or appealing a license
decision shall pay a nonrefundable fee in the amount of $2,000 for each
request. This fee is intended to help defray the city's administrative costs
associated with processing a transfer or an appeal request. Such fee will be
paid to the City Clerk at the time the transfer or appeal request is submitted.
(Ord. 24-009, passed 10-28-24)
ADULT USE MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT AUTHORIZATION AND LICENSING
§ 124.70 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate adult use
marijuana establishments in the city in order to protect the public health,
safety and general welfare of the city's residents, to provide reasonable
regulations regarding city licensing of adult use marijuana establishments, to
provide a method to defray administrative costs of such establishments, to
coordinate city regulations and license approval with laws and regulations
enacted by the State of Michigan and to promote economic development by
encouraging vertical integration of such establishments and operations in the
city. It is not the intent of this subchapter to restrict or abrogate the
protections for adult use marijuana found in the Michigan Regulation and
Taxation of Marijuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2018, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27951, et
seq., as may be amended.
(Ord. 24-009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.71 DEFINITIONS.
   Words used herein shall have the definitions as provided for in the Michigan
Regulation and Taxation of Marijuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2018, M.C.L.A. §§
333.27951, et seq., as may be amended and any administrative rules promulgated
thereunder. For purposes of this subchapter, the terms marihuana and marijuana
are interchangeable. The words "the city" is defined as permitting the use only
as a Special Land Use in the M-1 Light Industrial Zoning District Chapter §
154.165(C).
(Ord. 24-009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.72 AUTHORIZED ADULT USE MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS.
   The following adult use marijuana establishments may be authorized to
operate within the M-1 Light Industrial Zoning District within the city by the
holder of a state operating license, and the city may issue a city license for
the same, subject to compliance with the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of
Marijuana Act (Initiated Law 1 of 2018), as may be amended, the Administrative
Rules promulgated thereunder and this subchapter:
   (A)   Unlimited growers shall be authorized in the city which number may
include Class A, B or C growers, in any combination.
   (B)   Unlimited processors shall be authorized in the city, each of which
shall be co-located with an adult use grower.
   (C)   Unlimited retailers shall be authorized in the city, each of which
shall be co-located with an adult use grower and an adult use processor.
   (D)   Zero Class A microbusinesses shall be authorized in the city.
   (E)   Zero microbusinesses shall be authorized in the city.
   (F)   Zero secure transporters shall be authorized in the city.
   (G)   Zero safety compliance facilities shall be authorized in the city.
   (H)   Zero marijuana event organizers shall be authorized in the city.
   (I)   Zero temporary marijuana events shall be authorized in the city.
   (J)   Zero designated consumption establishments shall be authorized in the
city.
   (K)   Zero excess marijuana grower licenses are authorized in the city.
   (L)   No other license types as may be established by the rules promulgated
pursuant Initiated Law 1 of 2018, as amended, shall be authorized in the city.
(Ord. 24-009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.73 CITY ADULT USE MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE.
   (A)   All applicants for a city adult use marijuana establishment license
shall be pre-qualified by the State of Michigan Cannabis Regulatory Agency and
shall provide proof of such approval from the state prior to or upon applying
to the city for a city license. The applicant must be the same person who
received pre-qualification from the Cannabis Regulatory Agency.
   (B)   All applicants for a city adult use marijuana establishment license
must provide proof to city of interest in the property which is the proposed
location for the marijuana establishment, which proof may include, but is not
limited to, valid purchase agreement, valid option to purchase, deed or other
indicia of a property interest.
   (C0   On and after December 1, 2024 the city shall accept applications for a
city license to operate an adult use marijuana establishment within the city.
Application shall be made on a city form and must be submitted to the City
Clerk and/or other designee of the city (hereinafter referred to as the
"Clerk"). Once the Clerk receives a complete application including the initial
annual adult use marijuana establishment fee, the application shall be time and
date stamped. All complete applications received on or after December 1, 2024
shall be considered for conditional authorization and/or city licensure.
   (D)   If an application is incomplete or missing information the City Clerk
shall notify the applicant of the incomplete or missing information in writing
by electronic mail sent to the address provided for notification by the
applicant. The applicant shall have ten business days from the date of mailing
by electronic mail of the written notice to provide the incomplete or missing
information to the City Clerk. Failure to provide the missing or incomplete
information within the time specified may result in denial of the application.
Applications with incomplete or missing information shall not be reviewed by
city staff or marked complete until all incomplete or missing information is
received by the City Clerk and that date will be used to determine the order of
review of the application in relation to other applications.
   (E)   Applications received may be denied by the City Clerk if the applicant
fails to provide missing or incomplete information within the time specified in
this section.
   (F)   The City Clerk shall deny an application for any of the following
reasons:
      (1)   The applicant has not been prequalified for a marijuana business
license by Cannabis Regulatory Agency.
      (2)   The applicant did not pay the required application fee at the time
of submission of the application.
      (3)   The applicant has not provided satisfactory proof that the
applicant has or will have lawful possession of the premises proposed for the
location of the adult use marijuana facility for the period during which the
permit will be issued.
      (4)   The applicant's proposed adult use marijuana facility does not
comply with the zoning regulations in
Chapter 154 Zoning of the City Code.
      (5)   The City Clerk determines that the applicant has not satisfactorily
complied with all permit requirements in this chapter.
      (6)   The City Clerk determines that the applicant submitted an
application containing false, misleading, or fraudulent information, or who
intentionally omitted pertinent information on the application for a marijuana
business permit.
      (7)   The applicant is delinquent in the payment of any taxes, fees or
other charges owed to or collected by the city.
   (G)   Notice of denial of an application shall be sent to the applicant in
writing by electronic mail to the last known address of the applicant on file
with the city. An applicant whose application is denied may appeal denial to
the City Council in writing stating the basis for the appeal within ten days of
receipt of the notice of denial.
   (H)   If a conditionally licensed applicant is denied a state operating
license, then such conditional license will be canceled by the City Clerk and
the conditional license shall be available to the next applicant for the
specific type of adult use marijuana establishment.
   (I)   A conditionally licensed applicant shall receive a license from the
city to operate the adult use marijuana establishment within the city upon the
applicant providing the Clerk proof that the applicant has received a state
operating license for the adult use marijuana establishment in the city and the
applicant has met all other requirements of this subchapter for the operation
of an adult use marijuana establishment.
   (J)   If a conditionally licensed applicant fails to obtain a license from
the city within one year from the date of conditional license, then such
conditional license shall be canceled by the Clerk. The City Council shall have
the authority to extend the deadline to obtain a city license pursuant to §
124.76.
   (K)   The City Council may approve a license application form, which shall
include, but is not limited to, waiver provisions. The application form may
include, but is not limited to, a waiver of an applicant's right to bring
claims against the city regarding the licensing process and/or other city
approval decisions.
   (L)   A licensee shall not operate an adult use marijuana establishment at
any location in the city other than the address provided in the application to
the city.
(Ord. 24-009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.74 GENERAL REGULATIONS REGARDING AUTHORIZED ADULT USE MARIJUANA
ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   A licensed adult use marijuana establishment shall only be operated
within the city by the holder of a state operating license issued pursuant to
Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marijuana Act (Initiated Law 1 of 2018), as
may be amended and the rules promulgated thereunder. The establishment shall
only be operated as long as the state operating license and city license both
remain in effect.
   (B)   Prior to operating an authorized adult use marijuana establishment
within the city pursuant to a state operating license, the establishment must
comply with all city construction, building ordinances, zoning ordinances, and
all other applicable city ordinances and regulations. The establishment shall
only be operated as long as it remains in compliance with all such ordinances
and regulations now in force or which hereinafter may be established or
amended.
   (C)   Separation distance requirements. The following minimum setbacks apply
to all adult use marijuana establishments.
      (1)   From residentially zoned districts. All lots containing an adult
use marijuana establishment must be located at least 300 feet from a
residentially zoned district (regardless of whether the residentially zoned
district is located within the municipal boundaries of Garden City), measured
from the nearest lot line of the adult use marijuana establishment to the
nearest line of the residentially zoned district.
      (2)   From child care facilities, schools, and like facilities. All lots
containing an adult use marijuana establishment must be located at least 500
feet from the nearest lot line of any child care center, licensed day care
facility, preschool program center, primary, intermediate or secondary school,
or like facility, established pursuant to and in accordance with the Revised
School Code, P.A. 451 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 380.1 through 380.1853, as
amended, and/or the State School Aid Act of 1979, P.A. 94 of 1979, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 388.1601 through 388.1772, as amended.
      (3)   Public parks. All lots containing an adult use marijuana
establishment must be located at least 500 from any public park, measured from
the nearest lot line of the adult use marijuana establishment to the nearest
lot line of the public park.
   (D)   Distance from Ford Road. The minimum setbacks of adult use marijuana
establishments from the right-of-way of Ford Road are as follows:
      (1)   All buildings on a lot containing an adult use marijuana
establishment must be located at least 300 feet from Ford Road, measured from
the right-of-way of Ford Road to the nearest building.
      (2)   All lots containing an adult use marijuana establishment must be
located at least 265 feet from Ford Road, measured from the right-of-way of
Ford Road to the nearest lot line of the adult use marijuana establishment.
   (E)   An adult use marijuana processor shall co-locate with an adult use
marijuana grower. An adult use marijuana retailer must co-locate with an adult
use marijuana grower and an adult use marijuana processor.
   (F)   A medical marijuana facility may co-locate with an adult use marijuana
establishment, as authorized by Section 6, subsection 5 of the Michigan
Regulation and Taxation of Marijuana Act (Initiated Law 1 of 2018) and if
further authorized under all applicable city ordinances, including but not
limited to, the zoning ordinance.
   (G)   No stacked grower licenses are authorized by the city.
   (H)   An adult use marijuana establishment shall prevent smoke, odors,
debris, dust, noise, lights, glare, heat, other emissions or discharge from
interfering with the reasonable and comfortable use and enjoyment of another's
property. Whether smoke, odors, debris, dust, noise, lights, glare, heat, other
emissions or discharge interfere with the reasonable and comfortable use and
enjoyment of property shall be measured against the objective standards of a
reasonable person of normal sensitivity.
   (I)   An adult use marijuana establishment shall consent to inspection of
the facility by city officials including city police, building officials and
zoning officials, among others, upon reasonable notice, to verify compliance
with this subchapter.
   (J)   Wastewater. All adult use marijuana establishments must be designed
and operated so as to minimize the amount of pesticides, fertilizers,
nutrients, marijuana, and any other potential contaminants discharged into the
public wastewater and/or stormwater systems.
   (K)   Odor. All adult use marijuana establishments must be equipped with an
operable filtration, ventilation, and exhaust system that effectively confines
odors to the interior of the building from which the odor is generated.
   (L)   Separation of activities. All drying, soil mixing, testing,
processing, and other non-growing activities must take place in a separate room
from any growing activities.
   (M)   Security. All adult use marijuana establishments must have an adequate
and approved security plan to prevent access to marijuana by non-authorized
personnel, including unauthorized removal. All rooms that contain marijuana, in
any form, must be individually locked and accessible only to authorized
personnel. The building(s) housing the adult use marijuana facility shall all
be equipped with security cameras approved by the city Police Chief, maintained
in operational order, and installed in such a way as to monitor the entire
perimeter of the building(s) and capable of recording and storing a minimum of
120 continuous hours of the perimeter monitoring. The security cameras shall be
in operation 24-hours a day, seven days a week, and shall be set to maintain
the record of the prior 120 hours of continuous operation.
   (N)   Alarm system. An alarm system is required that is operated and
monitored by a recognized security company.
   (O)   Access record. Except as prohibited by state or federal law, a written
record of all individuals entering the adult use marijuana facility shall be
maintained at the facility, which written record shall be available to the city
Police Department as needed for investigative purposes, but only to the extent
allowed by state or federal law.
   (P)   Unlawful activities. Any uses or activities found by the State of
Michigan or a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or
otherwise unlawful by state law may not be permitted by the city. In the event
that a court of competent jurisdiction declares some or all of this section
invalid, the city may suspend the acceptance or review of applications for
special land use permits pending the resolution of the legal matter in
question.
   (Q)   Indoor activity only. All activities of an adult use marijuana
establishment must be conducted indoors except where outdoor service to
customers is a provided service, then the delivery to vehicles in designated
parking spaces shall be permitted.
   (R)   Prohibited activities. No smoking, inhalation, or consumption of
marijuana shall take place on the premises of any adult use marijuana
establishment.
   (S)   Waste disposal plan. All adult use marijuana establishments must
submit and have approved a waste disposal plan specific to marijuana, marijuana
plant waste, and marijuana-infused products.
   (T)   Operations plan. All adult use marijuana establishments must submit
and have approved an operations statement that describes, but is not limited
to, the life cycle of marijuana and marijuana-infused products entering, stored
on, grown, dried, and leaving the site. This statement may include how
deliveries are handled, methods of storage, cash handling, a floor plan, and
other pertinent information.
   (U)   It is hereby expressly declared that nothing in this subchapter be
held or construed to give or grant to any authorized adult use marijuana
facility a vested right, license, privilege or permit to continued
authorization from the city for operations within the city.
   (V)   City expressly reserves the right to amend or repeal this subchapter
in any way including, but not limited to, complete elimination of or reduction
in the type and/or number of licenses for adult use marijuana establishments
authorized to operate within the city.
(Ord. 24-009, passed 10-28-24; Am. Ord. 25-007, passed 9-22-25)
§ 124.75 ANNUAL ADULT USE MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT FACILITY FEE.
   There is hereby established an annual nonrefundable city adult use marijuana
establishment fee in the amount of $5,000 for each authorized adult use
marijuana establishment within the city. This fee is intended to help defray
the city's administrative and enforcement costs associated with authorizing and
licensing adult use marijuana establishments. An initial annual adult use
marijuana establishment fee of $5,000 shall be payable at the time of
application for city authorization and licensing. Thereafter the same amount
shall be payable each year by the anniversary of the date of the city's
issuance of a city license to operate the adult use marijuana establishment.
(Ord. 24-009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.76 CITY LICENSE NONRENEWAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, TRANSFERS, EXTENSIONS
AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Each license is exclusive to the licensee and cannot be sold or
transferred without prior approval of the City Council. The attempted transfer,
sale or other conveyance of an interest in a license without prior approval of
the City Council is grounds for suspension or revocation of the license or for
other appropriate sanction. Any licensee seeking to transfer or sell a license
must request approval of such transfer or sale in writing to the City Council
at least 60 days prior to the proposed transfer or sales date. No transfer or
sale of a city license may occur prior to City Council approval.
   (B)   The City Council, after notice and hearing, may suspend, revoke or
refuse to renew a license for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   The applicant or licensee, or his/her agent, manager or employee,
has violated, does not meet or has failed to comply with any of the terms,
requirements, conditions of provisions of this subchapter, with city zoning
approvals or with any applicable state or local law or regulation; or
      (2)   The adult use marijuana establishment has operated in a manner that
adversely affects the public health, safety and welfare.
   (C)   Evidence to support a finding for nonrenewal, suspension or revocation
of a license may include, without limitation, a continuing pattern of conduct
of drug related criminal complaints within the premises of the adult use
marijuana establishment or in the immediate surrounding area or an ongoing
nuisance condition, including but not limited to odors, emanating from or
caused by an adult use marijuana establishment or such other ordinance
violations.
   (D)   An applicant may appeal any city decision regarding licensure,
nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a license to the full City Council,
upon written request. An applicant requesting such appeal shall submit the
request in writing to the City Clerk, which request shall include reasons for
the appeal. The City Clerk shall, within a reasonable time thereafter, provide
notice to the applicant of the time and date of the City Council meeting at
which the appeal will be heard. At such meeting, the applicant will have the
opportunity to present his/her case supporting their appeal request.
   (E)   A licensee may request an extension of their city license from the
City Council for a period of up to six months. Such request must be submitted
to the City Clerk in writing at least 30 days prior to the license expiration.
The City Council has the authority to grant up to two six-month extensions, but
may only grant one six-month extension at a time.
   (F)   An applicant seeking a license transfer or appealing a license
decision shall pay a nonrefundable fee in the amount of $2,000 for each
request. This fee is intended to help defray the city's administrative costs
associated with processing a transfer or an appeal request. Such fee will be
paid to the City Clerk at the time the transfer or appeal request is submitted.
(Ord. 24-009, passed 10-28-24)
§ 124.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who disobeys neglects or refuses to comply with any
provision of this chapter, or who causes allows or consents to any of the same
shall be deemed to be responsible for the violation of this chapter. A
violation of this chapter is deemed to be a nuisance per se.
      (2)   A violation of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction, for
which the fines shall not be less than $100 nor more than $500, in the
discretion of the Court. The foregoing sanctions shall be in addition to the
rights of the city to proceed at law or equity with other appropriate and
proper remedies. Additionally, the violator shall pay costs which may include
all expenses, direct and indirect, which the city incurs in connection with the
municipal civil infraction.
      (3)   Each day during which any violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
      (4)   In addition, the city may seek injunctive relief against persons
alleged to be in violation of this chapter, and such other relief as may be
provided by law.
      (5)   This section shall be administered and enforced by the Garden City
Police Department by an ordinance enforcement officer, by a peace officer, or
by such other person(s) as designated by the City Council from time to time.
   (B)   Violations and penalties.
      (1)   Any person who disobeys neglects or refuses to comply with any
provision of this chapter or who causes, allows or consents to any of the same
shall be deemed to be responsible for the violation of this chapter. A
violation of this chapter is deemed to be a nuisance per se.
      (2)   A violation of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction, for
which the fines shall not be less than $100 nor more than $500 for the first
offense and not less than $250 nor more than $500 for subsequent offenses, in
the discretion of the Court. For purposes of this section, "subsequent
offenses" means a violation of the provisions of this chapter committed by the
same person within 12 months of a previous violation of the same provision of
this chapter for which said person admitted responsibility or was adjudicated
to be responsible. The foregoing sanctions shall be in addition to the rights
of the city to proceed at law or equity with other appropriate and proper
remedies. Additionally, the violator shall pay costs which may include all
expenses, direct and indirect, which the city incurs in connection with the
municipal civil infraction. This section is not intended to conflict with the
penalty provisions in the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marijuana Act,
Initiated Law 1 of 2018, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27951, et seq., as may be amended.
      (3)   Each day during which any violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
      (4)   In addition, the city may seek injunctive relief against persons
alleged to be in violation of this chapter and such other relief as may be
provided by law.
      (5)   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city's
ordinance enforcement officer, Police Department or by such other person (s) as
designated by the City Council from time to time.
(Ord. 10-010, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 19-004, passed 3-25-19; Am. Ord. 24-
009, passed 10-28-24)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
      
134.   GAMBLING
      
135.   OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS
      
136.   DRUG OFFENSES
      
137.   WEAPONS CONTROL
      
138.   CYBERBULLYING
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Short title
   
130.02   Definitions
   
130.03   Additional definitions
   
130.04   Saving clause
   
130.05   Designation of District Court
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 SHORT TITLE.
   Title XIII may be cited as the “Penal Code.”
(‘83 Code, § 130.01)
§ 130.02 DEFINITIONS.
   DISTRICT COURT. The twenty-first District Court of the State of Michigan.
   DISTRICT COURT JUDGE. The presiding judge of the twenty-first District Court
of the State of Michigan.
   PENALTY. Any fine, imprisonment, or both as set forth in this chapter or
§ 10.99 of the code.
(‘83 Code, § 130.02)
§ 130.03 ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever any words and phrases used herein are not defined but are defined
in the State Penal Code, the definition therein shall be deemed to apply to
such words and phrases used herein.
(‘83 Code, § 130.03)
§ 130.04 SAVING CLAUSE.
   All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing, acquired,
or incurred, at the time this code takes effect, are saved. Such proceedings
may be consummated under and according to the ordinance in force at the time
such proceedings are or were commenced. This chapter shall not be construed to
alter, affect, or abate any pending prosecution, or prevent prosecution
hereafter instituted under any ordinance specifically or impliedly repealed by
the adoption of this Code for offenses committed prior to the effective date
thereof. All prosecutions pending at the effective date of this Code, and all
prosecutions instituted after the effective date of this Code for offenses
committed prior to the effective date of this Code may be continued or
instituted under and in accordance with the provisions of any ordinance in
force at the time of this commission of such offense.
(‘83 Code, § 130.04)
§ 130.05 DESIGNATION OF DISTRICT COURT.
   Pursuant to Public Act 154 of 1968, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8101 et seq., as
amended, the legislature has abolished the Municipal Court of the city, and
transferred all its duties and powers, enumerated therein, to the Twenty-First
District Court of the State of Michigan.
(‘83 Code, § 37.01)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any of
the provisions of Title XIII, unless the violation or failure is by statute of
the state declared to be a felony. Every person convicted for a violation of,
or failure to comply with any provision of Title XIII, shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $500, or by imprisonment for a period of time not to
exceed 90 days, or by both fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court
or as otherwise required by state law. Each act of violation and every day upon
which such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
(‘83 Code, § 130.99)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
   
131.01   Disorderly persons
   
131.02   Assault and battery
   
131.03   Disruptions of gatherings and meetings
   
131.04   Throwing dangerous objects
   
131.05   Breach of peace
   
131.06   Resisting or interfering with police officer
   
131.07   Obscene or harassing telephone calls
   
131.08   Discharge of small weapons
   
131.09   False crimes
§ 131.01 DISORDERLY PERSONS.
   (A)   A person is a disorderly person if the person is any of the following:
      (1)   A person of sufficient ability who refuses or neglects to support
his or her family.
      (2)   A common prostitute.
      (3)   A window peeper.
      (4)   A person who engages in an illegal occupation or business.
      (5)   A person who is intoxicated in a public place and who is either
endangering directly the safety of another person or of property or is acting
in a manner that causes a public disturbance.
      (6)   A person who is engaged in indecent or obscene conduct in a public
place.
      (7)   A vagrant.
      (8)   A person found begging in a public place.
      (9)   A person found loitering in a house of ill fame or prostitution or
place where prostitution or lewdness is practiced, encouraged, or allowed.
      (10)   A person who knowingly loiters in or about a place where an
illegal occupation or business is being conducted.
      (11)   A person who loiters in or about a police station, police
headquarters building, county jail, hospital, court building, or other public
building or place for the purpose of soliciting employment of legal services or
the services of sureties upon criminal recognizances.
   (B)   A person who is found jostling or roughly crowding people
unnecessarily in a public place.
   (C)   When a person, who has been convicted of refusing or neglecting to
support his or her family under this section, is then charged with subsequent
violations within a period of two years, that person shall be prosecuted as a
second offender, or third and subsequent offender, as provided in M.C.L.A. §
750.168, if the family of that person is then receiving public relief or
support.
(M.C.L.A. § 750.167) (‘83 Code, § 131.01) (Ord. 74-010, passed 11-25-74)
Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 131.02 ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
    (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B), a person who assaults
or assaults and batters an individual, if no other punishment is prescribed by
law, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90
days or a fine of not more than $500, or both.
   (B)   An individual who assaults or assaults and batters his or her spouse
or former spouse, an individual with whom he or she has had a child in common,
or a resident or former resident of his or her household, or an individual with
whom he or she has or had a dating relationship, is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than
$500, or both. For purposes of this section, police officers shall have the
authority to arrest in accordance with MCL 764.15a, as amended.
   (C)   As used in this section, DATING RELATIONSHIP is defined as frequent,
intimate associations primarily characterized by the expectation of affectional
involvement. This term does not include a casual relationship or an ordinary
fraternization between two individuals in a business or social context.
(‘83 Code, § 131.02) (Ord. 99-035, passed 2-28-00; Am. Ord. 19-002, passed 1-7-
19)  Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 131.03 DISRUPTION OF GATHERINGS AND MEETINGS.
   (A)   No person shall willfully interrupt or disturb on any day of the week
any assembly of people met for the worship of God within the place of the
meeting or out of it.
   (B)   No person shall make or excite any disturbance or contention in any
tavern, dance hall, beer garden, store or grocery, manufacturing establishment,
or any other business place or in any street, lane, alley, highway, public
building, ground or park or at any election or other public meeting in the city
where any persons are peaceably and lawfully assembled.
(‘83 Code, § 131.03) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 131.04 THROWING DANGEROUS OBJECTS.
   No person shall throw or cause to be thrown any stone, brick, or any other
missile, likely to cause bodily injury or property damage, at any motor bus,
automobile, motor vehicle, house, garage, stores, buildings, street lights,
trailers, persons, or animals.
(‘83 Code, § 131.04) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 131.05 BREACH OF PEACE.
   Any person who shall make or assist in making any noise, disturbance,
trouble, or improper diversion, or any rout or riot, by which the peace and
good order of the city are disturbed, shall be guilty of a breach of the peace,
and disorderly conduct.
(‘83 Code, § 131.05) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 131.06 RESISTING OR INTERFERING WITH POLICE OFFICER.
   No person shall willfully resist any police officer or other law enforcement
agent while in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty, or in any way
interfere with or hinder him in the discharge of his duty.
(‘83 Code, § 131.06) (Ord. 86-003, passed 2-3-86) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 131.07 OBSCENE OR HARASSING TELEPHONE CALLS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person who telephones any other person or
causes any other person to be telephoned to use any vulgar, indecent, obscene,
threatening, or offensive language, or suggest any lewd or lascivious act over
any telephone. (‘83 Code, § 131.07)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to telephone any other person
repeatedly or cause any person to be telephoned repeatedly for the purpose of
harassing, bothering, or interfering with the peace of the other person or his
family, regardless of whether or not a conversation is held between the
parties. However, legitimate business calls or solicitations are proper. (‘83
Code, § 131.08)
Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 131.08 DISCHARGE OF SMALL WEAPONS.
   No person shall attempt, aim, fire, or shoot, or cause to be fired or shot,
any bow and arrow, BB gun, slingshot, or like device likely to cause bodily
injury or property damage, at any bus, automobile, house, garage, store,
buildings, street lights, trailers, persons, or animals.
(‘83 Code, § 131.09) (Ord. 84-002, passed 5-21-84; Am. Ord. 84-003, passed 5-
21-84) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 131.09 FALSE CRIMES.
   (A)   A person who intentionally makes a false report of the commission of a
crime to a member of the State Police, a sheriff or deputy sheriff, a police
officer of the city, a police officer of any city or village, or any other
peace officer of this state knowing the report is false is guilty of a crime.
   (B)   If the report is a false report of a misdemeanor, the person is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine
of not more than $100, or both.
(Ord. 99-031, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
General Property Offenses
   
132.01   Theft of or damage to trees or vegetation
   
132.02   Breaking and entering outside showcases
   
132.03   Breaking and entering coin box
   
132.04   Malicious destruction of house, barn, or building of another
   
132.05   Malicious destruction of public property
   
132.06   Damage to fences or gates
   
132.07   Guest responsibility
   
132.08   Tampering with property placed by the city
   
132.09   Tampering with vehicle
   
132.10   Malicious destruction of personal property
   
132.11   Maliciously destroying or injuring trees, shrubs, grass, turf, plants,
crops or soil
   
132.12   Malicious destruction of tombs and memorials to dead
   
132.13   Willfully and maliciously setting fires
   
132.14   Burning of personal property
   
132.15   Unlawful entry of motor vehicles
Larceny
   
132.20   Larceny from public libraries; failure to return
   
132.21   Larceny from vacant buildings
   
132.22   Larceny or attempted larcency of goods
   
132.23   Buying, receiving, possessing, or concealing stolen, embezzled, or
converted money, goods, or property
   
132.24   Retail fraud in the third degree
   
132.25   Larceny of rented motor vehicle, trailer, or other tangible property
   
132.26   Larceny from motor vehicles or trailers; attached accessories;
breaking or entering, damaging
Fraud
   
132.35   Fraud deemed unlawful
   
132.36   False representation as blind or disabled
   
132.37   False statements for welfare aid
   
132.38   Drawing on insufficient funds
   
132.39   Unlawful entry of the property of another; exceptions; misdemeanor
   
132.40   Impersonating city officers, officials, or employees
   
132.41   Use of computers to commit crime
   
132.42   Revoked or cancelled financial transaction devices
   
132.43   Use of financial transaction device to withdraw or transfer funds
   
132.44   Embezzlement
   
132.45   Embezzlement of property
   
132.46   False pretenses
   
132.47   Obtaining telecommunications services with intent to avoid charge
   
132.48   Publication of communications access device
   
132.49   Unauthorized use or diversion of telecommunications services
GENERAL PROPERTY OFFENSES
§ 132.01 THEFT OF OR DAMAGE TO TREES OR VEGETATION.
   Any person who shall wrongfully take and carry away from any place any fruit
tree, ornamental tree, shade tree, ornamental shrub, or any plant, vine, bush,
or vegetable there growing, standing or being, with intent to deprive the owner
thereof, or who shall without right and with wrongful intent, detach from the
ground or injure any fruit tree, ornamental tree, shade tree, ornamental shrub,
or any plant, vine, bush, vegetable or produce shall be deemed by so doing to
have committed the crime of larceny.
(M.C.L.A. § 750.367) (‘83 Code, § 132.01) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.02 BREAKING AND ENTERING OUTSIDE SHOWCASES.
   Any person who shall break and enter, or enter without breaking, at any
time, any outside show case or other outside enclosed counter used for the
display of goods, wares or merchandise, with intent to commit the crime of
larceny, shall be guilty of misdemeanor.
(M.C.L.A. § 750.114) (‘83 Code, § 132.02) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.03 BREAKING AND ENTERING PUBLIC COIN BOX.
   Any person who maliciously and wilfully, by and with the aid and use of any
key, instrument, device or explosive, blows or attempts to blow, or forces or
attempts to force an entrance into any coin box, depository box or other
receptacle established and maintained for the convenience of the public, or of
any person or persons, in making payment for any article of merchandise or
service, wherein is contained any money or thing of value, or extracts or
obtains, or attempts to extract or obtain, therefrom any such money or thing of
value so deposited or contained therein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(M.C.L.A. § 750.113) (‘83 Code, § 132.03) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.04 MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF HOUSE, BARN, OR BUILDING OF ANOTHER.
   (A)   A person shall not willfully and maliciously destroy or injure another
person’s house, barn, or other building or its appurtenances.
   (B)   If the amount of the destruction or injury is less than $200, a person
who violates division (A) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment
for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500 or three times the
amount of the destruction or injury, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment
and a fine.
   (C)   The amounts of destruction or injury in separate incidents pursuant to
a scheme or course of conduct within any 12-month period may be aggregated to
determine the total amount of destruction or injury.
(‘83 Code, § 132.04) (Ord. 99-027, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.05 MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No person shall maliciously destroy, damage, injure, mar, or deface any
building, monument, sign, structure, fence, tree, shrub, plant, park, or public
property of any kind which is owned, controlled, or managed by the state,
county, city, school district of Garden City, or by any other unit or agency of
government whose operating budget is raised in whole or in part by public
taxation. No person shall commit any act of vandalism on or in any such
property.
(‘83 Code, § 132.05) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.06 DAMAGE TO FENCES OR GATES.
   Any person who shall maliciously break down, injure, mar or deface any fence
belonging to or enclosing lands not his own, or shall maliciously throw down or
open any gate, bars or fence, and leave the same down or open, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
(M.C.L.A. § 750.381) (‘83 Code, § 132.06) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.07 GUEST RESPONSIBILITY.
   No person, in smoking or attempting to light or to smoke a cigarette, cigar,
pipe, or tobacco in any form for which lighters or matches are used, or in the
use of flammable liquids, shall set fire to any bedding, furniture, curtain,
drape, house, or household furnishings in any licensed establishment.
(‘83 Code, § 132.07) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.08 TAMPERING WITH PROPERTY PLACED BY THE CITY.
   No person shall tamper with, injure, deface, destroy, or remove any sign,
notice, marker, fire alarm box, fire hydrant, topographical survey instrument,
water meter, water stop box, or any other personal property erected or placed
by the city. No person shall make unauthorized taps into the water lines or any
unauthorized use of fire hydrants.
(‘83 Code, § 132.08) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.09 TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE.
   No person shall intentionally cut, mark, scratch, destroy, or damage any
motor vehicle, the property of another, or intentionally cut, scratch, mark,
destroy, or damage any motor vehicle, or any of the accessories, equipment,
appurtenances, or attachments thereof, or any spare or extra parts thereon
without permission of the owner.
(‘83 Code, § 132.09) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.10 MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   A person who willfully and maliciously destroys or injures the
personal property of another person is guilty of a misdemeanor if the amount of
destruction or injury is less than $200, the person shall be subject to
punishment by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than
$500 or three times the amount of the destruction or injury, whichever is
greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
   (B)   The amounts of destruction or injury in separate incidents pursuant to
a scheme or course of conduct within any 12-month period may be aggregated in
determining the total amount of the destruction or injury.
(‘83 Code, § 132.10) (Ord. 79-022, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 99-028, passed 2-
28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.11 MALICIOUSLY DESTROYING OR INJURING TREES, SHRUBS, GRASS, TURF, PLANTS,
CROPS OR SOIL.
   (A)   A person who willfully and maliciously, or wantonly and without cause,
cuts down, destroys, or injures any tree, shrub, grass, turf, plants, crops, or
soil of another that is standing, growing, or located on the land of another is
guilty of a misdemeanor. If the value of the trees, shrubs, grass, turf,
plants, crops, or soil cut down, destroyed, or injured is less than $200, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than
93 days or a fine of not more than $500 or three times the value of the trees,
shrubs, grass, turf, plants, crops or soil, whichever is greater, or both
imprisonment and a fine.
   (B)   The secretary of state shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's
license of a person convicted of a violation or attempted violation of division
(A) who committed the offense with a vehicle, as provided in section 319 of the
Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, M.C.L.A. § 257.319. As used in
this subsection, "vehicle" means that term as defined in section 79 of the
Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, M.C.L.A. § 257.79.
   (C)   The values of the trees, shrubs, grass, turf, plants, crops or soil
cut down, destroyed, or injured in separate incidents pursuant to a scheme or
course of conduct within any 12-month period may be aggregated to determine the
total value of the trees, shrubs, grass, turf, plants, crops or soil cut down,
destroyed, or injured.
(Ord. 99-030, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.12 MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF TOMBS AND MEMORIALS TO DEAD.
   (A)   A person, other than a burial right owner or his or her
representative, heir at law, or a person having care, custody, or control of a
cemetery pursuant to law, a contract, or other legal right, shall not willfully
destroy, mutilate, deface, injure, or remove a tomb, monument, gravestone, or
other structure or thing placed or designed for a memorial of the dead, or a
fence, railing, curb, or other thing intended for the protection or for the
ornament of any tomb, monument, gravestone, or other structure described in
this section or any other enclosure for the burial of the dead and shall not
willfully destroy, mutilate, remove, cut, break, or injure any tree, shrub, or
plant, placed or being within such an enclosure.
   (B)   Prosecution under division (A) may commence upon complaint by the
burial right owner or his or her representative, heir at law, or person having
care, custody, or control of a cemetery, tomb, monument. gravestone, or other
structure or thing described in division (A).
   (C)   If the total amount of damage is less than $200, a person who violates
division (A) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more
than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500 or three times the amount of
damage, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
   (D)   The amounts of damage in separate incidents pursuant to a scheme or
course of conduct within any 12-month period may be aggregated in determining
the total amount of damage.
(Ord. 99-029, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.13 WILLFULLY AND MALICIOUSLY SETTING FIRES.
   (A)   A person who uses, arranges, places, devises or distributes an
inflammable combustible, or explosive material, liquid, or substance or any
device in or near a building or property described in this section with intent
to willfully and maliciously set fire to or burn the building or property or
who aids, counsels, induces, persuades, or procures another to do so is guilty
of a crime:
      (1)   Any dwelling house, either occupied or unoccupied, or the contents
thereof, or any building within the curtilage of such dwelling house, or the
contents thereof.
      (2)   Any building or other real property, or the contents thereof if the
value of the contents is more than $200.
      (3)   Any personal property valued at less than $200 owned by him or
herself or another.
      (4)   Any building or personal property which at the time shall be
insured against loss or damage by fire with the intent to injure and defraud
the insurer.
   (B)   If the value of the property intended to be burned is personal or real
property, or both, with a combined value less than $200, the person is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine
of not more than $500 or three times the combined value of the property
intended to be burned, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
   (C)   The combined value of property intended to be burned in separate
incidents pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct within any 12-month period
may be aggregated to determine the total value of property intended to be
burned.
(Ord. 99-036, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.14 BURNING OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   A person who willfully and maliciously burns any personal property,
other than personal property specified in M.C.L.A. §§ 750.72 and 750.73, owned
by himself or herself or another person is guilty of a crime.
   (B)   If the value of the personal property burned or intended to be burned
is less than $200, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500 or three
times the value of the personal property burned or intended to be burned,
whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
   (C)   The values of personal property burned or intended to be burned in
separate incidents pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct within any 12-
month period may be aggregated to determine the total value of personal
property burned or intended to be burned.
   (D)   The term "burn" as used in this section shall mean setting fire to, or
doing any act which results in the starting of a fire, or aiding, counseling,
inducing, persuading or procuring another to do such act or acts.
(Ord. 99-034, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.15 UNLAWFUL ENTRY OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   ENTER. Includes, but is not limited to, opening a door, trunk or
hood of a vehicle, or inserting any part of one's body, or any object connected
with the body, into a vehicle, which act shall include breaking the plane of an
opened door, window, trunk or engine area.
      (2)   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle that falls within the definition of
"motor vehicle" in the Michigan Vehicle Code.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter a motor vehicle unless
the person:
      (1)    Is the owner or lessee of the vehicle or has some other
contractual interest in the vehicle that would entitle the person to enter the
vehicle.
      (2)   Is the owner or lessee of the real property upon which the vehicle
is located; or
      (3)   Has permission to enter from an owner, a lessee, or an authorized
operator of the motor vehicle, or the owner or lessee of the real property upon
which the vehicle is located.
   (C)    This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer acting within the scope of the officer's
duties.
      (2)   A motor vehicle that is lawfully being moved because it is
abandoned, inoperable, or improperly parked.
      (3)   An employee or agent of an entity that possesses a valid lien on a
motor vehicle and who is expressly authorized by the lien holder to repossess
the motor vehicle, based upon the failure of the owner or lessee of the motor
vehicle to abide by the terms and conditions of the loan or lease agreement.
(Ord. 21-005, passed 2-22-21; Am. Ord. 23-005, passed 12-18-23) Penalty, see §
130.99
LARCENY
§ 132.20 LARCENY FROM PUBLIC LIBRARIES; FAILURE TO RETURN.
   (A)   Any person who shall procure, or take in any way from any public
library or the library of any literary, scientific, historical or library
society or association, whether incorporated or unincorporated, any book,
pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper,
magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part thereof, with intent to convert the
same to his own use, or with intent to defraud the owner thereof, or who having
procured or taken any such book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture,
photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part
thereof, shall thereafter convert the same to his own use or fraudulently
deprive the owner thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (M.C.L.A. §
750.364) (‘83 Code, § 132.15)
   (B)   No person, shall willfully or negligently fail to return to the
library any book, magazine, pamphlet, map, manuscript, picture, microfilm,
phonograph records, or other property belonging to the library. Failure to
return property in accordance with the rules of the library is deemed to be a
violation of this section, and upon conviction, the violator is subject to a
fine of not less than $5 nor more than $50 for each violation. (‘83 Code, §
132.16)
(Ord. 76-013, passed 11-1-76) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.21 LARCENY FROM VACANT BUILDING.
   Any person or persons who shall steal or unlawfully remove or in any manner
damage any fixture, attachment or other property belonging to, connected with
or used in the construction of any vacant structure or building, whether built
or in the process of construction or who shall break into any vacant structure
or building with the intention of unlawfully removing, taking therefrom or in
any manner damaging any fixture, attachment or other property belonging to,
connected with or used in the construction of such vacant structure or building
whether built or in the process of construction, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(M.C.L.A. § 750.359) (‘83 Code, § 132.17) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.22 LARCENY OR ATTEMPTED LARCENY OF GOODS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to steal or
attempt to steal or unlawfully take or attempt to take any of the following:
      (1)   Money, goods, or chattels.
      (2)   A bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of
exchange or other bill, draft, order, or certificate.
      (3)   A book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due, to become
due, or to be delivered.
      (4)   A deed or writing containing any conveyance of land or other
valuable contract in force.
      (5)   A receipt, release, or defeasance.
      (6)   A writ, process, or public record.
   (B)   If the property stolen has a value of less than $200, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or
a fine of $500 or three times the value of the property stolen, or attempted to
be stolen, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
   (C)   The values of the property stolen in separate incidents pursuant to a
scheme or course of conduct within any 12-month period may be aggregated to
determine the total value of property stolen, or attempted to be stolen.
(‘83 Code, § 132.18) (Ord. 99-023, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.23 BUYING, RECEIVING, POSSESSING, OR CONCEALING STOLEN, EMBEZZLED, OR
CONVERTED MONEY, GOODS, OR PROPERTY.
   (A)   A person shall not buy, receive, possess, conceal, or aid in the
concealment of stolen, embezzled, or converted money, goods, or property
knowing the money, goods, or property is stolen, embezzled, or converted.
   (B)   If the property purchased, received, possessed, or concealed has a
value of less than $200, a person who violates division (A) is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of
not more than $500 or three times the value of the property purchased,
received, possessed, or concealed, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment
and a fine.
   (C)   The values of property purchased, received, possessed, or concealed in
separate incidents pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct within any 12-
month period may be aggregated to determine the total value of property
purchased, received, possessed, or concealed.
   (D)   A person who is a dealer in or collector of merchandise or personal
property, or the agent, employee, or representative of a dealer or collector of
merchandise or personal property who fails to reasonably inquire whether the
person selling or delivering the stolen, embezzled, or converted property to
the dealer or collector has a legal right to do so or who buys or receives
stolen, embezzled, or converted property that has a registration, serial, or
other identifying number altered or obliterated on an external surface of the
property, is presumed to have bought or received the property knowing the
property is stolen, embezzled, or converted. This presumption is rebuttable.
(M.C.L.A. § 750.535) (‘83 Code, § 132.19) (Ord. 99-032, passed 2-28-00)
Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.24 RETAIL FRAUD IN THE THIRD DEGREE.
   (A)   A person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate
vicinity is guilty of retail fraud in the third degree, a misdemeanor
punishable as provided by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of
not more than $500 or three times the value of the difference in price,
property stolen, or money or property obtained or attempted to be obtained,
whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine:
      (1)   While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and
replaces, conceals, or otherwise misrepresents the price at which property is
offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less
than the price at which the property is offered for sale, if the resulting
difference in price is less than $200.
      (2)   While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store
that is offered for sale at a price of less than $200.
      (3)   With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or
property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid
for and belongs to the store, if the amount of money, or the value of the
property, obtained or attempted to be obtained is less than $200.
   (B)   A person who commits retail fraud in the third degree shall not be
prosecuted under M.C.L.A. § 750.360.
   (C)   The values of the difference in price, property stolen, or money or
property obtained or attempted to be obtained in separate incidents pursuant to
a scheme or course of conduct within any 12-month period may be aggregated to
determine the total value involved in the offense under this section.
(M.C.L.A. § 750.356d) (‘83 Code, § 132.20) (Ord. 89-001, passed 1-16-89; Am.
Ord. 99-025, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.25 LARCENY OF RENTED MOTOR VEHICLE, TRAILER, OR OTHER TANGIBLE PROPERTY.
   (A)   A person to whom a motor vehicle, trailer, or other tangible property
delivered on a rental basis under a written agreement providing for its return
to a particular place at a particular time who with intent to defraud the
lessor refuses or willfully neglects to return the vehicle, trailer, or other
tangible property after expiration of the time stated in a written notice
mailed by registered or certified mail addressed to than person's last known
address is guilty of larceny, punishable as provided in this section.
   (B)   If the vehicle, trailer, or other tangible property has a value of
less than $200, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500 or three
times the value of the vehicle, trailer, or other tangible property, whichever
is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
   (C)   The values of the property not returned in separate incidents pursuant
to a scheme or course of conduct within any 12-month period may be aggregated
to determine the total value of property not returned.
(Ord. 99-026, passed 2-28-00)  Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.26 LARCENY FROM MOTOR VEHICLES OR TRAILERS; ATTACHED ACCESSORIES;
BREAKING OR ENTERING, DAMAGING.
   (A)   A person who enters or breaks into a motor vehicle, house trailer,
trailer, or semitrailer to steal or unlawfully remove property from it is
guilty of a crime if the value of the property is less than $200, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or
a fine of not more than $500 or three times the value of the property,
whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
   (B)   The values of property stolen or unlawfully removed in separate
incidents pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct within any 12-month period
may be aggregated to determine the total value of property stolen or unlawfully
removed.
(Ord. 99-024, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
FRAUD
§ 132.35 FRAUD DEEMED UNLAWFUL.
   No person shall engage in any fraudulent scheme, device, or trick to obtain
money or other valuable thing, or aid or abet, or in any manner be concerned
therein.
(‘83 Code, § 132.25) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.36 FALSE REPRESENTATION AS BLIND OR DISABLED.
   Any person who shall falsely represent himself or herself as blind, mute,
disabled or physically or mentally challenged for the purpose of obtaining
money or any other thing of value, and any person thus falsely representing
himself or herself as blind, mute, disabled, or physically or mentally
challenged, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(M.C.L.A. § 750.221) (‘83 Code, § 132.26) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.37 FALSE STATEMENTS FOR WELFARE AID.
   No person shall obtain by means of a willfully false statement or
representation, impersonation, or other fraudulent device the following.
   (A)   Aid, relief, or welfare assistance to which he is not entitled.
   (B)   Aid, relief, or welfare assistance greater than that to which he is
entitled; or knowingly aid or abet in buying or in any way disposing of the
property of a recipient of aid, relief, or welfare assistance.
(‘83 Code, § 132.27) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.38 DRAWING ON INSUFFICIENT FUNDS.
   (A)   A person shall not make, draw, utter, or deliver any check, draft, or
order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank
or other depository with intent to defraud and knowing at the time of the
making, drawing, uttering, or delivering that the maker or drawer does not have
sufficient funds in or credit with the bank or other depository to pay the
check, draft, or order in full upon its presentation.
   (B)   A person shall not make, draw, utter, or deliver any check, draft, or
order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank
or other depository with intent to defraud if the person does not have
sufficient funds for the payment of the check, draft, or order when
presentation for payment is made to the drawee. This section does not apply if
the lack of funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy, or other lawful
cause and that fact was not known to the person when the person made, drew,
uttered, or delivered the check, draft, or order.
   (C)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment of not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than
$500, or both; if the amount payable in the check, draft, or order is less than
$100.
(M.C.L.A. § 750.131(2)) (‘83 Code, § 132.28) (Ord. 99-037, passed 2-28-00)
Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.39 UNLAWFUL ENTRY OF THE PROPERTY OF ANOTHER; EXCEPTIONS; MISDEMEANOR.
   (A)   Any person who shall wilfully enter, upon the lands or premises of
another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden so to do by the
owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or any person
being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart
therefrom by the owner or occupant, the agent or servant of either, who without
lawful authority neglects or refuses to depart therefrom, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person who breaks and enters or enters without breaking, any
dwelling, house, tent, hotel, office, store, shop, warehouse, barn, factory or
other building, boat, ship, railroad car or structure used or kept for public
or private use, or any private apartment therein, or any cottage, clubhouse,
boat house, hunting or fishing lodge, garage or the out-buildings belonging
thereto, any ice shanty with a value of $100 or more, or any other structure,
whether occupied or unoccupied, without first obtaining permission to enter
from the owner or occupant, agent, or person having immediate control thereof,
is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Division (B) does not apply to entering without breaking, any place
which at the time of the entry was open to the public, unless the entry was
expressly denied. Divisions (B) does not apply if the breaking and entering or
entering without breaking was committed by a peace officer or an individual
under the peace officer’s direction in the lawful performance of his or her
duties as a peace officer.
(M.C.L.A. § 750.552) (‘83 Code, § 132.29) (Ord. 83-012, passed 11-21-83; Am.
Ord. 13-011, passed 8- 12-13)  Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.40 IMPERSONATING CITY OFFICERS, OFFICIALS, OR EMPLOYEES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely assume or pretend to be a
police officer; a firefighter; an inspector of a Department of Building and
Safety; a city engineer; a health officer, a health inspector, or public health
nurse of the Department of Health; the sealer of weights and measures or his
assistants; a supervisor or investigator of the Department of Public Welfare;
an assessor or his agent or employee; an inspector or meter reader for the
city; or any other person employed by the city or by any other governmental
agency for the protection of the peace, health, and safety of the city, or to
take upon themselves to act as such or to require any person to aid and assist
him in any manner pertaining to the duties of persons employed by the city for
the protection of peace, health, and safety of the city.
(‘83 Code, § 132.30) (Ord. 84-006, passed 9-17-84) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.41 USE OF COMPUTERS TO COMMIT CRIME.
   (A)   A person shall not utilize a computer program, computer, computer
system, or computer network to commit a crime.
   (B)   A person shall not intentionally access or cause access to be made to
a computer program, computer, computer system, or computer network to devise or
execute a scheme or artifice with the intent to defraud or to obtain money,
property, or a service by a false or fraudulent pretense, representation, or
promise.
   (C)   A person shall not intentionally and without authorization or be
exceeding valid authorization do any of the following:
      (1)   Access or cause access to be made to a computer program, computer,
computer system, or computer network to acquire, alter, damage, delete, or
destroy property or otherwise use the service of a computer program, computer,
computer system, or computer network.
      (2)   Insert or attach or knowingly create the opportunity for an
unknowing and unwanted insertion or attachment of a set of instructions or a
computer program into a computer program, computer, computer system, or
computer network, that is intended to acquire, alter, damage, delete, disrupt,
or destroy property or otherwise use the services of a computer program,
computer, computer system, or computer network. This subdivision does not
prohibit conduct protected under section 5 of article I of the State
Constitution of 1963 or under the First Amendment of the Constitution of the
United States.
   (D)   A person who violates this section is guilty of misdemeanor if the
violation involves an aggregate amount of less than $200, punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500 or three
times the aggregate amount, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a
fine.
   (E)   It is a rebuttable presumption that the person did not have
authorization from the owner, system operator, or other person who has
authority from the owner or system operator to grant permission to access the
computer program, computer, computer system, or computer network or has
exceeded authorization unless one or more of the following circumstances
existed at the time of access:
      (1)   Written or oral permission was granted by the owner, system
operator, or other person who has authority from the owner or system operator
to grant permission of the accessed computer program, computer, computer
system, or computer network.
      (2)   The accessed computer program, computer, computer system, or
computer network had a pre-programmed access procedure that would display a
bulletin, command, or other message before access was achieved that a
reasonable person would believe identified the computer program, computer,
computer system, or computer network as within the public domain.
      (3)   Access was achieved without the use of a set of instructions, code,
or computer program that bypasses, defrauds, or otherwise circumvents the pre-
programmed access procedure for the computer program, computer, computer
system, or computer network.
   (F)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACCESS. To instruct, communicate with, store data in, retrieve or
intercept data from, or otherwise use the resources of a computer program,
computer, computer system, or computer network.
      AGGREGATE AMOUNT. Any direct or indirect loss incurred by a victim
including, but not limited to, the value of any money, property or service
lost, stolen, or rendered unrecoverable by the offense, or any actual
expenditure incurred by the victim to verify that a computer program, computer,
computer system, or computer network was not altered, acquired, damaged,
deleted, disrupted, or destroyed by the access.
      COMPUTER. Any connected, directly interoperable or interactive device,
equipment, or facility that uses a computer program, or other instructions to
perform specific operations including logical, arithmetic, or memory functions
with or on computer data or a computer program and that can store, retrieve,
alter, or communicate the results of the operations to a person, computer
program, computer system, or computer network.
      COMPUTER NETWORK. The interconnection of hardwire or wireless
communication lines with a computer through remote terminals, or a complex
consisting of two or more interconnected computers.
      COMPUTER SYSTEM. A set of related, connected or unconnected, computer
equipment devices, software, or hardware.
      DEVICE. An electronic, magnetic, electrochemical, biochemical, hydraulic,
optical, or organic object that performs input, output, or storage functions by
the manipulation of electronic, magnetic, or other impulses.
      PROPERTY. Intellectual property, computer data, instructions or programs
in either machine or human readable form, financial instruments or information,
medical information, restricted personal information, or any other tangible or
intangible item of value.
      SERVICES. Computer time, data processing, storage functions, computer
memory, or the unauthorized use of a computer program, computer, computer
system, computer network, or communication facilities connected or related to a
computer, computer system, or computer network.
(Ord. 99-033, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.42 REVOKED OR CANCELLED FINANCIAL TRANSACTION DEVICES.
   (A)   A person who, for the purpose of obtaining goods, property, services
or anything of value, knowingly and with intent to defraud uses one or more
financial transaction devices that have been revoked or canceled by the issuer
of the device or devices, as distinguished from expired, and has received
notice of the revocation or cancellation is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable
by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500, or
both; if the value of the goods, property, services, or anything of value is
less than $100.
   (B)   The values of goods, property, services, or anything of value obtained
in separate incidents pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct within any 12-
month period may be aggregated to determine the total value of the goods,
property, services, or things of value obtained.
(Ord. 99-038, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.43 USE OF FINANCIAL TRANSACTION DEVICE TO WITHDRAW OR TRANSFER
FUNDS.
   (A)   A person who knowingly and with intent to defraud uses a financial
transaction device to withdraw or transfer funds from a deposit account in
violation of the contractual limitations imposed on the amount or frequency of
withdrawals or transfers or in an amount exceeding the funds than on deposit in
the account is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more
than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500 or three times the amount of funds
withdrawn or transferred, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a
fine, if the amount of the funds withdrawn or transferred is less than $200.
   (B)   The amounts of funds withdrawn or transferred in separate incidents
pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct within any 12-month period may be
aggregated to determine the total amount of the funds withdrawn or transferred.
   (C)   As used in this section, FINANCIAL TRANSACTION DEVICE means any of the
following:
      (1)   A credit card, meaning any instrument or device which is sold,
issued, or otherwise distributed by a business organization or financial
institution for the use of the person or organization identified on the
instrument or device for obtaining goods, property, services, or anything of
value on credit.
      (2)   A debit card.
      (3)   A point-of-sale card.
      (4)   Any instrument, device, card, plate, code, account number, personal
identification number, or a record or copy of a code, account number, or
personal identification number or other means of access to a credit account or
deposit account, or a driver's license or state identification card used to
access a proprietary account, other than access originated solely by a paper
instrument, that can be used alone or in conjunction with another access
device, for any of the following purposes:
         (a)   Obtaining money, cash refund or credit account credit, goods,
services, or any other thing of value.
         (b)   Certifying or guaranteeing to a person or business the
availability to the device holder of funds on deposit to honor a draft or check
payable to the order of that person or business.
         (c)   Providing the device holder access to a deposit account for the
purpose of making deposits, withdrawing funds, transferring funds between
deposit accounts, obtaining information pertaining to a deposit account, or
making an electronic funds transfer as defined in Public Act 322 of 1978
section 3(4), being M.C.L.A. § 488.3.
   (D)   A FINANCIAL INSTITUTION means a bank, savings and loan association, or
credit union, and includes a corporation wholly owned by a financial
institution or by the holding company parent of a financial institution.
   (E)   PROPRIETARY ACCOUNT means the account which is maintained by a
business organization in the name of an individual person or organization and
through which the business organization allows the person or organization to
obtain goods, property, services, or any other thing of value on credit.
(Ord. 99-039, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.44 EMBEZZLEMENT.
   (A)   A person who as the agent, servant, or employee of another person,
governmental entity within this state, or other legal entity, or who as the
trustee, bailee, or custodian of the property of another person, governmental
entity within this state, or other legal entity fraudulently disposes of or
converts to his or her own use, or takes or secretes with the intent to convert
to his or her own use without the consent of his or her principal, any money or
other personal property of his or her principal that has come to that person's
possession or that is under his or her charge or control by virtue of his or
her being an agent, servant, employee, trustee, bailee, or custodian, is guilty
of embezzlement.
   (B)   If the money or personal property embezzled has a value of less than
$200, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not
more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500 or three times the value of
the money or property embezzled, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and
a fine.
   (C)   The values of the money or personal property embezzled in separate
incidents pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct within any 12-month period
may be aggregated to the total value of money or personal property embezzled.
If the scheme or course of conduct is directed against only one person,
governmental entity within this state, or other legal entity, no time limit
applies to aggregation under this section.
   (D)   In a prosecution under this section, the failure, neglect, or refusal
of the agent, servant, employee, trustee, bailee, or custodian to pay, deliver,
or refund his or her principal the money or property entrusted to his or her
care upon demand is prima facie proof of intent to embezzle.
(Ord. 99-040, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.45 EMBEZZLEMENT OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   An agent, servant, employee, trustee, bailee, custodian, attorney-at-
law, collector, or another person who receives or collects in any manner money
or other personal property that is partly the property of another person,
governmental entity within the township, or other legal entity and partly the
property of the agent, servant, employee, trustee, bailee, custodian, attorney-
at-law, collector, or other person shall not embezzle, fraudulently dispose of,
convert to his or her own use, or take or secrete with intent to embezzle or
convert to his or her own use the money or personal property without the
consent of the part owner of the money or personal property.
   (B)   If the money or person property embezzled, disposed of, converted,
taken, or secreted has a value of less than $200, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of
not more than $500 or three times the value of the money or property embezzled,
disposed of, converted, taken, or secreted, whichever is greater, or both
imprisonment and a fine.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, the values of money or
property embezzled, disposed of, converted, taken, or secreted in separate
incidents pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct within any 12-month period
may be aggregated to determine the total value of money or personal property
embezzled, dispose of, converted, taken, or secreted. If the scheme or course
of conduct is directed against only one person, governmental entity within this
state, or other legal entity, no time limit applies to aggregation under this
section.
   (D)   In a prosecution under this section, it is not a defense that the
agent, servant, employee, trustee, bailee, custodian, attorney-at-law,
collector, or other person was entitled to a compensation out of the money or
person property as compensation for collecting or receiving it for its owner,
but it is not embezzlement by the agent, servant, employee, trustee, bailee,
custodian, attorney-at-law, collector, or other person to retain his or her
reasonable collection fee on the collection or any other valid interest he or
she has in the money or personal property.
   (E)   In a prosecution under this section, the failure, neglect, or refusal
of the agent, servant, employee, trustee, bailee, custodian, attorney-at-law,
collector, or other person to pay, deliver, or refund to the proper person the
money or personal property entrusted to him or her care, upon demand, is prima
facie proof of intent to embezzle.
(Ord. 99-041, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.46 FALSE PRETENSES.
   (A)   A person who, with intent to defraud or cheat and by color of a false
token or writing, by a false or bogus check or other written, printed, or
engraved instrument, by counterfeit coin or metal that is intended to simulate
a coin, or by any other false pretense does one or more of the following is
guilty of a crime punishable as provided in this chapter:
      (1)   Causes a person to grant, convey, assign, demise, lease, or
mortgage land or an interest in land.
      (2)   Obtains a person's signature on a forged written instrument.
      (3)   Obtains from a person any money or personal property or the use of
any instrument, facility, article, or other valuable thing or service.
      (4)   By means of a false weight or measure obtains a larger amount or
quantity of than was bargained for.
      (5)   By means of a false weight or measure sells or disposes of a
smaller amount or quantity of property than was bargained for.
   (B)   If the land, interest in land, money, personal property, use of the
instrument, facility, article, or valuable thing, service, larger amount
obtained, or smaller amount sold or disposed of has a value of less than $200,
the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more
than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500 or three time the value, whichever
is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
   (C)   The values of land, interest in land, money, personal property, use of
the instrument, facility, article, or valuable thing, service, larger amount
obtained, or smaller amount sold or disposed of in separate incidents pursuant
to a scheme or course of conduct within any 12-month period may be aggregated
to determine the total value involved in violating this section.
(Ord. 99-042, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.47 OBTAINING TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES WITH INTENT TO AVOID
CHARGE.
   (A)   A person shall not knowingly obtain or attempt to obtain
telecommunications services with intent to avoid, attempt to avoid, or cause
another person to avoid or attempt to avoid any lawful charge for that
telecommunications service by using any of the following:
      (1)   A telecommunications access device without the authority or consent
of the subscriber or lawful holder of that telecommunications access device.
      (2)   A counterfeit telecommunications access device.
      (3)   A fraudulent or deceptive scheme, pretense, method, or conspiracy,
or any device or other means, including but not limited to any of the
following:
         (a)   Using a false, altered, or stolen identification.
         (b)   The use of a telecommunications access device to violate this
section by a person other than the subscriber or lawful holder of the
telecommunications access device pursuant to an exchange of anything of value
to the subscriber or lawful holder to allow that unlawful use of the
telecommunications access device.
      (4)   A telecommunications device or counterfeit telecommunications
device.
   (B)   A person who violates division (A) is guilty of a misdemeanor if the
total value of the telecommunications service obtained or attempted to be
obtained is less than $200, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93
days or a fine of not more than $500 or three times the value of the
telecommunications service obtained or attempted to be obtained, whichever is
greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
   (C)   The values of the telecommunications services obtained, or attempted
to be obtained in separate incidents pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct
within any 12-month period may be aggregated to determine the total value of
the telecommunications service obtained or attempted to be obtained.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COUNTERFEIT TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACCESS DEVICE. A telecommunications access
device that is false, fraudulent, unlawful, not issued to a legitimate
telecommunications access device subscriber account, or otherwise invalid or
that is expired, suspended, revoked, canceled, or otherwise terminated if
notice of the expiration, suspension, revocation, cancellation, or termination
has been sent to the telecommunications access device subscriber.
      COUNTERFEIT   TELECOMMUNICATIONS   DEVICE. A telecommunications device
alone or with another telecommunications device that has been altered or
programmed to acquire, intercept,
receive, or otherwise facilitate the use of a telecommunications service
without the authority or consent of the telecommunications service provider.
COUNTERFEIT TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE includes, but is not limited to, a clone
telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone, tumbler microchip, or otherwise
facilitating the use of a telecommunications service without immediate
detection.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The origination, emission, transmission, or reception
of data, images, signals, sounds, or other intelligence or equivalence of
intelligence of any nature over any communications system by any method,
including, but not limited to, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital, or
analog.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACCESS DEVICE. An instrument, device, card, plate,
code, telephone number, account number, personal identification number,
electronic serial number, mobile identification number, counterfeit number, or
financial transaction device as defined in
§ 132.35, that alone or with another telecommunications access device can
acquire, intercept, provide, receive, use, or otherwise facilitate the use of a
telecommunications device, counterfeit telecommunications device, or
telecommunications service.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Any instrument, equipment, machine, or device
that facilitates telecommunications. TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE includes, but is
not limited to, a computer, computer chip or circuit, telephone, cellular
telephone, pager, personal communications device, transponder, receiver, radio,
modem, or device that enables use of a modem.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Providing, allowing, facilitating, or
generating any form of telecommunications through the use of telecommunications
devices or telecommunications access devices over a telecommunications system.
      VALUE OF THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES AVOIDED OR ATTEMPTED TO BE
AVOIDED.
      (1)   Any lawful charge for telecommunications services avoided or
attempted to be avoided.
      (2)   The value of any other money, property, or telecommunications
service lost, stolen, or rendered unrecoverable by the violation.
      (3)   Any actual expenditure incurred by the victim to verify that a
telecommunications device or telecommunications access device or
telecommunications service was not altered, acquired, damaged, disrupted,
destroyed, or stolen as a result of the violation.
(Ord. 99-043, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.48 PUBLICATION OF COMMUNICATIONS ACCESS DEVICE.
   (A)   A person who knowingly or intentionally publishes a telecommunications
access device or counterfeit telecommunications access device with the intent
that it be used or knowing or having reason to know that it will be used or is
likely to be used to violate
§ 132.39 is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more
than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100, or both.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COUNTERFEIT TELECOMMUNICATION ACCESS DEVICE. A telecommunications access
device that is false, fraudulent, unlawful, not issued to a legitimate
telecommunications access device subscriber account, or otherwise invalid or
that is expired, suspended, revoked, canceled, or otherwise terminated if
notice of the expiration, suspension, revocation, cancellation, or termination
has been sent to the telecommunications access device subscriber.
      PUBLISH. To communicate information or make information available to one
or more person orally, in writing, or by means of any telecommunications.
PUBLISH includes but is not limited to communicating information on a computer
bulletin board or similar system.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACCESS DEVICE. An instrument, device, card, plate,
code, telephone number, account number, personal identification number,
electronic serial number, mobile identification number, counterfeit number, or
financial transaction device as defined in
§ 132.35 that alone or with another telecommunications access device can
acquire, intercept, provide, receive, use or otherwise facilitate the use of a
telecommunications device, counterfeit telecommunications device, or
telecommunications service.
(Ord. 99-044, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 132.49 UNAUTHORIZED USE OR DIVERSION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.
   (A)   An officer, shareholder, partner, employee, agent, or independent
contractor of a telecommunications service provider who knowingly and without
authority uses or diverts telecommunications services for his or her own
benefit or to the benefit of another is guilty of a misdemeanor if the total
value of the telecommunications service used or diverted is less than $200,
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than
$500 or three times the total value of the telecommunications service used or
diverted, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
   (B)   The values of telecommunications service used or diverted in separate
incidents pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct within any 12-month period
may be aggregated to determine the total value of the telecommunications
services used or diverted.
(Ord. 99-045, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
Section
General Offenses Against Morals
   
133.01   Indecent language
   
133.02   Lewdness and indecent exposure
   
133.03   Obscene books, pictures and literature
   
133.04   Houses of ill-fame; patrons
   
133.05   Indecent and improper conduct
   
133.06   Hotel/motel prohibitions
   
133.07   Solicitation of drinks
   
133.08   Window peeping
Fortune Telling
   
133.20   Purposes and findings
   
133.21   Permit required
   
133.22   Definitions
   
133.23   Permit application; investigation
   
133.24   Hearing and decision by City Clerk
   
133.25   Approval of permit; term
   
133.26   Posting of required information
   
133.27   Receipts
   
133.28   Recording of consultation
   
133.29   Minors prohibited
   
133.30   Exceptions
   
133.31   Failure to answer citation, notice to appear; failure to comply with
order
GENERAL OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
§ 133.01 INDECENT LANGUAGE.
   No person shall use any indecent, immoral, obscene, vulgar, or insulting
language on any public street, or other public place, or in any place of
business open to public patronage.
(‘83 Code, § 133.01) (Am. Ord. 21-005, passed 2-22-21)  Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 133.02 LEWDNESS AND INDECENT EXPOSURE.
    No person or persons, shall be guilty of open and gross lewdness and
lascivious behavior, or designedly make any open or indecent, or obscene
exposure of his or her person, or of the person of another.
(‘83 Code, § 133.02) (Am. Ord. 21-005, passed 2-22-21)  Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 133.03 OBSCENE BOOKS, PICTURES AND LITERATURE.
   No person shall import, print, publish, sell, design, prepare, loan, give
away, or distribute any book, magazine, newspaper, writing, pamphlet, ballad,
printed paper, print, picture, drawing, photograph, reproduction, publication,
or other thing, knowing the same to contain any obscene, immoral, lewd, or
lascivious language or obscene, immoral, lewd, or lascivious prints, pictures,
figures, or descriptions, manifestly tending to the corruption of the morals of
youth. No person shall knowingly introduce into any family, school, or place of
education, or knowingly procure, receive, or have in his possession any such
book, pamphlet, magazine, newspaper, writing, ballad, printed paper, print,
picture, drawing, photograph, publication, or other thing, either for the
purpose of sale, exhibition, loan, or circulation, or with intent to introduce
the same into any family, school, or place or education.
(‘83 Code, § 133.03) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 133.04 HOUSES OF ILL-FAME; PATRONS.
   (A)   No person shall keep or maintain a house of ill-fame or assignation,
or place for the practice of fornication, prostitution, or lewdness. (‘83 Code,
§ 133.04)
   (B)   No person shall lease to another any house, room, or other premises,
in whole or in part, for any of the uses or purposes set forth in division (A)
of this section, or to knowingly permit the same to be used or occupied for
such purposes. (‘83 Code, § 133.06)
   (C)   No person shall patronize, frequent, be found in, or be an inmate of
any house of ill-fame or assignation, or place for the practice of prostitution
or lewdness. (‘83 Code, § 133.05)
Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 133.05 INDECENT AND IMPROPER CONDUCT.
   No person shall follow, annoy, molest, disturb, or insult by voice, conduct,
or actions any child under 21 years of age, and no person shall induce, coax,
persuade, or induce by threat any child under 21 years of age to enter any
vehicle or conveyance, or to go in or upon any public alley, street, park, or
private property or place. No person shall engage in any indecent, improper,
immoral, or obscene conduct, behavior, or actions.
(‘83 Code, § 133.07) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 133.06 HOTEL/MOTEL PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)    No proprietor, manager, or other person in charge of any place where
transients are accommodated for lodging or sleeping, shall let any room more
than once between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the next day except to
bona fide travelers with luggage. (‘83 Code, § 133.08)
   (B)   No person shall write or cause or permit to be written in any register
any other or different name or designation than the true name of the person so
registered. (‘83 Code, § 133.10)
(Am. Ord. 21-005, passed 2-22-21) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 133.07 SOLICITATION OF DRINKS.
   No person shall frequent or loiter in any tavern, bar, or place where drinks
are sold with the purpose of soliciting patrons or employees to purchase
drinks. The proprietor of the establishments shall not allow the presence of
any person who violates this section.
(‘83 Code, § 133.11) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 133.08 WINDOW PEEPING.
   No person shall look, peer, or peep into, or be found loitering around, or
within view of any window not on his own property, with the intent of looking
through the window.
(‘83 Code, § 133.12) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
FORTUNE-TELLING
§ 133.20 PURPOSES AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   The practice of fortune-telling, as defined in this subchapter, has
historically been subject to abuse by certain unscrupulous practitioners using
the practice to commit fraud and larceny upon clients.
   (B)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to regulate the practice of
fortune-telling in such manner as to reduce the risk of fraud and larceny to
clients while allowing fortune-tellers to provide their services to clients
with only minimal restrictions.
   (C)   The provisions of this chapter requiring a permit, posting of fees,
providing receipts and allowing client recordation of the consultation, will
make it more difficult for an unscrupulous fortune- teller to commit fraud or
larceny, and yet, as informational regulations, will not affect the nature of
the information conveyed by the fortune-teller, nor the manner in which it is
conveyed. These regulations require only minimal expense and effort on the part
of the fortune-teller and will not, therefore, impose any undue burden on their
practices.
   (D)   Fortune-telling for entertainment purposes, as defined in this
chapter, does not create the same risk of fraud and larceny by an unscrupulous
practitioner as would the practice with an individual client, because it is
done with a group at a public place for the purpose of entertaining and not to
deal with the private concerns of an individual.
   (E)   For these and other reasons, the provisions of this chapter are
necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community.
(Ord. 98-001, passed 1-5-98)
§ 133.21 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct, engage in, carry on, participate in, or practice
fortune-telling or cause the same to be done for pay without having first
obtained a permit therefor.
(Ord. 98-001, passed 1-5-98) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 133.22 DEFINITIONS.
   FORTUNE-TELLING. Telling fortunes, forecasting of future events or
furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process
of knowledge, by means of any occult or psychic power, faculty or force,
including, but not limited to clairvoyance, clairaudience cartomancy,
phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other such reading, mediumship, seership,
prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind-reading, telepathy, or
other craft, art, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article
or substance, crystal gazing, or magic, of any kind or nature.
   FOR PAY. For a fee, reward, donation, loan or loan or receipt of anything of
value.
(Ord. 98-001, passed 1-5-98)
§ 133.23 PERMIT APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Every natural person who, for pay, conducts, engages in, carries on,
or practices fortune-telling shall file a separate verified application for a
permit with the City Clerk. The application shall contain the following.
      (1)   The name, home and business address, and home business telephone
number of the applicant.
      (2)   The record of conviction for violations of the law, excluding minor
traffic violations.
      (3)   The fingerprints of the applicant on a form provided by the Police
Department.
      (4)   The address, city and state, and the approximate dates where and
when the applicant practiced a similar business, either alone or in conjunction
with others.
      (5)   A non-refundable application fee in an amount set by resolution of
the City Council from time to time, posted in the City Clerk's Office.
   (B)   Upon the filing of the application, it shall be referred to the Police
Department for investigation, report and recommendation. The investigation
shall be conducted to verify the facts contained in the application, and any
supporting data. The investigation shall be completed and a report and
recommendation made in writing to the City Clerk within 14 days after the
filing of the application, unless the applicant requests or consents to an
extension of the time period. If the report recommends denial of the permit to
the applicant, the grounds for the recommended denial shall be set forth
therein.
(Ord. 98-001, passed 1-5-98) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 133.24 HEARING AND DECISION BY CITY CLERK.
   The City Clerk shall consider the application and the Police Department
report and recommendation at a hearing held not less than seven nor more than
14 days following receipt of the Police Department report described in
§ 133.23(B). Notice of the time and place of the hearing and a copy of the
Police Department report shall be given to the applicant personally or by
certified mail by the City Clerk at least five days prior to the hearing. Any
interested person shall be heard at the hearing. The city shall have the burden
of proof to show the permit should be denied. The decision of the City Clerk to
approve, deny or conditionally approve the permit shall be in writing, and if
adverse to the applicant, shall contain findings of fact and a determination of
the issues presented. Unless the applicant agrees in writing to an extension of
time, the City Clerk shall make his or her decision approving, denying, or
conditionally approving the permit within 24 hours after completion of the
hearing on the application of his or her action by personal service or
certified mail.
(Ord. 98-001, passed 1-5-98)
§ 133.25 APPROVAL OF PERMIT; TERM.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall approve or conditionally approve the permit if he
or she makes all of the following findings.
      (1)   All the information contained in the application and supporting
data is true.
      (2)   The applicant has not, within one year from the date of the
application, been convicted of any violation of this chapter or crimes
involving prediction of future events by the occult arts, larceny, perjury,
bribery, extortion, fraud, or similar crimes involving moral turpitude; and
      (3)   The applicant has paid the required business license fee.
   (B)   The term of the permit shall be for no more than the term of the
business license. A renewal application shall be filed no later than 30 days
prior to the expiration of the permit and shall be processed in the same manner
as any new application.
(Ord. 98-001, passed 1-5-98)
§ 133.26 POSTING REQUIRED INFORMATION.
   (A)   Each person required to obtain a permit pursuant to
§ 133.21 shall post on his or her business premises a sign containing the
following information.
      (1)   The true name of the fortune-telling practitioner.
      (2)   Each service provided by the fortune-telling practitioner.
      (3)   The fees charged for each service provided by the fortune-telling
practitioner.
      (4)   The statement, “By law, this business is prohibited from charging
or soliciting any fee, payment or remuneration beyond these established rates.”
   (B)   The sign required by this section shall be prominently posted in the
interior of the business premises at a point near the entry, and shall be
conspicuously visible to every person seeking services of the fortune-teller.
The sign lettering shall be of uniform size with each letter at least ½-inch in
height.
   (C)   If the fortune-telling service is provided at a location other than
the fortune-teller's permanent place of business, the fortune-teller shall
provide the information required by this section on 8½ by 11-inch paper and
legibly printed or typewritten. The paper shall also include the name and
permanent address of the person providing the fortune-telling services. A true,
correct and complete copy of the paper shall be given to each client prior to
providing any fortune-telling services.
   (D)   No person shall charge any fee, payment, remuneration, or item of
value for fortune-telling services in excess of the fees set forth on the sign
or paper required by this section.
(Ord. 98-001, passed 1-5-98) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 133.27 RECEIPTS.
   Prior to the acceptance of any money or item of value from a client, other
than the acceptance of a gratuitous tip given voluntarily by the client, the
fortune-teller shall issue a written receipt to the client, clearly showing the
following information.
   (A)   Date.
   (B)   Name of client.
   (C)   Amount of money received or specific description of item of value
received.
   (D)   Purpose for which the money or item of value was received.
(Ord. 98-001, passed 1-5-98) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 133.28 RECORDING OF CONSULTATION.
   No person engaging in fortune-telling services shall prohibit a client from
making an audio recording or taking written notes of the information conveyed
by the fortune-teller.
(Ord. 98-001, passed 1-5-98) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 133.29 MINORS PROHIBITED.
   No person engaged in fortune-telling services shall render that service to
any person under the age of 18 years of age unless the minor is accompanied by
a parent or guardian or unless the minor has the written consent of a parent or
guardian, which written consent shall be retained by the person engaged in
fortune-telling for a period of one year. Premises must be posted that persons
supplying fraudulent letters of consent are subject to prosecution.
(Ord. 98-001, passed 1-5-98) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 133.30 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person engaged
solely in the business of entertaining the public by demonstrations of fortune-
telling at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of all
other persons in attendance, and at which no questions are answered as part of
the entertainment except in a manner to permit all persons present at the
public place to hear the answers.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any person
conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service when the
person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium,
healer, clairvoyant, or similar position (hereinafter collectively referred to
as minister) from any bona fide church or religious association having a creed
or set of religious principles that is recognized by all churches of like faith
which provides for fortune-telling provided that the following apply.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(3), the minister's fees,
gratuities, emoluments, and profits shall be regularly accounted for and paid
solely to or for the benefit of the bona fide church or religious association,
as defined in this section.
      (2)   The minister holding a certificate of ordination from a bona fide
church or religious association, as defined in this section, shall file with
the Business License Officer a certified copy of the minister's certificate or
ordination and the minister's name, age, street, address, and telephone number
in this city where the activity set forth in this section is to be conducted.
      (3)   The bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this
section, may pay to its ministers a salary or compensation based upon a
percentage basis, pursuant to an agreement between the church or religious
association and the minister which is embodied in a resolution and transcribed
in the minutes of the church or religious association.
(Ord. 98-001, passed 1-5-98) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 133.31 FAILURE TO ANSWER CITATION, NOTICE TO APPEAR; FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH
ORDER.
   (A)   A person who fails to answer a citation, or a notice to appear in
court for a violation reportable to the Secretary of State under M.C.L.A. §
257.732 or an ordinance of the city substantially corresponding to a violation
of state law reportable to the Secretary of State under M.C.L.A. § 257.732, or
for any matter pending, or who fails to comply with an order or judgment of the
court, including, but not limited to, paying all fines, costs, fees, and
assessments is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more
than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100, or both. A violation of this
section or failure to answer a citation or notice to appear for a violation of
section 33b(1) of former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA section 703(1) of the Michigan
Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998, M.C.L.A. § 436.1703, or an
ordinance of the city substantially corresponding to either of those sections
shall not be considered a violation for any purpose under M.C.L.A. § 320a.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C), 28 days or more after a person
fails to answer a citation, or a notice to appear in court for a violation
reportable to the Secretary of State under M.C.L.A. § 257.732 or an ordinance
of the city substantially corresponding to a violation of a law of this state
reportable to the Secretary of State under M.C.L.A. § 257.732, or for any
matter pending, or fails to comply with an order or judgment of the court,
including, but not limited to paying all fines, costs, fees and assessments,
the court shall give notice by mail at the last known address of the person
that if the person fails to appear or fails to comply with the order or
judgment within 14 days after the notice is issued, the Secretary of State
shall suspend the person's operator's or chauffeur's license. If the person
fails to appear or fails to comply with the order or judgment within the 14-day
period, the court shall, within 14 days, inform the Secretary of State, who
shall immediately suspend the license of the person. The Secretary of State
shall immediately notify the person of the suspension by regular mail at the
person's last known address.
   (C)   If the person is charged with, or convicted of, a violation of
M.C.L.A. § 257.625, or § 70.04 or a local ordinance substantially corresponding
to the provisions of M.C.L.A. § 257.625 and the person fails to answer a
citation or a notice to appear in court, or for any matter pending, or fails to
comply with an order or judgment of the court, including but not limited to the
paying of all fines, costs, fees and crime victim rights assessments, the court
shall immediately give notice by first-class mail sent to the person's last
known address that if the person fails to appear within seven days after the
notice is issued, or fails to comply with the order or judgment of the court,
including, but not limited to, paying all fines, costs, and crime victim rights
assessments, within 14 days after the notice is issued, the Secretary of State
shall suspend the person's operator's or chauffeur's license. If the person
fails to appear within the seven-day period, or fails to comply with the order
or judgment of the court, including, but not limited to, paying all fines,
costs, and crime victim rights assessments, within the 14-day period, the court
shall immediately inform the Secretary of State who shall immediately suspend
the person's operator's or chauffeur's license and notify the person of the
suspension by first-class mail sent to the person's last known address.
   (D)   If the person is charged with, or convicted of, a violation of section
33b(1) of former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, section 703(1) of the Michigan Liquor
Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998, M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1703, 624a, 624b,
or an ordinance of the city substantially corresponding to those state law
sections or fails comply with an order or judgment of the court issued pursuant
to section 33b of former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, section 703 of the Michigan
Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998, M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1703, 624a,
624b, or an ordinance of the city substantially corresponding to those state
law sections including, but not limited to, paying all fines and costs, within
14 days after the notice is issued, the Secretary of State shall suspend the
person's operator's or chauffeur's license. If the order or judgment of the
court, including, but not limited to, paying all fines and costs, within the
14-day period, the court shall immediately suspend the person's operator's or
chauffeur's license and notify the person of the suspension by first-class mail
sent to the person's last known address.
   (E)   A suspension imposed under division (B) or (C) remains in effect until
both of the following occur:
      (1)   The Secretary of State is notified by each court in which the
person failed to answer a citation or notice to appear or failed to pay a fine
or cost that the person has answered that citation or notice to appear or paid
that fine or cost.
      (2)   The person has paid to the court a $25 driver license clearance fee
for each failure to answer a citation or failure to pay a fine or cost.
   (F)   The court shall not notify the Secretary of State, and the Secretary
of State shall not suspend the person's license, if the person's fails to
appear in response to a citation issued for, or fails to comply with an order
or judgment involving one or more of the following infractions:
      (1)   The parking or standing of a vehicle.
      (2)   A pedestrian, passenger, or bicycle violation, other than a
violation of section 33b (1) or (2) of former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, section 703
(1) or (2) of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998,
M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1703, 624a or 624b, or a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to section 33b(1) or (2) of former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, section
703(1) or (2) of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of
1998, M.C.L.A. § 436.1703, or M.C.L.A. §§ 624a or 624b.
   (G)   The court may notify a person who has done either of the following,
that if the person does not appear within ten days after the notice is issued,
the court will inform the Secretary of State of the person's failure to appear:
      (1)   Failed to answer two or more parking violation notices or citations
for violating this section substantially corresponding to the provisions of
Public Act 73 of 1999, M.C.L.A. § 257.321a pertaining to parking for persons
with disabilities.
      (2)   Failed to answer six or more parking violation notices or citations
regarding illegal parking.
   (H)   The Secretary of State, upon being informed of the failure of a person
to appear or comply as provided in division (G), shall not issue a license to
the person or renew a license for the person until both of the following occur:
      (1)   The court informs the Secretary of State that the person has
resolved all outstanding matters regarding the notices or citations.
      (2)   The person has paid to the court a $25 driver license clearance
fee. If the court determines that the person is responsible for only one
parking violation under division (G)(1) or less than six parking violations
under division (G)(2) for which the person's license was not issued or renewed
under this subsection, the court may waive payment of the fee.
   (I)   Not less than 28 days after a person fails to appear in response to a
citation issued for, or fails to comply with an order or judgment involving, a
state civil infraction described in chapter 88 of the
Revised Judicature Act of 1961, Public Act 236 of 1961, M.C.L.A. § 600.8801
through 600.8835, the court shall give notice by ordinary mail, addressed to
the person's last known address, that if the person fails to appear or fails to
comply with the order or judgment described in this division within 14 days
after the notice is issued, the court will give to the Secretary of State
notice of the failure. Upon receiving notice of that failure, the Secretary of
State shall not issue or renew an operator's or chauffeur's license for the
person until both of the following occur:
      (1)   The court informs the Secretary of State that the person has
resolved all outstanding matters regarding each notice or citation.
      (2)   The person has paid to the court a $25 driver license clearance
fee. If the court determines that the person is not responsible for any
violation for which the person's license was not issued or renewed under this
subsection, the court shall waive the fee.
   (J)   For purposes of divisions (E)(1), (H)(1), and (I)(1), the court shall
give to the person a copy of the information being transmitted to the Secretary
of State. Upon showing that copy, the person shall not be arrested or issued a
citation for driving on a suspended license, on an expired license, or without
a license on the basis of any matter resolved under divisions (E)(1), (H)(1),
or (I)(1), even if the information being sent to the Secretary of State has not
yet been received or recorded by the Department.
   (K)   Six dollars of each fee received under divisions (E)(2), (H)(2), or
(I)(2) shall be transmitted by the court to the Secretary of State on a monthly
basis. The funds received by the Secretary of State under this division shall
be deposited in the state general fund and shall be used to defray the expenses
of the Secretary of State in processing the suspension and reinstatement of
driver licenses under this section.
   (L)   M.C.L.A. § 257.819 does not apply to a reinstatement fee collected for
an operator's or chauffeur's license that is not issued or renewed under
section 8827 of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, Public Act 236 of 1961,
M.C.L.A. § 600.8827.
(Ord. 99-021, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
CHAPTER 134: GAMBLING
Section
   
134.01   Gambling prohibited
   
134.02   Gambling premises and equipment prohibited
   
134.03   Policy or pool tickets prohibited; confiscation
   
134.04   Conflict with state or federal statutes
§ 134.01 GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall deal, play, engage in, or frequent any faro, roulette, dice,
cards, or gambling for money or other valuable things, or any other device or
game of chance, hazard, or skill, either as bookmaker, dealer, keeper, player,
or otherwise, for the purpose of gambling for money or other valuable thing. No
person shall attend or be found frequenting any place where gaming or gambling
is taking place.
(‘83 Code, § 134.01) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 134.02 GAMBLING PREMISES AND EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Any person, or his agent or employee who shall, directly or
indirectly, keep or occupy or assist in keeping or occupying any common
gambling house or any building or place where gaming is permitted or suffered
or who shall suffer or permit on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by
him any apparatus used for gaming or gambling or who shall use such apparatus
for gaming or gambling in any place within the state, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (M.C.L.A. § 750.302(1)) (‘83 Code, § 134.02)
   (B)   A person who for hire, gain, or reward, keeps or maintains a gaming
room, gaming table, game of skill or chance, or game partly of skill and partly
of chance, used for gaming, or who permits a gaming room, or gaming table, or
game to be kept, maintained, or played on premises occupied or controlled by
the person, is guilty of a misdemeanor. A person who aids, assists, or abets in
the keeping or maintaining of a gaming room, gaming table, or game, is guilty
of a misdemeanor. (M.C.L.A. § 750.303(1)) (‘83 Code, § 134.03)
   (C)   Any person or his agent or employee, who shall, directly or indirectly
keep, maintain, operate or occupy any building or room or any part thereof or
any place with apparatus, books or any device for registering bets or buying or
selling pools upon the result of a trial or contest of skill, speed or
endurance or upon the result of a game, competition, political nomination,
appointment or election or any purported event of like character or who shall
register bets or buy or sell pools, or who shall be concerned in buying or
selling pools or who shall knowingly permit any grounds or premises, owned,
occupied or controlled by him to be used for any of the purposes aforesaid,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (M.C.L.A. § 750.304) (‘83 Code, § 134.04)
Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 134.03 POLICY OR POOL TICKETS PROHIBITED; CONFISCATION.
   No person shall be in possession of any policy or pool tickets, slips or
checks, memoranda, or any combination, or other bet, manifold, or other policy,
or pool books or sheets, or of any such articles, or of any other implements,
apparatus or materials or any other form of gaming. Any and all such articles
may be confiscated and destroyed by the police department of the city, or used
in evidence in any prosecution for violation.
(‘83 Code, § 134.05) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 134.04 CONFLICT WITH STATE OR FEDERAL STATUTES.
   Sections 134.01 through 134.03 shall not be construed as to conflict with
any state or federal statute.
(‘83 Code, § 134.06)
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS
Section
   
135.01   Definitions
   
135.02   Minors prohibited in certain places
   
135.03   Curfew for minors
   
135.04   Purchase, possession or transportation of alcoholic beverages by
minors
   
135.05   Sales of alcohol to minors prohibited
   
135.06   Contributing to the delinquency of minors; neglect
   
135.07   Notification of parent; record of
   
135.08   Alcoholic beverages and drugs at open house parties
   
135.09   Sale of tobacco to minors prohibited
   
135.10   Use of tobacco by minors in public places prohibited
   
135.11   Definitions relating to tobacco use
   
135.99   Penalty
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CRIMINAL ACTS. Those acts which violate the statutes of the State of
Michigan or the ordinances of the city, but not including Traffic Violations.
   FAILURE TO EXERCISE REASONABLE PARENTAL CONTROL. Includes but is not limited
to the following.
      (1)   Knowingly permit the minor to violate the city's curfew laws.
      (2)   Knowingly permit the minor to keep stolen property.
      (3)   Knowingly permit the minor to associate with known juvenile
delinquents.
      (4)   Knowingly permit the minor to be absent without cause from regular
school sessions.
      (5)   Knowingly permit the minor to possess unlawful drugs or narcotics.
      (6)   Knowingly permit the minor to be without proper supervision in the
absence of the parents.
      (7)   Knowingly permit the minor to maliciously destroy anyone else's
real or personal property.
   HABITUAL OFFENDER. One who commits two or more criminal acts within a 12-
month period.
   MINOR. Any juvenile under the age of 17 years residing with the parent as
defined in this chapter.
   PARENT. Mother, father, legal guardian, and any other person having the care
or custody of a minor or any adult with whom a minor may be found residing.
(‘83 Code, § 135.01) (Ord. 72-002, passed 1-17-72)
§ 135.02 MINORS PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.
   No minor child under 21 years of age, within the city, shall be permitted,
unless accompanied by parent or legal guardian, to remain in any saloon, bar
room, or other place where any spiritous or intoxicating liquor, wine, beer, or
any beverage containing any spiritous or intoxicating liquor, beer, or malt
liquor, is sold, given away, or furnished, or in any place of amusement known
as dance houses or halls, concert saloons, or variety theaters. All such
establishments shall be posted with signs bearing the legend, “Minors under 21
unaccompanied by parent or guardian prohibited.” No minor shall be present at
any time or under any circumstances in any house of prostitution, or in any
room or hall occupied or used for hire, gain, or reward for the purpose of
cards, dice, or gaming, pool selling or betting in any manner whatever. No
proprietor, keeper, or manager of such place shall permit a minor to remain in
such place.
(‘83 Code, § 135.02) Penalty, see
§ 135.99
§ 135.03 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   No child under the age of 16 years shall be permitted, caused, or
suffered to be upon the public streets or in any public place between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m, except as provided in division (F).
   (B)   No child under the age of 12 years shall be permitted, caused, or
suffered to be engaged or employed as a bootblack, or in the selling of
magazines, periodicals, newspapers, goods, wares, or merchandise, of any kind
or nature upon the public streets or in any public place between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., or to accompany any person so engaged or employed.
   (C)   The parent or guardian of the child shall be held responsible for the
enforcement of divisions (A) and (B) of this section.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 17 years to
loiter, idle, congregate, or otherwise be in or on any public street, highway,
alley, park, or any public place, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00
a.m., except as provided in division (F).
   (E)   Any person assisting, aiding, abetting, or encouraging any minor under
the age of 17 years to violate the provisions of divisions (A), (B) and (D) of
this section shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. When any minor is
found violating the provisions of divisions (A), (B) and (D) of this section, a
presumption shall arise that the parent or legal guardian having the care and
custody of the minor assisted, aided, abetted, and encouraged the minor in so
violating those divisions.
   (F)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or the residence of
a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department
about the minor's presence;
      (7)   Attending a lawful school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults, or going to or returning home from, without any
detour or stop, a lawful school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
(‘83 Code, § 135.03) (Ord. 71-018, passed 7-19-71) Penalty, see
§ 135.99
§ 135.04 PURCHASE, POSSESSION, OR TRANSPORTATION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY
MINORS.
   (A)   (1)   A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic
liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, or possess or attempt
to possess alcoholic liquor, except as provided in this section. A minor who
violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the following
fines and sanctions:
         (a)   For the first violation a fine of not more than $100, and may be
ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or substance abuse
treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in section 6107 of the Public
Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, M.C.L.A. § 333.6107, and designated by the
administrator of substance abuse services, and may be ordered to perform
community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at
his or her own expense as described in division (A)(3).
         (b)   For a violation of this section following a prior violation of
this section, or section 33b(1) of former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, a fine of not
more than $200, and may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention
or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in section
6107 of the Public Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, M.C.L.A. § 333.6107,
and designated by the Administrator of Substance Abuse Services, to perform
community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at
his or her own expense as described in division (A)(3).
         (c)   For a violation of this section following two or more prior
violations of this section or section 33b(1) of former 1933 (Ex Sess) PA 8, a
fine of not more than $500 and may be ordered to participate in substance abuse
prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined
in section 6107 of the Public Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, M.C.L.A. §
333.6107, and designated by the Administrator of Substance Abuse Services, to
perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and
assessment at his or her own expense as described in division (A)(3).
      (2)   A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor, or
notwithstanding division (A)(1) a minor who uses fraudulent identification to
purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100, or
both.
      (3)   The court may order the person convicted of violating division (A)
(1) to undergo screening and assessment by a person or agency as designated by
the substance abuse coordinating agency as defined in section 6103 of the
Public Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, M.C.L.A. § 333.6103, in order to
determine whether the person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services,
including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs.
      (4)   The Secretary of State shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's
license of an individual convicted of violating divisions (A)(1) or (2) as
provided in section 319 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949,
M.C.L.A. § 257.319, as amended.
      (5)   A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has
consumed alcoholic liquor may require the person to submit to a preliminary
chemical breath analysis. A peace officer may arrest a person based in whole or
in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The results
of a preliminary chemical breath analysis, or other acceptable blood alcohol
test are admissible in a criminal prosecution to determine whether the minor
has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor. A minor who refuses to submit to a
preliminary chemical breath test analysis as required by this section is
responsible for a civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of
not more than $100..
      (6)   A law enforcement agency, upon determining that a person less than
18 years of age who is not emancipated pursuant to Public Act 293 of 1968,
M.C.L.A. § 722.1 through 722.6, allegedly consumed, possessed, purchased, or
attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor in violation of
division (A)(1) shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of
the person as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian,
or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The
notice required by this subdivision shall be made not later than 48 hours after
the law enforcement agency determines that the person who allegedly violated
division (A)(1) is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under Public
Act 293 of 1968, M.C.L.A. § 722.1 through 722.6. The notice may be made by any
means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including, but not
limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first-class mail. If an
individual less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating division (A)
(1), his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as
provided in this subdivision.
      (7)   This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing alcoholic
liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her employment
if employed by a person licensed by the Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act
58 of 1998, M.C.L.A. § 435.1101 et seq.; by the commission, or by an agent of
the commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her
consumption.
      (8)   This section does not limit the civil or criminal liability of the
vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a violation of
this section.
      (9)   The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled in a
course offered by an accredited post-secondary educational institution in an
academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member
is not prohibited by this section if the purpose of the consumption is solely
educational and is a requirement of the course.
      (10)   The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection with
religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited by this
section.
      (11)    Division (A)(1) does not apply to a minor who participates in
either or both of the following:
         (a)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives
alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the
prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-
sponsored internal enforcement action.
         (b)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchase or receives
alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the commission, or a
local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or
contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the minor was not
under the direction of the state police, the commission, or the local police
agency and was not part of the undercover operation.
      (12)    The state police, the commission, or a local police agency shall
not recruit or attempt to recruit a minor for participation in an undercover
operation at the scene of a violation of division (A)(1), M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1801
(2) or 436.1701(1).
      (13)    For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         PROBATE COURT DISPOSITION. An order of disposition of the probate
court or the family division of the circuit court for a child found to be
within the provisions of Public Act 288 of 1939, chapter XIIA, M.C.L.A. § 712A
through 712A.32.
         WORK LOCATION. The specific place or places of employment, or the
territory or territories regularly visited by the person in pursuance of the
person's occupation, or both.
         MINOR. A person less than 21 years of age.
(‘83 Code, § 135.04) (Ord. 99-017, passed 2-28-00)
   (B)   (1)   A person less than 21 years of age shall not knowingly transport
or possess alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle as an operator or occupant
unless the person is employed by a licensee under the Michigan Liquor Control
Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998, M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1101 through 436.2303, a
common carrier designated by the Liquor Control Commission under the Michigan
Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998, M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1101 through
436.2303, the Liquor Control Commission, or an agent of the Liquor Control
Commission and is transporting or having the alcoholic liquor in a motor
vehicle under the person's control during regular working hours and in the
course of the person's employment. This section does not prevent a person less
than 21 years of age from knowingly transporting alcoholic liquor in a motor
vehicle if a person at least 21 years of age is present inside the motor
vehicle. A person who violates this subdivision is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable as provided for in § 10.99. As part of the sentence, the person may
be ordered to perform community service and undergo substance abuse screening
and assessment at his or her own expense as described in section 703(1) of the
Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998, M.C.L.A. §
435.1703.
      (2)   Within 30 days after the conviction for a violation of division (B)
(1) by the operator of a motor vehicle, which conviction has become final, the
arresting law enforcement officer or the officer's supervisor may make a
complaint before the court from which the warrant was issued. The complaint
shall be under oath and shall describe the motor vehicle in which alcoholic
liquor was possessed or transported by the operator, who is less than 21 years
of age, in committing the violation and requesting that the motor vehicle be
impounded as provided in this division. Upon the filing of the complaint, the
court shall issue to the owner of the motor vehicle an order to show cause why
the motor vehicle should not be impounded. The order to show cause shall fix a
date and time for a hearing, which shall not be less than ten days after the
issuance of the order. The order shall be served by delivering a true copy to
the owner not less than three full days before the date of hearing or, if the
owner cannot be located, by sending a true copy by certified mail to the last
known address of the owner. If the owner is a nonresident of the state, service
may be made upon the secretary of state as provided in M.C.L.A. § 257.403.
      (3)   If the court determines upon the hearing of the order to show
cause, from competent and relevant evidence, that at the time of the Commission
of the violation the motor vehicle was being driven by the person less than 21
years of age with the express or implied consent or knowledge of the owner in
violation of division (B)(1), and that the use of the motor vehicle is not
needed by the owner in the direct pursuit of the owner's employment or the
actual operation of the owner's business, the court may authorize the
impounding of the vehicle for a period of not less than 15 days or more than 30
days. The court’s order authorizing the impounding of the vehicle shall
authorize a law enforcement officer to take possession without other process of
the motor vehicle wherever located and to store the vehicle in a public or
private garage at the expense and risk of the owner of the vehicle. The owner
of the vehicle may appeal the order to the circuit court and the provisions
governing the taking of appeals form judgments for damages apply to the appeal.
This section doe not prevent a bona fide lienholder from exercising rights
under a lien.
      (4)   A person who knowingly transfers title to a motor vehicle for the
purpose of avoiding this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, a fine of not more than $500, or both.
      (5)   A law enforcement agency, upon determining that a person less than
18 years of age allegedly violated this section, shall notify the parent or
parents, custodian or guardian of the person as to the nature of the violation
if the name of a parent, guardian or custodian is reasonable ascertainable by
the law enforcement agency. The notice required by this subdivision shall be
made not later than 48 hours after the law enforcement agency determines that
the person who allegedly violated this section is less than 18 years of age and
may be made in person, by telephone, or first-class mail.
      (6)   As used in this section, "alcoholic liquor" means any spirituous,
vinous, malt, or fermented liquor, liquids and compounds, whether or not
medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called containing ½ of
is or more of alcohol by volume which are fit for use for beverage purposes as
defined and classified by the Liquor Control Commission according to alcohol
content as belonging to one of the varieties defined the Michigan Liquor
Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998, M.C.L.A. § 436.1101 et seq.
(‘83 Code, § 135.06) (Ord. 99-020, passed 2-28-00) Penalty, see
§ 135.99
§ 135.05 SALE OF ALCOHOL TO MINORS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person, either directly or indirectly, by himself, clerk, agent,
servant, or employee, shall at any time sell, furnish, give, or deliver any
alcoholic liquor to any person unless the person shall have attained the age of
21 years. Nor shall any person, either directly or indirectly by himself,
clerk, agent, servant, or employee, at any time, sell, furnish, give, or
deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person who is so intoxicated as not to be
in control of all his faculties.
   (B)   Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the sale of an alcoholic
beverage to a minor upon authority of and pursuant to a prescription of a duly
licensed physician.
   (C)   (1)   Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or furnished to a person
unless the person has attained 21 years of age. A person who knowingly sells or
furnishes alcoholic liquor to a person who is less than 21 years of age, or who
fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is less than 21 years
of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor. A suitable sign which describes this
section and the penalties for violating this section shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in each room where alcoholic liquors are sold. The signs
shall be approved and furnished by the state Liquor Control Commission.
      (2)   Diligent inquiry shall be interpreted to mean that the person
selling or furnishing alcoholic liquor demanded, and was shown, before
furnishing alcoholic liquor, a motor vehicle operator's license or a
registration certificate issued by the federal selective service, or other bona
fide documentary evidence of the age and identity of that person.
(‘83 Code, § 135.05) (Ord. 82-018, passed 5-3-82) Penalty, see
§ 135.99
§ 135.06 CONTRIBUTING TO THE DELINQUENCY OF MINORS: NEGLECT
   (A)   Any person who shall, by any act, or by any word, encourage,
contribute toward, cause, or tend to cause any minor child under the age of 17
years to become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the
jurisdiction of the Juvenile Division of the Probate Court, as defined in
Public Act 288 of 1939, § 2 of Chapter 12a, as added by Public Act 54 of 1944
(First Extra Session), being M.C.L.A. 712A.2 et seq., and any amendments
thereto, whether or not the child shall in fact be adjudicated a ward of the
Probate Court, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (‘83 Code, § 135.07)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the parent of any minor to fail to exercise
reasonable parental control which results in the minor committing any criminal
act or to allow or encourage any minor to commit any criminal act or become
delinquent in accordance with the Probate Code as it pertains to juveniles.
(‘83 Code, § 135.08)
(Ord. 72-002, passed 1-17-72; Am. Ord. 72-029, passed 10-2-72) Penalty, see
§ 135.99
§ 135.07 NOTIFICATION OF PARENT; RECORD.
   (A)   Whenever a minor shall be arrested or detained for the commission of
any criminal act within the city, the parent of the minor shall be immediately
notified by the police department advising the parent of the arrest or
detention, the reason therefor, and their responsibility under this ordinance.
   (B)   A record of notifications shall be kept by the city Police Department.
(‘83 Code, § 135.09) (Ord. 72-002, passed 1-17-72) Penalty, see
§ 135.99
§ 135.08 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND DRUGS AT OPEN HOUSE PARTIES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ADULT. A person 18 years of age or older.
      ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Any spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented liquor,
liquids and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by
whatever name called, containing ½ of 1% or more of alcohol by volume which are
fit for use for beverage purposes as defined and classified by the commission
according to alcoholic content in accordance with M.C.L.A. § 436.1105.
      CONTROL. Any form of regulation or dominion including a possessory right.
      DRUG. A controlled substance as defined now or hereafter by the Public
Acts of the State of Michigan. Currently, controlled substances are defined by
Public Act 196 of 1971, being M.C.L.A. §§ 333.7101 et seq., as amended.
      MINOR. A person not legally permitted by reason of age to possess
alcoholic liquor pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 436.1701, as the same may be amended
from time to time.
      OPEN HOUSE PARTY. A social gathering of persons at a residence, other
than the owner or those with rights of possession or their immediate family
members.
      RESIDENCE. A home, apartment, condominium, or other dwelling unit and
includes the curtilage of the dwelling unit.
   (B)   Prohibition. No adult having control of any residence shall allow an
open house party to take place at that residence if any alcoholic liquor or
drug is possessed or consumed at that residence by any minor where the adult
knew or reasonably should have known that an alcoholic liquor or drug was in
the possession of or being consumed by a minor at that residence, and where the
adult failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption
of the alcoholic liquor or drug at that residence.
   (C)   Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to legally
protected religious observances or legally protected educational activities.
(‘83 Code, § 135.10) (Ord. 86-004, passed 4-21-86) Penalty, see
§ 135.99
§ 135.09 SALE OF TOBACCO TO MINORS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to sell, give to,
or in any way furnish cigarettes, cigars, tobacco in any form, vapor products
or alternative nicotine products to a person under 18 years of age. Upon being
found guilty of this offense, the offender may be punished, in the discretion
of the court, according to the provisions of §
135.99.
   (B)   A person who sells tobacco products or vapor products or alternative
nicotine products at retail shall post a sign as required by Section 1 of
Public Act No. 31 of 1915 (M.C.L. § 722.641), furnished by the state department
of public health, that includes the following statement:
      The purchase of tobacco products by a minor under 18 years of age and the
provision of tobacco products to a minor are prohibited by law. A minor
unlawfully purchasing or using tobacco products is subject to criminal
penalties.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge pursuant to division (B) of
this section that the defendant had in force at the time of arrest and
continues to have in force a written policy to prevent the sale of cigarettes,
cigars, chewing tobacco, tobacco snuff, other tobacco products, vapor products
or alternative nicotine products to persons under 18 years of age, and that the
defendant enforced and continues to enforce the policy. A defendant which
proposes to offer evidence of the affirmative defense described in this
subsection shall file and serve notice of the defense, in writing, upon the
court and the City Attorney. The notice shall be served not less than 14 days
before the date set for trial.
   (D)   A City Attorney who proposes to offer testimony to rebut the
affirmative defense described in division (C) of this section shall file and
serve a notice of rebuttal, in writing, upon the court and the defendant. The
notice shall be served not less than seven days before the date set for trial,
and shall contain the name and address of each rebuttal witness.
(‘83 Code, § 135.11) (Ord. 92-007, passed 4-21-92; Am. Ord. 19-007, passed 5-6-
19) Penalty, see
§ 135.99
§ 135.10 USE OF TOBACCO BY MINORS IN PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED.
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years of age to
smoke cigarette, cigars, to use tobacco in any other form, or to use vapor
products or alternative nicotine products on a public roadway, street, alley,
park or other lands used for public purposes, or in any place of business or
amusement open to the public. Upon being found guilty of this offense, the
offender may be punished in the discretion of the court according to the
provisions of § 135.99.
(‘83 Code, § 135.12) (Ord. 92-007, passed 4-21-92; Am. Ord. 19-007, passed 5-6-
19)  Penalty, see
§ 135.99
§ 135.11 DEFINITIONS RELATING TO TOBACCO USE.
   As used in §§
135.09 and
135.10, the following definitions shall apply:
   CHEWING TOBACCO. Loose tobacco or a flat, compressed cake of tobacco which
is inserted into the mouth to be chewed or sucked.
   TOBACCO SNUFF. Shredded, powdered or pulverized tobacco which may be inhaled
through the nostrils, chewed or placed against the gums.
   VAPOR PRODUCT OR ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS. A noncombustible product
containing nicotine or not that employs a heating element, power source,
electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means
regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from nicotine or
not in a solution or other form. VAPOR PRODUCT includes an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar
product or device and a vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a
solution or other form than is intended to be used with or in an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar
product or device. VAPOR PRODUCT does not include a product regulated as a drug
or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") under
subchapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 USC 351 to 360FFF-
7.
(Ord. 19-007, passed 5-6-19)
§ 135.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Anyone who violates any of the provisions of this chapter for which no
other penalty is specified shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 130.99.
   (B)   Anyone who violates the provisions of §
135.09 shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50.
   (C)   Anyone who violates the provisions of §
135.10 is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $50
for each offense. If the court determines it is appropriate, eligible juveniles
may be referred to a diversion program. Pursuant to a probation order, the
court may require a person who violates §
135.10 to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment
program, if available. A probationer who is ordered to participate in a health
promotion and risk reduction assessment program under this section is
responsible for the cost of participating in the program. In addition, a person
who violates this section is subject to the following:
      (1)   For the first violation the court may order the person to do one of
the following:
         (a)   Perform not more than 16 hours of community service.
         (b)   Participate in a health promotion and risk reduction program, as
described in this division.
      (2)   For a second violation, in addition to participation in a health
promotion risk reduction program, the court may order the person to perform not
more than 32 hours of community service.
      (3)   For a third or subsequent violation, in addition to participation
in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the
person to perform not more than 48 hours of community service.
(‘83 Code, §§ 135.11 and 135.12) (Ord. 92-007, passed 4-21-92)  
CHAPTER 136: DRUG OFFENSES
Section
General Drug Offenses
   
136.01   Possession or use of marijuana or addictive drugs prohibited
   
136.02   Dispensing of drugs by authorized persons
   
136.03   Possession of hypodermic syringes and needles prohibited; exceptions
   
136.04   Sale of other drug implements prohibited
   
136.05   Fraud prohibited
   
136.06   Exceptions
   
136.07   Loitering where drugs are dispensed illegally prohibited
Drug Paraphernalia
   
136.20   Definitions
   
136.21   Possession or sale of drug paraphernalia prohibited
   
136.22   Advertisement of drug paraphernalia
   
136.23   Exceptions
   
136.24   Forfeiture
GENERAL DRUG OFFENSES
§ 136.01 POSSESSION OR USE OF MARIJUANA OR ADDICTIVE DRUGS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for any person to
possess, have under his control, distribute, sell, or give away marijuana or
cannabis, unless pursuant to a license or prescription as provided in M.C.L.A.
§ 333.7301. It shall be unlawful to use marijuana or cannabis, as so defined,
except pursuant to a prescription. (‘83 Code, § 136.01)
   (B)   No person shall unlawfully use narcotic or dangerous drugs or their
derivatives or barbituric acid or derivative or mixtures, compound, or
preparation thereof. Any such unlawful use shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter. (‘83 Code, § 136.08)
   (C)   Pursuant to Public Act 279 of 1909, as amended, M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k),
the City of Garden City hereby adopts by reference M.C.L.A. § 750.474
prohibiting the illegal transport of marijuana.
(Ord. 77-008, passed 5-2-77; Am. Ord. 13-016, passed 12-16-13) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 136.02 DISPENSING OF DRUGS BY AUTHORIZED PERSONS.
   (A)   A manufacturer, wholesaler, apothecary, medical doctor, osteopathic
physician, dentist, veterinarian, chiropodist, public or private hospital,
sanitarium, or institution maintained or conducted in whole or part for the
treatment of disability, disease, inebriety, or drug addiction may purchase,
receive, possess, sell, distribute, prescribe, administer, or dispense the
narcotic and dangerous drugs described in § 136.01 provided that he or they
shall have complied with all provisions as required by the United States
Internal Revenue Code, as the same now exists or may be hereafter amended, and
M.C.L.A. §§ 333.7301 et seq., and M.C.L.A. § 333.7401 et seq., as those Acts
have been or shall hereafter be amended.
   (B)   No medical doctor, osteopathic physician or other person specified in
this section in any manner authorized to prescribe narcotic or dangerous drugs
shall prescribe drugs for his own use, nor shall any druggist honor such a
prescription. All narcotic or dangerous drugs obtained pursuant to this section
shall be kept in the original package or container in which they were received.
   (C)   This requirement should not be construed to apply to any duly licensed
medical doctor, osteopathic physician, dentist, veterinarian, or chiropodist,
or to any authorized person or persons acting directly under their supervision
or control.
(‘83 Code, § 136.02) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 136.03 POSSESSION OF HYPODERMIC SYRINGES AND NEEDLES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall, at any time, have or possess a hypodermic syringe or
needle or any other instrument or implement adapted for the use of narcotic or
dangerous drugs by subcutaneous injection or intracutaneous injection or any
other manner or method of introduction, and which is possessed for that
purpose, unless possession is authorized by the certificate of a licensed
medical doctor or osteopathic physician issued within the period of one year.
   (B)   The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to
manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians,
technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical
laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists,
veterinarians, pharmacists, and embalmers in the normal legal course of their
respective business or profession, nor to persons suffering from diabetes,
asthma, or any other medical condition requiring self-injection.
(‘83 Code, § 136.03) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 136.04 SALE OF OTHER DRUG IMPLEMENTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NON-MEDICAL HABITUAL USER OF NARCOTIC OR DANGEROUS DRUGS. Any person who
uses narcotic or dangerous drugs merely to satisfy a craving for the drugs and
who does not have a legitimate medical need for narcotic or dangerous drugs.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish, supply, or give
away any empty gelatin capsules or hypodermic syringe or needle or other
instrument or implement adapted for the use of narcotic or dangerous drugs by
subcutaneous injection or intracutaneous injection or any other manner or
method of introduction to any person known to be a non-medical habitual user of
narcotic or dangerous drugs.
(‘83 Code, § 136.04) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 136.05 FRAUD PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Any fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, subterfuge, concealment of a
material fact, use of a false name, or giving of a false address for the
purpose of obtaining any narcotic or dangerous drugs or barbituric acid or any
derivative, compound, preparation, or mixture thereof, or hypodermic syringe or
needle or other instrument or implement or empty gelatin capsules or false
statement on any prescription blank, shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter. No person who shall have obtained the possession of any narcotic or
dangerous drugs, hypodermic syringes, needles, or other instruments or
implements adapted for the use of such drugs or empty gelatin capsules pursuant
to the terms of this chapter shall use the same or permit or authorize their
use for any purpose other than that specifically authorized in the prescription
or order by means of which possession was obtained. (‘83 Code, § 136.05)
   (B)   Any fraud, scheme, device, trick, deceit, misrepresentation,
subterfuge or any other form of concealment for the purpose of obtaining money
or any other thing of value by the sale, furnishing, supplying or giving away
of any substance represented to be a drug as described in
§ 136.01, when the same may or may not be the same, shall be deemed a violation
of this chapter. (‘83 Code, § 130.06)
Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 136.06 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter restricting the possession of narcotic or
dangerous drugs or barbituric acid or any derivative, compound, preparation or
mixture thereof, of hypodermic syringes, needles, or other implements or
instruments adapted to the use of such drugs by means of subcutaneous injection
or intracutaneous injection or any other manner or method of introduction or
empty gelatin capsules, shall not apply to common carriers or warehousemen or
their employees engaged in the lawful transportation or storage of drugs,
syringes, needles, or capsules or to public officers or employees while engaged
in the performance of their official duties, nor to temporary incidental
possession on the part of employees or agents of persons lawfully entitled to
possession.
(‘83 Code, § 130.07)
§ 136.07 LOITERING WHERE DRUGS ARE DISPENSED ILLEGALLY PROHIBITED.
   No person shall knowingly loiter about, frequent, or live in any building,
apartment, store, automobile, boat, boathouse, aeroplane, or other place of any
description whatsoever where narcotic or other instruments or implements or
empty gelatin capsules are sold, dispensed, furnished, given away, stored, or
kept illegally.
(‘83 Code, § 136.09) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 136.20 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means any equipment, product,
material, or combination of equipment, products, or materials, which is
specifically designed for use in planting; propagating; cultivating; growing;
harvesting; manufacturing; compounding; converting; producing; processing;
preparing; testing; analyzing; packaging; repackaging; storing; containing;
concealing; injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance; including, but not limited to, all of the
following:
   (A)   An isomerization device specifically designed for use in increasing
the potency of any species of plant which plant is a controlled substance.
   (B)   Testing equipment specifically designed for use in identifying or in
analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a controlled substance.
   (C)   A weight scale or balance specifically designed for use in weighing or
measuring a controlled substance.
   (D)   A diluent or adulterant, including, but not limited to, quinine
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, specifically designed
for use with a controlled substance.
   (E)   A separation gin or sifter specifically designed for use in removing
twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.
   (F)   An object specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the
human body.
   (G)   A kit specifically designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, or harvesting any species of plant which is a controlled
substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
   (H)   A kit specifically designed for use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances.
   (I)   A device, commonly known as a cocaine kit, that is specifically
designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled
substances into the human body, and which consists of at least a razor blade
and a mirror.
   (J)   A device, commonly known as a bullet, that is specifically designed to
deliver a measured amount of controlled substances to the user.
   (K)   A device, commonly known as a snorter, that is specifically designed
to carry a small amount of controlled substances to the user's nose.
   (L)   A device, commonly known as an automotive safe, that is specifically
designed to carry and conceal a controlled substance in an automobile,
including, but not limited to, a can used for brake fluid, oil, or carburetor
cleaner which contains a compartment for carrying and concealing controlled
substances.
   (M)   A spoon, with or without a chain attached, that has a small diameter
bowl and that is specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing controlled substances into the human body.
(M.C.L.A. § 333.7451) (‘83 Code, § 136.20) (Ord. 87-004, passed 3-2-87)
Penalty, see
§ 130.99
   § 136.21 POSSESSION OR SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to use or to possess with intent to use
drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law. (‘83
Code, § 136.21)
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, sell, possess with intent to
deliver or sell, or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell drug
paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of state law. (‘83 Code, § 136.22)
(Ord. 87-004, passed 3-2-87) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 136.22 ADVERTISEMENT OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill,
sign, poster, or other publication, any advertisement, knowing that the purpose
of the advertisement in whole or in part is to promote the sale of objects
designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
(‘83 Code, § 136.23) (Ord. 87-004, passed 3-2-87) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 136.23 EXCEPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers,
licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research
teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic
physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists, and embalmers
in the normal legal course of their respective businesses or professions, nor
to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma, or any other medical condition
requiring self-injection.
(‘83 Code, § 136.24) (Ord. 87-004, passed 3-2-87)
§ 136.24 FORFEITURE.
   Any drug paraphernalia used, sold, possessed with intent to use or sell, or
manufactured with intent to sell in violation of this subchapter shall be
seized and forfeited to the city.
(‘83 Code, § 136.25) (Ord. 87-004, passed 3-2-87)
CHAPTER 137: WEAPONS CONTROL
Section
Firearms
   
137.01   Negligent, careless, reckless, willful or wanton discharging of
firearm; injury
   
137.02   Possession of firearm while intoxicated
   
137.03   Hunting within city prohibited
   
137.04   Confiscation of firearms
   
137.05   Replica or facsimile of firearm
Air Guns
   
137.15   Definitions
   
137.16   Furnishing air guns to minors restricted
   
137.17   Possession by minors
   
137.18   General regulations
Swords and Knives
   
137.20   Sale, use, possession
FIREARMS
§ 137.01 NEGLIGENT, CARELESS, RECKLESS, WILLFUL OR WANTON DISCHARGING OF
FIREARM; INJURY.
   (A)   No person shall intentionally, without malice, point or aim any
firearm at or toward any other person. (‘83 Code, § 137.01)
   (B)   No person shall discharge, without injury to another person, any
firearm, while intentionally, without malice, aiming at or toward any person.
(‘83 Code, § 137.02)
   (C)   No person shall maim or injure any other person by the discharge of
any firearm pointed or aimed unintentionally, without malice, at any other
person. (‘83 Code, § 137.03)
   (D)   Any person who shall recklessly or heedlessly or willfully or wantonly
use, carry, handle or discharge any firearm without due caution and
circumspection for the rights, safety or property of others shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.
   (E)   Any person who, because of carelessness, recklessness or negligence,
but not willfully or wantonly, shall cause or allow any firearm under his or
her control to be discharged so as to destroy or injure the property of
another, real or personal, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 13-011, passed 8-12-13) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 137.02 POSSESSION OF FIREARM WHILE INTOXICATED PROHIBITED.
   No person, while under the influence of an intoxicating liquor, or any
exhilarating or stupefying drug, shall carry, have in possession or control, or
use in any manner, or discharge any firearm.
(‘83 Code, § 137.04) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 137.03 HUNTING WITHIN CITY PROHIBITED.
   No person shall hunt or trap wild game, or in any manner carry any gun,
weapon or firearm within the city for the purpose of hunting any wild game or
fowl at any time.
(‘83 Code, § 137.05) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 137.04 CONFISCATION OF FIREARMS.
   All weapons, guns, pistols, or firearms carried, possessed, or used contrary
to the preceding sections are forfeited to the city.
(‘83 Code, § 137.06)
§ 137.05 REPLICA OR FACSIMILE OF FIREARM.
   (A)   Definition.
      (1)   REPLICA OR FACSIMILE OF FIREARM means any device or object made of
plastic, wood, metal or any other material which is a replica, facsimile,
imitation or toy version of any firearm including but not limited to, a
replica, facsimile or toy version of a pistol, revolver, shotgun, sawed-off
shotgun, rifle, machine gun, assault weapon, starter pistol, machine gun,
rocket launcher, air gun, BB gun inoperative firearms, or other firearm. As
used in this section, REPLICA OR FACSIMILE FIREARM shall include, but is not
limited to toy guns, theatrical production props models, or any other device or
object which might reasonably be perceived to be real firearms.
   (B)   Unlawful use of replica or facsimile of firearm.
      (1)   Unlawful display of replica, toy or imitation gun. It shall be
unlawful for any person to carry, possess, brandish, aim, point, exhibit or
display to any other person a replica or facsimile of a firearm in such a
manner as to frighten, threaten, harass, panic or annoy any other person.
      (2)   Unlawful to carry or possess imitation gun in motor vehicle. It
shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess, whether concealed or
displayed, in a motor vehicle in an area of the vehicle accessible to the
occupants thereof, a replica or a facsimile of a firearm with intent to
brandish, use, aim or point such firearm to frighten, panic, threaten, harass
or annoy any other person. Carrying or concealing of any such replica or
facsimile firearm under or near the driver's seat, glove box or dashboard shall
be a prima facie rebuttable inference of such intent.
      (3)   Unlawful to brandish replica or facsimile of firearm in presence of
police officer, firefighter or emergency medical technician. No person shall
draw, exhibit or brandish a replica or facsimile of a firearm in the presence
of a police officer, firefighter, medical emergency technician or paramedic who
is engaged in the performance of his duties and the person committing such
brandishing knows or has reason to know that such police officer, firefighter,
medical emergency technician or paramedic is engaged in the performance of his
duties.
(Ord. 21-005, passed 2-22-21)
AIR GUNS
§ 137.15 AIR GUNS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR GUN. Any gun, rifle, or pistol, by whatever name known, which is
designed to expel a projectile by the action of compressed air or gas, or by
the action of a spring or elastic, but does not mean a firearm.
   DEALER. Any person engaged in the business of selling at retail or renting
any air gun.
(‘83 Code, § 137.10)
§ 137.16 FURNISHING AIR GUNS TO MINORS RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No dealer shall sell, lend, rent, give, or otherwise transfer an air
gun to any person under the age of 18 years if the dealer knows or has
reasonable cause to believe the person to be under 18 years of age or if the
dealer has failed to make reasonable inquiry relative to the age of the person
and the person is under 18 years of age.
   (B)   No person shall give, lend, or otherwise transfer any air gun to any
person under 18 years of age, except where the relationship of parent and
child, guardian and ward, or adult instructor and pupil exists between the
person and the person under 18 years of age.
(‘83 Code, § 137.11) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 137.17 POSSESSION BY MINORS.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, it shall be
lawful for any person under 18 years of age to have in his possession one or
more air guns if the same is as follows,
   (A)   Kept within his domicile.
   (B)   Used by the person under 18 years of age and he is a duly enrolled
member of any club, team, or society organized for educational purposes and
maintaining as part of its facilities, or having written permission to use, an
indoor or outdoor rifle range, and to possess, load and fire at the rifle range
under the supervision, guidance, and instruction of a responsible adult.
   (C)   Used in or on any private grounds or residence under circumstances
when the air gun can be fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not
to endanger persons or property and also in such a manner as to prevent the
projectile from traversing any grounds or space outside the limits of the
grounds or residence.
(‘83 Code, § 137.12) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
§ 137.18 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall carry any air gun on the
streets, alleys, public roads or public lands within the city unless
accompanied by an adult. However, a person under 18 years of age may carry an
air gun unloaded, in a suitable case or securely wrapped.
   (B)   No person shall discharge any air gun from or across any street,
sidewalk, alley, or public land, or any public place, except on a properly
constructed target range.
(‘83 Code, § 137.13) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
SWORDS AND KNIVES
§ 137.20 SALE, USE OR POSSESSION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to do any of the following.
   (A)   Offer for sale, keep, possess, use or loan a cane sword, umbrella
sword, switchblade or self- opening knife.
   (B)   Carry a knife with a blade of more than three inches in length, which
is concealed on or about his person, on any of the streets or other public
places in the city, or on any private property frequented or visited by the
public for purposes of education, recreation, amusement, entertainment, sport,
eating or shopping; provided that the prohibition of this section shall not
apply to any one-armed person in possession of a switchblade or self-opening
knife in connection with his living requirements.
   (C)   Carry a knife with a blade of more than three inches in the passenger
area of any automobile.
   (D)   Carry a knife with a blade of more than three inches in any business
establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold or served to the public.
(‘83 Code, § 137.20) (Ord. 90-003, passed 4-16-90) Penalty, see
§ 130.99
CHAPTER 138: CYBERBULLYING
Section
   
138.01   Purpose and definitions
   
138.99   Penalty
§ 138.01 PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   A person shall not cyberbully another person.
   (B)   The following terms shall apply to this chapter as written unless
context indicates or requires a different meaning:
      CYBERBULLY. Include posting a message or statement in a public media
forum about any other person if both of the following apply:
         (a)   The message or statement is intended to place a person in fear
or bodily harm or death and expresses an intent to commit violence against the
person.
         (b)   The message or statement is posted with the intent to
communicate a threat or with knowledge that it will be viewed as a threat.
      PUBLIC MEDIA FORUM. The internet or any other medium designed or intended
to be used to convey information to other individuals, regardless of whether a
membership or password is required to view the information.
(Ord. 19-006, passed 5-6-19)
§ 138.99 PENALTY.
   A person who violates §
138.01(A) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more
than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500, or both.
(Ord. 19-006, passed 5-6-19)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
151.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
152.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
153.   INSPECTIONS
      
154.   ZONING
         
APPENDIX A: SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
         
APPENDIX B: ILLUSTRATIONS
      
155.   VACANT PROPERTIES
CHAPTER 150: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
   
150.01   Local enforcing agency
   
150.02   Rules adopted
   
150.03   Submission of plans
   
150.04   Permit; fees
   
150.05   Site inspection
   
150.06   Surety bond
   
150.07   Floodplain management
Wind-Driven Energy Devices
   
150.20   Definition
   
150.21   Applicability
District Area
   
150.35   Designation of district area
   
150.36   Place of residence
   
150.37   Citizen's District Council; membership
   
150.38   Statutory authority
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
§ 150.01 LOCAL ENFORCING AGENCY.
   It is the intent of the city to become the local enforcing agency in regard
to implementing Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, Public Act 347 of 1972,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9101 et seq., within the municipal limits of the city.
(‘83 Code, § 156.01) (Ord. 74-012, passed 12-23-74)
§ 150.02 RULES ADOPTED.
   The city adopts by reference the latest rules promulgated by the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) relative to Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Act, Public Act 347 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9101
et seq. The rules shall be available for public distribution, at a reasonable
charge, with not less than ten copies to be available for public inspection at
the office of the City Clerk.
(‘83 Code, § 156.02) (Ord. 74-012, passed 12-23-74)
§ 150.03 SUBMISSION OF PLANS.
   Before ground-breaking of any construction project in the city involving one
or more acres of land, an erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be
submitted to the city in accordance with DNR rules adopted in
§ 150.02.
(‘83 Code, § 156.03) (Ord. 74-012, passed 12-23-74) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 150.04 PERMIT; FEES.
   Upon payment of the necessary fees to the city in accordance with a fee
schedule to be determined by the City Council, and amended from time to time by
simple resolution, the submitted plans shall be reviewed and approved and a
permit shall issue, provided the plans meet DNR standards, to prevent soil
erosion at all major construction sites in the city in excess of one acre.
(‘83 Code, § 156.04) (Ord. 74-012, passed 12-23-74) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 150.05 SITE INSPECTION.
   The local enforcing agency shall inspect the construction site, at a
minimum, at the beginning, during construction, and at the end of the project,
and shall issue cease and desist orders upon violation of the rules set forth
in Public Act 347 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.9101 et seq.
(‘83 Code, § 156.05) (Ord. 74-012, passed 12-23-74) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 150.06 SURETY BOND.
   The local enforcing agency prior to issuance of a permit shall fix and
obtain from the applicant a surety bond in an amount not to exceed $5,000 to
assure prompt completion, observance of all pertinent laws and regulations, and
installation of the soil erosion and sedimentation control facilities, and
protection of the city from any damages or actions at law that may arise on
account of injury to persons or property resulting from the work done.
(‘83 Code, § 156.06) (Ord. 74-012, passed 12-23-74) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 150.07 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Agency Designated. Pursuant to the provisions of the state
construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public
Acts of 1972, as amended, the Building Official of the City of Garden City is
hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of
the city under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of
Michigan. The city assumes responsibility for the administration and
enforcement of said Act through out the corporate limits of the community
adopting this section.
   (B)   Code Appendix Enforced. Pursuant to the provisions of the state
construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public
Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be
enforced by the enforcing agency within the jurisdiction of the community
adopting this section.
   (C)   Designation of Regulated Flood Prone Hazard Areas. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) entitled The
Flood Insurance Study for Wayne County, All Jurisdictions, effective October
21, 2021 and the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) of _ the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) panels: 26163CO210E, 26163CO230E, 26163CO233E,
26163CO241E, effective February 2, 2012, and panels 26163CIND1C, 26163CIND2C,
and 26163CO240F effective October 21, 2021 are adopted by reference for the
purposes of administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to
be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the
content of the "Flood Hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan
Residential Code.
(Ord. 21-008, passed 7-12-21)
WIND-DRIVEN ENERGY DEVICES
§ 150.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   WIND-DRIVEN ENERGY DEVICE. Includes any device, such as a wind charger or a
wind turbine, which converts wind energy to a form of usable energy such as
electricity and heat.
(‘83 Code, § 162.01) (Ord. 82-013, passed 5-3-82)
§ 150.21 APPLICABILITY.
   In any zoning district, wind-driven energy devices, as accessory uses, may
be allowed subject to the following conditions.
   (A)   The setback shall be equal to the height of its highest point in the
vertical axis. The City Council may grant a reduction in the setback when it
finds that the reduction shall not adversely affect surrounding property, and
is consistent with the intent of this title to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare.
   (B)   The operation shall not cause interference to the radio and television
reception on adjoining property.
   (C)   To limit climbing access to the tower, a six-foot fence made of opaque
material with a locking portal shall be placed around the tower base, or the
tower climbing apparatus shall be limited to no lower than 12 feet from the
ground, or the tower may be mounted on a roof top.
   (D)   Data pertaining to the machine's safety and stability shall be filed
with the application for building permit and shall meet final approval of the
Building Inspector.
   (E)   The applicant shall submit covenants, easements, or similar
documentation from abutting owners providing access to wind sufficient for its
adequate operation, unless accessibility to the wind is furnished on the site.
   (F)   The wind-driven energy devices, if interconnected to a utility system,
shall meet the requirements for interconnection and operation as set forth in
the electric utility's current service regulations applicable to wind-driven
energy devices.
   (G)   The wind-driven energy device shall be located a sufficient distance
from any overhead utility lines, excluding service drops, such that a
structural failure of any portion of the wind-driven energy device or its
supporting structure would not cause any portion of it to fall within five feet
of the lines.
   (H)   The operation of the wind-driven energy device in an average 20 m.p.h.
wind shall produce no more than the following decibel (db) readings at the
closest point of contact of any adjoining property line.
 
Ambient Reading                     Maximum Permitted Reading With Wind Driven
(Without Wind Driven Energy Device) Energy Device
45 db                               55.4 db
50 db                               56.2 db
55 db                               61.0 db
60 db                               61.2 db
65 db                               65.4 db
 
(‘83 Code, § 162.02) (Ord. 82-013, passed 5-3-82) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
DISTRICT AREA
§ 150.35 DESIGNATION OF DISTRICT AREA.
   (A)   The Garden City District Area #1, which is known as the Ford-
Middlebelt Urban Renewal Project, as defined in Public Act 189 of 1968, being
M.C.L.A. 125.74, shall be development area bounded by the following streets.
      (1)   On the north by Maplewood Avenue.
      (2)   On the south by Ford Road.
      (3)   On the east by Central Street.
      (4)   On the west by Middlebelt Road.
   (B)   All of the development area is located in the city and is legally
described as follows.
   A parcel of land in the SW ¼ of Section 12, the SE ¼of Section 11, the NE
¼of Section 14, and the NW ¼ of Section 13 T. 2S., R 9E., Garden City, Wayne
County, Michigan; more particularly described as beginning at the point of
intersection of the south line of Ford Road, 120 feet wide, and the west line
of Middlebelt Road, 120 feet wide and proceeding northerly along the west line
of Middlebelt Road to a point on the north line of Lot 26A of Assessor's
Folker's Little Farms Subdivision as extended; thence easterly along the north
line of said Lot 26a as extended a distance of approximately 480 feet; thence
northerly a distance of approximately 154 feet to the south line of Maplewood
Avenue; thence easterly a distance of approximately 260 feet to the east line
of Central Avenue, 60 feet wide; thence southerly along the east line of
Central Avenue, 30 feet wide, and the extension thereof to the south line of
Ford Road; thence westerly along the south line of Ford Road to the point of
beginning. (31.43 acres, more or less)
(‘83 Code, § 155.01)
§ 150.36 PLACE OF RESIDENCE.
   All the residents in the district area reside in the development area since
the areas are co-terminus.
(‘83 Code, § 155.02)
§ 150.37 CITIZEN'S DISTRICT COUNCIL; MEMBERSHIP.
   The Citizen's District Council for the Ford-Middlebelt District Area Urban
Renewal Project shall be made up of 15 members, the majority of which shall
reside in the development area. The members of the District Council shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of a majority of the Council
for a term of two years.
(‘83 Code, § 155.05)
§ 150.38 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   The Citizen's District Council shall have such authority and perform such
duties as are provided for in Act 189, Public Acts of 1968, as amended, being
M.C.L.A. 125.74 et seq.
(‘83 Code, § 155.06)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Codes Adopted
   
151.01   Adoption of Building Code by reference
Building Fees and Permits
   
151.15   Building Department fee; inspection schedule
   
151.16   Qualifications of applicants
 
   
151.99   Penalty
CODES ADOPTED
§ 151.01 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Building codes.
      (1)   The State Building Code, and any amendments and/or supplements
thereto, as promulgated by the State Construction Code Commission in accord
with Public Act 230 of 1972 Section 8b(6), as amended, shall be administered
and enforced by the city, and shall govern and be observed and followed in all
buildings and structures throughout the city. Notice is hereby given that
complete copies of the State Building Code, and any amendments and/or
supplements thereto are available for public use and inspection at the Clerk's
office for the city.
      (2)   The State Residential Building Code, and an amendments and/or
supplements thereto, as promulgated by the State Construction Code Commission
in accord with Public Act 230 of 1972 Section 8b(6), as amended, shall be
administered and enforced by the city, and shall govern and be observed and
followed in all one-and two-family dwellings throughout the city. Notice is
hereby given that complete copies of the State Residential Building Code, and
any amendments and/or supplements thereto are available for public use and
inspection in the Clerk' office for the city.
      (3)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office
of the City Clerk, the most recent edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code, as published by the International Code Council, be and is
hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the city for regulating and
governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and
structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures
are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of
buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition
of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefore and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code
on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, prescribed herein as follows:
         (a)   Section 101.1. Title: These regulations shall be known as the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Garden City, hereinafter referred to
as "this Code".
         (b)   Section 103.1. General: The Building Official shall be
designated as the code official and shall be the official in charge of the
enforcement of this Garden City Property Maintenance Code.
         (c)   Section 103.5. Fees: The fees for activities and services
performed by the Building Official and/or his designee in carrying out their
responsibilities under this Code shall be as approved by resolution of the City
Council from time to time and shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk.
         (d)   Section 112.4. Failure to Comply: Any person who shall continue
any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as
that person is directed to perform to remove a violation of unsafe conditions,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable for a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $500.
         (e)   Section 202. General Definitions:  CODE OFFICIAL. The Building
Official or any duly authorized representative of the Building Official shall
be the Code Official.
         (f)   Section 302.4. Weeds: Insert "eight (8) inches in height".
         (g)   Section 304.14. Insect screens: Insert "March 1 through December
1".
         (h)   Section 602.3. Heat supply: Insert "October 1 through May 15".
         (i)   Section 602.4. Occupiable Work Spaces: Insert "October 1 through
May 15".
         (j)   Chapter 7: Fire Safety Requirements is hereby deleted in its
entirety.
   (B)   Fee schedule. A fee for each plan examination, permit, and/or
inspection required by the State Building Code, the State Residential Building
Code and/or the 2000 International Property Maintenance Code shall be paid in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council for
the city, from time to time and shall be posted in the Building Department.
   (C)   Violation; penalty. A violation of the provisions of the State
Building Code, the State Residential Building Code, and/or the most current
edition of the International Property Maintenance Code in the city shall be a
municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which
a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 98-022, passed 9-21-98; Am. Ord. 02-003, passed 11-5-01; Am. Ord. 11-003,
passed 2-14-11; Am. Ord. 14-001, passed 1-13-14; Am. Ord. 18-014, passed 3-19-
18) Penalty, see §
151.99
BUILDING FEES AND PERMITS
§ 151.15 BUILDING DEPARTMENT FEE AND INSPECTION SCHEDULE.
Editor's note:
   Please see the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in
Chapter 12 of this Code for Building Department fees and inspection schedules.
§ 151.16 QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANTS.
   The general standards herein as to the qualifications of every applicant for
a city building permit shall be considered and applied by the city's Building
Department. In making such a determination, the City's Building Department
shall consider the following:
   Non-default. The applicant shall not be in default under the provisions of
this chapter or indebted or obligated in any manner to the city except for
current taxes. Such debt includes the late payment of city property taxes,
personal property taxes, water bills, code enforcement tickets, Building
Department permits, and other such debts. Only upon a successful review that
there are no outstanding payments due, and the applicant is in compliance with
all other applicable laws and policies as relevant to the permit, then a
building permit may be issued.
(Ord. 21-005, passed 2-22-21)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Anyone who violates any section of this chapter for which no penalty
is provided shall be subject to the terms of
§ 10.99.
   (B)   Anyone who violates §
151.01 shall be subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
(Ord. 98-022, passed 9-21-98; Am. Ord. 18-014, passed 3-19-18)
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Improvements
   
152.001   Short title
   
152.002   Definitions
   
152.003   Subdivision procedure
   
152.004   Subdividing preliminary investigation
   
152.005   Fees
Preliminary Plat
   
152.015   Preparation and submission
   
152.016   Identification; description
   
152.017   Existing conditions
   
152.018   Proposed subdivision
   
152.019   Required information
   
152.020   Review by Planning Commission
   
152.021   Review by City Council
Final Plat
   
152.035   Preparation
   
152.036   Review
   
152.037   Procedure
   
152.038   Action of City Council
   
152.039   Plat and fees forwarded to county
Public Improvements and Design Standards
   
152.050   Minimum standards
   
152.051   Location and arrangement of streets
   
152.052   Street design standards
   
152.053   Grade standards
   
152.054   Horizontal alignment
   
152.055   Blocks
   
152.056   Easements
   
152.057   Public reservations
   
152.058   Lots
   
152.059   Arrangement of lots
   
152.060   Preservation of natural character of land
Improvements
   
152.070   Minimum standards
   
152.071   Street and utility improvements
   
152.072   Trees
   
152.073   Street signs
   
152.074   Street lighting
   
152.075   Utilities
   
152.076   Monuments; stakes
Variance
   
152.090   Conditions
   
152.091   Neighborhood plan
   
152.092   Application
Drawings: Plans
   
152.105   Final plat copy
   
152.106   Submission of plans
   
152.107   Division of platted lots
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City Subdivision
Regulations.
(‘83 Code, § 151.01) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70)
§ 152.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A minor vehicular way used primarily to serve as an access way to the
back or side or properties otherwise abutting on a street.
   BLOCK. That property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two
nearest intersecting streets, or between the nearest street and railroad right-
of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream; or between any of the
foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development.
   CUL-DE-SAC or COURT. A minor street of short length, having one end open to
traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around.
   DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS. The regulations and specifications of the
department, prepared pursuant to this chapter and governing the nature, extent,
installation, construction, inspection, and supervision of improvements and
lands within new subdivisions.
   DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS. The engineering plans and
specifications filed by and certified by a registered professional engineer,
relating to all public improvements, utilities, and grading within (and
outside, if required) a proposed subdivision as the same are proposed by the
proprietor and required by the ordinances of the city, the subdivision
regulations adopted by the Planning Commission, and the department regulations
adopted hereunder.
   EASEMENT. A quantity of land set aside or over which a liberty, privilege,
or advantage is granted by the owner to the public, corporation, or some
particular person or part of the public for specific use and purposes, and
shall be designated a public or private easement, depending on the nature of
the user.
   FINAL PLAT. A map of all or part of a subdivision prepared and certified as
to its accuracy by a registered engineer or land surveyor. Such maps must meet
the requirements of the Plat Act, Public Act 288 of l967, being M.C.L.A. §§
560.101 - 560.293 as amended, and be suitable for recording by the Wayne County
Registrar of Deeds.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Streets, pavements, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks,
water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, street trees, and other additions to
the natural state of land which increases its value, utility, or habitability.
   LOT. A parcel of land separated from other parcels on a preliminary or
recorded plat for the purpose of sale, lease, or separate use.
   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE. An arterial street of great continuity which is intended
to serve as a large-volume traffic way for both the immediate city area and
region beyond, and may be designated in the city's major thoroughfare plan as a
major thoroughfare, parkway, expressway, or equivalent term to identify those
streets comprising the basic structure of the street plan.
   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A minor street parallel and adjacent to a major
thoroughfare, and which provides access to abutting properties and protection
from through traffic.
   MASTER PLAN. The comprehensive plan including graphic and written proposals
indicating the general locations recommended for the streets, parks, schools,
public buildings, zoning districts, and all physical developments of the city,
and includes any unit or part of the plans separately adopted, and any
amendments to the plan or parts thereof adopted in principle or under Public
Act 285 of 1931, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.31 through 125.45, as amended, by the
Planning Commission.
   MINOR STREET. A street supplementary to a secondary street intended to serve
the local needs of a neighborhood and of limited continuity, used primarily as
an access to abutting residential properties.
   OUTLOT. A platted parcel within a subdivision, which is a lettered lot,
designated for public use, such as a school or park site.
   PLANNING COMMISSION ACT. Public Act 285 of l931, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.31 -
125.45, as amended.
   PLAT ACT. Public Act 288 of l967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 - 560.293, as
amended.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A map indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision in
sufficient detail to provide adequate basis for review and to meet the
requirements and procedures set forth hereinafter.
   PUBLIC RESERVATION. A portion of a subdivision which is set aside for public
use and made available for public use and acquisition.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. A firm, corporation, or municipal authority providing gas,
electricity, telephone, sewer, water, or other services of a similar nature.
   SECONDARY THOROUGHFARE. A street intended to serve as a major means of
access from minor streets to major thoroughfares and has considerable
continuity within the framework of the city's major thoroughfare plan.
   STREET. A right-of-way dedicated to public use, which provides vehicular and
pedestrian access to adjacent properties whether designated as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, lane, or however otherwise
designated. Includes the land between right-of-way lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, curbs and gutters, shoulders, sidewalks,
parking areas, lawn areas, and other areas within the right-of-way lines.
   SUBDIVIDER. Includes the plural as well as the singular and may mean a
person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or any legal combination
of them or any other legal entity proceeding under these regulations to effect
a subdivision of land for himself or for another.
   SUBDIVISION. The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land by
the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal
representatives, successors, or assigns for the purpose of sale or lease of
more than one year, or of building development, where the act of division
creates five or more parcels of land (each of which is ten acres or less in
area) by successive divisions within a period of ten years.
   TURN-AROUND or PLACE. A short boulevard permanently terminated by a
vehicular turn- around.
(‘83 Code, § 151.02) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70)
§ 152.003 SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE.
   The preparation of a subdivision for platting shall be carried out through
four stages, including preliminary investigation, preliminary plat, subdivision
improvements, and final plat and in accordance with the procedure hereinafter
set forth.
(‘83 Code, § 151.03) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70)
§ 152.004 PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION.
   Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall
investigate the procedures and standards of the city and shall further
investigate the existing and proposed requirements with regard to the following
elements of the Master Plan.
   (A)   The area for the proposed subdivision shall be properly zoned for the
intended use.
   (B)   The adequacy of existing schools and adequacy of public open spaces
including parks and playgrounds to service the proposed subdivision.
   (C)   The relationship of the proposed subdivision with respect to major
thoroughfares and plans for widening of thoroughfares.
   (D)   Standards for sewage, disposal, water supply, and drainage of the
city, and health standards of the county and state.
(‘83 Code, § 151.04) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70)
§ 152.005 FEES.
   Engineering fees, inspection fees, water and sewer connection charges, and
other applicable development charges shall be provided for by resolution.
(‘83 Code, § 151.05) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70)
PRELIMINARY PLAT
§ 152.015 PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION.
   At least 20 days prior to the regular Planning Commission meeting the
subdivider shall submit the following to the City Clerk the following.
   (A)   Three copies of a letter of application for a preliminary plat review.
The subdivider shall indicate his interest in the land as to whether it is a
land contract interest or if he owns the property in fee, and further shall
certify the investigation required in
§ 152.004(A) has been completed.
   (B)   Twenty copies of the preliminary plat.
   (C)   Fees as required in
§ 152.005.
(‘83 Code, § 151.10) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.016 IDENTIFICATION; DESCRIPTION.
   The preliminary plat shall include the following.
   (A)   Proposed name of subdivision.
   (B)   Location by section, town, and range, or by other legal description.
   (C)   Names and addresses of subdivider and planner, engineer, or surveyor
who designed the subdivision layout.
   (D)   Scale of plat: one inch = 100 feet as minimum acceptable scale.
   (E)   Date.
   (F)   Northpoint.
   (G)   The name of the proprietor.
   (H)   The title “Preliminary Plat.”
(‘83 Code, § 151.11) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.017 EXISTING CONDITIONS.
   The preliminary plat shall include the following.
   (A)   Area plan.
   (B)   General street pattern including collector streets and indications of
future proposed circulation between the land in question and in adjacent areas.
   (C)   Location and size of existing and proposed school sites, parks, or
other public areas.
   (D)   Existing and proposed location of shopping centers, multi-family
residential, commercial, or other land use.
(‘83 Code, § 151.12) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.018 PROPOSED SUBDIVISION.
   The plat of the proposed subdivision shall include the following.
   (A)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision and section or corporation lines
within or adjacent to the tract.
   (B)   Adjacent tracts of subdivided and unsubdivided land shown in relation
to the tract being proposed for subdivision. Ownership of each unsubdivided
tract shall be indicated on the plat. The name of the plat and the liber and
page of record data shall be indicated on adjacent subdivisions.
   (C)   Location, widths, and name of existing or prior platted public streets
and private streets, and public easements within or adjacent to the tract being
proposed for subdivision.
   (D)   Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains, and other
underground facilities within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for
subdivision.
   (E)   The plat shall be superimposed upon a topographic map with contour
intervals of one foot.
   (F) The acreage of the tract to the nearest l/10 of an acre.
(‘83 Code, § 151.13) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.019 PROPOSED CONDITIONS.
   The preliminary plat shall include the following.
   (A)   The location, width, and names of proposed streets.
   (B)   The location, width, and use of proposed easements.
   (C)   All lots, including the required set back lines, mention of typical
lots, the smallest lot, the approximate dimensions of all corner lots, the
approximate dimensions of lots on a curvilinear section of street, and the
approximate dimensions of irregular shaped lots must be indicated on each lot.
If outlots are proposed in the plat, the specific purpose for the outlot shall
be indicated.
   (D)   The lot numbers and total number of lots.
   (E)   The provision for water supply, sanitary sewers and disposal, storm
water drainage, and disposal.
   (F)   The location for curbs, gutters, and sidewalks.
(‘83 Code, § 151.14) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.020 REVIEW BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall act as agent of the Planning Commission under
this chapter to permit the filing of plats for the Commission agenda at a
municipal office, to make the records of the Assessor's office available to the
Clerk for proper mailing of notices, and to permit the proper assessing and
receipt of fees as provided for by this chapter. The Clerk shall place the
proposed preliminary plat on the agenda of the next regular Planning Commission
meeting which follows the submittal by not less than 20 days. Should the
Planning Commission, in their review, find that any data required under
§ 152.004 and §§
152.015 through
152.019 is omitted, the secretary of the Planning Commission shall notify the
subdivider of the additional data required and delay further Planning
Commission action until the required data is received. Failure to comply with
all requirements is sufficient reason for rejection.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, as agent of the Planning
Commission, to send written notice of the proposed plat by first-class mail to
owners of record of land immediately adjoining the property to be platted, as
listed on the current tax roll of the city. The notice, stating the time and
place of the Planning Commission meeting, must be received five days before the
date of the Commission meeting where the preliminary plat will be presented. A
copy of the notice also shall be sent to the applicants.
   (C)   Where the proposed subdivision is adjacent to or contains a Wayne
County or State of Michigan trunkline highway, the Planning Commission shall
forward three copies of the preliminary plat via the City Clerk to the Wayne
County Road Commission or the Michigan State Highway Department for their
respective approval.
   (D)   The Planning Commission shall review all details of the proposed
subdivision within the framework of various elements of the master plan and
within the design standards of this subdivision regulation.
   (E)   The Planning Commission shall have copies of the proposed preliminary
plat transmitted to the City Engineer, the City Planner, the Director of Public
Works, the Director of Parks and Recreation, the Chief of Police, the Fire
Chief, the Traffic Engineer and the appropriate school board for their
technical review in their individual area of responsibility.
   (F)   Each department shall return their copy of the preliminary plat and
their review, in writing, to the Planning Commission within 15 days of receipt
of the proposed plat. The approval or disapproval, as the case may be, of the
City Engineer, Police Chief, Fire Chief and Planning Consultant must appear
written upon the preliminary plat.
   (G)   Land requirements for public uses within the framework of the Master
Plan shall be considered in the review of each preliminary plat submitted.
   (H)   Prior to decision, the Commission shall permit objections to or
concurrence with the plat to be heard or received.
   (I)   Should the Planning Commission reject the plat, the reason for
rejection shall be entered in the official meeting minutes and the Commission
shall cause the reason for rejection to be noted upon the Commission file copy.
The secretary of the Commission shall notify the developer of the reason for
the rejection by presenting him with a copy of the official minutes.
   (J)   Should the approval be conditional approval and therefore tentative,
the subdivision layout shall not be forwarded to the City Council until the
conditions have been satisfied by the subdivider. The revised layout shall
follow the submittal procedure indicated under
§ 152.015.
   (K)   Should the Planning Commission find that all conditions have been
satisfactorily met, it shall give preliminary approval to the subdivider. The
Chairperson shall make notation to that effect on each copy of the preliminary
plat, returning one copy to the subdivider, forward two copies to the City
Engineer, including the copy bearing the approval of the governing road
commission. One copy shall be forwarded to the City Assessor, two copies shall
be retained for the Commission files, and all remaining copies shall be
forwarded to the City Council with the recommendation for preliminary approval.
(‘83 Code, § 151.15) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70)
§ 152.021 REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   The City Council will not review a preliminary plat until it has
received the review recommendations of the Planning Commission. Following the
receipt of the recommendations, the City Council shall consider the plat at the
meeting that the matter is placed on the regularly scheduled agenda.
   (B)   Should the City Council approve the preliminary plat, it shall be
deemed to confer upon the subdivider the right to proceed with the preparation
of the engineering drawings for planned improvements.
   (C)   Preliminary approval shall not constitute approval of the final plat.
It shall be deemed as approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat,
and shall be a guide to the preparation of the final plat. The general terms
and conditions under which preliminary approval was granted will not be
changed. The developer shall proceed to design the public improvements, and may
proceed with the preparation of the final plat.
   (D)   The approval of the City Council shall be effective for a period of 12
months. Should the final plat in whole or in part not be submitted to the city
for approval within this time limit, the preliminary plat must again be
submitted to the Planning Commission for approval.
(‘83 Code, § 151.16) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70)
FINAL PLAT
§ 152.035 PREPARATION.
   (A)   The final plat shall comply with the provisions of Public Act 288 of
l967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 - 560.293, as amended (The Plat Act), and with
the instructions and requirements set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved, and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary
plat which the subdivider proposed to record and develop at the time, provided,
however, that that portion conforms to these subdivision regulations, and shall
be contiguous to any previously platted portion or portions of the preliminary
plat.
   (C)   The subdivider shall submit evidence of title, either the opinion from
an attorney as to title showing any interests of record, or shall furnish an
abstract of title certified to date, or at the option of the subdivider, a
policy of title insurance for examination in order to ascertain as to whether
or not the proper parties have signed the plat.
(‘83 Code, § 151.20) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70)
§ 152.036 REVIEW.
   (A)   Five copies of the final plat meeting the requirements as set forth in
the Plat Act, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 - 560.293, as amended, as amended, and
three paper copies of the final plat shall be filed by the subdivider with the
City Clerk. Any sums of money as shall hereinafter be set forth shall be
deposited with the City Clerk to provide for the expenses of the City Council,
and for the fees required by the plat on the agenda of the next regular
Planning Commission meeting which follows the submittal by no less than ten
days.
   (B)   The final plat documents shall be transmitted to the secretary of the
Planning Commission for review as to compliance with the approved preliminary
plat.
   (C)   Should the Planning Commission find that the final plat is in
agreement with the preliminary plat, it shall stamp its approval on the final
plat and notify the City Council of this action in its official minutes.
   (D)   Should the Planning Commission find that the final plat does not
conform substantially to the previously approved preliminary plat, and that it
is not acceptable, they shall record the reason in their official minutes and
forward a copy of same to the subdivider and require that the cause for
rejection be corrected and the plat be held over for consideration at the next
regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting. Should the subdivider elect to
not make the required corrections, the Planning Commission shall reject the
plat, record the reasons for rejection in their official minutes and forward
copies of the minutes to the subdivider and to the City Council.
(‘83 Code, § 151.21) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70)
§ 152.037 PROCEDURE.
   Following approval by the Planning Commission:
   (A)   One copy of the final plat shall be forwarded to the City Assessor for
determination that no liens or special assessments exist against the land and
for determination that there exists no unpaid taxes on the land;
   (B)   One copy shall be forwarded to the City Engineer for determination
that metes and bounds descriptions of the plat are accurate, and for
determination that lot areas are within the minimum acceptable standards;
   (C)   After review by these officers and submittal of their written reports
within 20 days of receipt of the plat, the final plat shall be placed on the
agenda of the City Council for the next regularly scheduled meeting;
   (D)   The City Clerk shall certify to the City Council that funds totaling
10% of the cost of improvements, or a maximum of $50,000, or whichever is less,
are placed in escrow with the city to guarantee the installation of the public
improvements required under §§
152.018 through
152.021, 152.035 and 152.036. The deposited funds may be returned in part, as
the improvements are installed, provided that at all times 5% or $50,000, or
whichever is more of the cost of the uncompleted improvements, shall be
withheld;
   (E)   In lieu of any escrow deposit, the City Clerk may produce
certification by the City Engineer that the improvements have been installed to
the specifications of the city.
(‘83 Code, § 151.22) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.038 ACTION OF CITY COUNCIL
   The City Council shall review all recommendations and take action to approve
or disapprove the final plat within 60 days of its filing with the City Clerk.
(‘83 Code, § 151.023) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70)
§ 152.039 PLAT AND FEES FORWARDED TO COUNTY.
   Following approval by the City Council, the City Clerk shall forward the
approved plats, together with the filing fees to the tract index division of
the County of Wayne, Michigan. Subsequent action shall follow the procedure set
forth in the Plat Act.
(‘83 Code, § 151.24) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70)
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 152.050 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   (A)   Following approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivision
improvements shall be designed to meet the minimum design standards as adopted
by the city. The subdivision design standards set forth under this chapter are
development regulations to be followed by the developer. All final plans must
be reviewed and meet the approval of the City Engineer.
   (B)   Streets shall conform to at least all minimum requirements, general
specifications, typical cross- sections and other conditions set forth in §§
152.018 through
152.021,
152.035, and
152.036, and by the City Engineer.
(‘83 Code, § 151.30) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.051 LOCATION AND ARRANGEMENT OF STREETS.
   (A)   The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various elements of the
Master plan and shall be considered in relation to existing and planned major
thoroughfares and secondary thoroughfares. Such part shall be platted in the
location and the width indicated on the plan.
   (B)   The street layout shall provide for continuation of secondary
thoroughfares in the adjoining subdivision or of the proper projections of
streets when adjoining property is not subdivided (generally not more than 1300
feet apart); or conform to a plan for a neighborhood unit drawn up and adopted
by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   The street layout shall include minor streets so laid out that their
use by through traffic shall be discouraged.
   (D)   Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain an existing or
proposed major thoroughfare, the Planning Commission may require marginal
access streets, reverse frontage with an approved screen planting contained in
a non-access reservation along the real property line having a minimum width of
15 feet, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of
residential properties and to afford separation and reduction of traffic
hazards.
   (E)   Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain an expressway, or
other limited access highway right-of-way, the Planning Commission may require
the location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of the
right-of-way at a distance suitable for the development of an appropriate use
of the intervening land as for parks in residential districts or for commercial
or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. The distances shall be
determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for approach
grades to future grade separation.
(‘83 Code, § 151.31) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.052 STREET DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Major thoroughfare width shall conform to the major thoroughfare plan
of the Master Plan of the city and shall have a width of not less than 120
feet.
   (B)   Secondary thoroughfares shall have a width of not less than 86 feet.
   (C)   Minor streets shall have a width of not less than 60 feet.
   (D)   Marginal access streets shall have a width of not less than 34 feet,
unless another width is approved by the City Engineer.
   (E)   Cul-de-sac streets shall have a width of not less than 60 feet and
shall terminate in a vehicular turn-around with a minimum diameter of 110 feet
and with an improved roadway width of not less than 90 feet in diameter.
Maximum length for cul-de-sac streets shall be 500 feet.
   (F)   Turn-around streets shall have a width of not less than 110 feet and
shall have an improved roadway width of not less than 90 feet in diameter at
the terminating loop.
   (G)   Half streets shall be prohibited.
   (H)   Alleys, where permitted, shall have a width of not less than 20 feet.
A diagonal cut-off shall be made at all acute and right angle intersections of
alleys sufficient to provide an inside turning radius of 30 feet.
(‘83 Code, § 151.32) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.053 GRADE STANDARDS.
   Minimum grades of not less than 0.4% shall be acceptable. The Planning
Commission may approve a change or variance to this standard, upon
recommendation by the City Engineer.
(‘83 Code, § 151.33) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.054 HORIZONTAL ALIGNMENT.
   (A)   Major thoroughfares shall have a radii of centerline curvature of not
less than 450 feet, unless approved by the City Engineer.
   (B)   Secondary thoroughfares shall have a radii of centerline curvature of
not less than 300 feet, unless approved by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Between reverse curves on major thoroughfares and on secondary
thoroughfares, there shall be a minimum tangent distance of 100 feet, unless
approved by the City Engineer.
   (D)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible to
90 degrees.
   (E)   Curved streets intersecting with major thoroughfares shall do so with
a tangent section of centerline 100 feet in length measured from the right-of-
way line of the major thoroughfare or secondary thoroughfare.
(‘83 Code, § 151.34) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.055 BLOCKS.
   Blocks within a subdivision shall conform to the following standards.
   (A)   Maximum length for blocks shall not exceed 1300 feet in length, except
where in the opinion of the Planning Commission conditions may justify a
greater distance.
   (B)   Width of blocks shall be determined by the condition of the layout and
shall be suited to the intended layout.
(‘83 Code, § 151.35) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.056 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Location of utility line easements shall be provided along the rear,
side, or front lot lines as necessary for utility lines. Easements shall give
access to every lot, park, or public grounds. Easements shall be a total of not
less than 12 feet wide, with a minimum of six feet from each parcel.
   (B)   Recommendations on the proposed layout of telephone and electric
company easements should be sought from all of the utility companies serving
the area.
(‘83 Code, § 151.36) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.057 PUBLIC RESERVATIONS.
   When consideration is given by the subdivider to the allocation of areas
suitably located, and of adequate size for playgrounds, school sites, parks,
and recreation facilities, as indicated in the master plan and zoning code, the
areas shall be provided by one of the following methods.
   (A)   Dedication to the municipality.
   (B)   Reservation of land for the use of property owners by deed or
covenants.
   (C)   Reservation for acquisition by the municipality or school board within
a period of two years. The reservation shall be made in such manner as to
provide for a release of the land to the subdivider in the event that the
municipality or school board does not proceed with the purchase.
(‘83 Code, § 151.37) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.058 LOTS.
   Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards.
   (A)   The lot size, width, depth, and shape in any subdivision proposed for
residential uses shall be appropriate for the location and the type of
development contemplated.
   (B)   Lot areas shall conform to at least the minimum requirements of the
zoning code.
   (C)   Lot widths shall in no case be less than that required by the zoning
code for the district in which the subdivision is proposed.
   (D)   Building setback lines shall conform to at least the minimum
requirements of the zoning code.
   (E)   Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A depth-to-
width ratio of three to one shall normally be considered a maximum.
   (F)   Corner lots shall be platted a minimum of at least ten feet wider than
minimum width interior lots in order to permit conformance to set back lines on
side lotted streets.
(‘83 Code, § 151.38) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.059 ARRANGEMENT OF LOTS.
   (A)   Every lot shall front or abut on a street.
   (B)   Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street lines,
or as nearly as possible thereto.
   (C)   Residential lots abutting major thoroughfares or secondary
thoroughfares, where marginal access streets are not desirable or not possible
to attain, shall be platted with reverse frontage lots with an approved screen
planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line,
having a minimum width of 15 feet or such other treatment as may be adequate
for protection of residential properties, or with side lot lines parallel to
the major traffic streets, or shall be platted with extra depth to permit
generous distance between buildings and the traffic way.
   (D)   Lots shall have a front-to-front relationship across all streets. Any
deviation shall require the review and the approval of the Planning Commission.
(‘83 Code, § 151.39) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.060 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL CHARACTER OF LAND.
   The natural character of lands must be preserved wherever possible.
   (A)   Natural features. Due regard must be shown for all natural features
such as large trees, natural groves, watercourses, and similar community assets
that will add attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved. The
preservation of drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the
subdivider, and the dedication and provision of adequate barriers, where
appropriate, shall be required. Proposed changes shall follow good planning and
engineering practices and must be approved by the City Engineer.
   (B)   Suitability of lands. Lands which are held to be unsuitable for
residential use by reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, adverse rock or
topographic conditions, or any other features likely to be harmful to health,
safety, or welfare of future residents, will not be subdivided for residential
use. If it is determined that a flood problem does exist, then all or that part
of the proposed subdivision lying within the flood plain shall be rejected.
(‘83 Code, § 151.40) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 152.070 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   The improvements set forth under this chapter are to be considered as the
minimum acceptable standard. All improvements must meet the approval of the
City Engineer.
(‘83 Code, § 151.45) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70)
§ 152.071 STREET AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS.
   Street and utility improvements shall be provided in accordance with the
standards and requirements described as follows.
   (A)   Major thoroughfares. Cross-sections in accordance with the master plan
of major thoroughfares and as determined by the City Engineer and the Planning
Commission.
   (B)   Secondary thoroughfares. Eighty-six-foot right-of-way, 41-foot
concrete pavement from outside of curb to outside of curb, curb and gutter each
side of pavement, 16½-foot separation strip and five- foot concrete sidewalk on
each side of roadway, with one foot of space between sidewalk and right-of- way
line on each side; or a boulevard pavement consisting of two 21-foot concrete
pavements separated by a 20-foot median, a six-foot separation strip, five-foot
concrete sidewalk with one foot of space between sidewalk and right-of-way line
on each side.
   (C)   Minor streets. Sixty-foot right-of-way, 20-foot concrete pavement from
outside of curb to outside of curb, curb and gutter each side of pavement, 8½-
foot separation strip and five-foot concrete sidewalk on each side of roadway
with one foot of space between sidewalk and right-of-way line on each side.
   (D)   Marginal access streets. Thirty-four-foot right-of-way, 21-foot
pavement from outside of curb to outside of curb, concrete curb and gutter each
side of pavement, three-foot separation strip measured from right-of-way line
of the adjacent street to the marginal access street pavement, four-foot
separation strip and five-foot sidewalk on one side with one foot of space
between sidewalk and right-of-way.
   (E)   Alleys. Full width pavement per plans and profiles approved by the
City Engineer, according to standards heretofore adopted.
   (F)   Grading and centerline gradients. Per plans and profiles approved by
the City Engineer, according to standards heretofore adopted.
   (G)   Curbs and gutters. In accordance with details and specifications
prescribed by the City Engineer, according to standards heretofore adopted.
   (H)   Roadway pavements. In accordance with details and specifications
prescribed by the City Engineer, according to standards heretofore adopted.
   (I)   Sidewalks. In accordance with details and specifications prescribed by
the City Engineer, according to standards heretofore adopted.
   (J)   Storm drainage system and other drainage improvements. Per plans
approved by the City Engineer, according to standards heretofore adopted. Where
county drains are involved, a letter or document of approval from the County
Drain Commissioner must be submitted by the subdivider.
   (K)   Sewage disposal; sewer system. Sanitary sewers are required per plans
approved by the City Engineer, according to standards heretofore adopted.
   (L)   Water supply; water distribution system. Per plans approved by the
City Engineer and in conformance with regulations of the Michigan Department of
Health relating to municipal water supplies.
(‘83 Code, § 151.46) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.072 TREES.
   Existing trees near street right-of-way shall be preserved by the
subdivider. Street trees shall be provided of at least 2½-inch trunk diameter,
at least one per lot, and shall comply with Chapter 154, Zoning.
(‘83 Code, § 151.47) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.073 STREET SIGNS.
   Street name signs meeting city standards and approved by the City Engineer
will be provided at intersections of all streets. Traffic-control signs as
directed by the City Engineer shall be provided. All signs shall be reflective
unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
(‘83 Code, § 151.48) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.074 STREET LIGHTING.
   Street lighting service with underground conductors shall be installed
throughout the subdivision in conformity with specifications and standards
prescribed by the service company involved and as approved by the City
Engineer.
(‘83 Code, § 151.49) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.075 UTILITIES.
   The subdivider shall make arrangements for all local distribution lines
within a subdivision (exclusive of main supply lines, perimeter feed lines, and
necessary surface facilities) for telephone and electric service to be placed
underground entirely throughout a subdivided area. Conduits or cables shall be
placed within private easements provided to the service companies by the
subdivider, or within dedicated public ways. Those telephone and electrical
facilities placed in dedicated public ways shall be planned as not to conflict
with other underground utilities. All telephone and electrical facilities shall
be constructed in accordance with standards of construction approved by the
Michigan Public Service Commission. All drainage and underground utility
installations which traverse privately-owned property shall be protected by
easements granted by the subdivider or proprietor of the plat. The subdivider
or proprietor of the plat shall bear any increase in costs, if any, over the
normal mode of construction of telephone or electrical lines and facilities, as
determined by the telephone or electric company involved, in accordance with
the valid rules and regulations of the telephone or electric company involved.
(‘83 Code, § 151.50) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.076 MONUMENTS; STAKES.
   Subdivision monuments shall be placed as provided by the Plat Act, Public
Act 288 of l967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 - 560.293, as amended. Following
installation of all other public improvements, the monuments shall be checked
for location and grade. Metal stakes at least ½-inch x 18 inches long shall be
placed at each lot corner not coinciding with a monument, and shall be checked
for location and grade following installation of all other improvements.
(‘83 Code, § 151.51) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
VARIANCE
§ 152.090 CONDITIONS.
   The City Council may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in
its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any
variance, the City Council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems
necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as
required hereinbelow, the City Council shall take into account the nature of
the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the
number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the
probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the
vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the City Council finds the
following.
   (A)   That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the
property such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter
would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land.
   (B)   That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the petitioner.
   (C)   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the
property is situated.
(‘83 Code, § 151.55) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70)
§ 152.091 NEIGHBORHOOD PLAN.
   The City Council may authorize a variance from these regulations in case of
a plan for a complete community or neighborhood which, in the judgment of the
City Council, and after the recommendation is had from the Planning Commission,
provides adequate public spaces and includes provision for efficient
circulation, light and air, and other needs. In making its findings, as
required below, the City Council shall take into account the nature of the
proposed use of and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of
persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect
of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. The City
Council shall find as follows.
   (A)   That there is adequate acreage in the proposed plan to support an
elementary school site as proposed in the Master Plan of the municipality.
   (B)   That the standards and requirements of the Zoning Code of the
municipality are met.
   (C)   That the Planning Commission has reviewed the plan and recommends its
approval as having met the standards and intent of the Master Plan of land use
as it relates to facility needs.
   (D)   That in granting the variance, it shall be valid only as long as the
plan is carried out as approved. Any departure from the plan shall immediately
rescind variance granted.
   (E)   That the City Council shall establish a time schedule to be met on the
various aspects of the complete neighborhood plan.
(‘83 Code, § 151.56) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70)
§ 152.092 APPLICATION.
   Application for any variance shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider
at the time the preliminary plat is filed for the consideration of the City
Council, stating fully and clearly all facts relied upon by the petitioner. It
shall be supplemented by maps, plans, or other additional data which may aid
the City Council in the analysis of the proposed project. The plans for the
development shall include the covenants, restrictions, or other legal
provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the plan.
(‘83 Code, § 151.57) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
DRAWINGS
§ 152.105 FINAL PLAT COPY.
   Following by no more than 30 days the recording of the final plat with the
state, a true copy of the recorded plat bearing the recording data, and
prepared on a Mylar film, shall be filed with the city for their records.
(‘83 Code, § 151.60) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.106 SUBMISSION OF PLANS.
   Following by no more than 30 days the installation of subdivision
improvements to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, a copy of the plans of
the improvements revised to indicate the “as-build” locations of the
improvements shall be prepared on a Mylar film and shall be filed with the city
for their records.
(‘83 Code, § 151.61) (Ord. 70-008, passed 7-27-70) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 152.107 DIVISION OF PLATTED LOTS.
   A platted lot may be divided in accordance with the following provisions.
   (A)   The City Council may permit the division of lots as follows.
      (1)   Outlots, or parts thereof consisting of ten acres or less, into not
more than four parts.
      (2)    A platted lot into not more than four parts as separate parcels,
or divided and combined with an adjacent lot, outlot, acreage, or parts
thereof, provided that each of the resulting parcels contain no less than 7,200
square feet and a minimum width of 60 feet. The resultant parcels for the
construction of new homes shall comply with Section 154.024 Residential Design
Standards.
      (3)   A platted lot into not more than two parts for the purpose of
combining each of the parts with adjacent lots where the resulting parcels
exceed the area and width of original platted size.
   (B)   Application shall be made to the City Assessor by submission of the
following.
      (1)   Written request signed by all parties in interest showing the legal
description of the resultant parcels of the requested real property division.
      (2)   Two plot plans each showing dimensions of platted and resultant
parcels.
      (3)   A fee charged in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule in
Chapter 12 of this Code for each of the resultant parcels.
      (4)   Evidence of ownership or interest in property to be divided.
   (C)   Prior to submission to the City Council, the City Assessor shall
obtain or prepare the following.
      (1)   A tax memo from the City Treasurer showing tax status of all lots
involved.
      (2)   A memo from the City Assessor stating whether or not the parcel or
parcels to be divided contain any improvements.
      (3)   If any improvements are contained thereon, a memo from the Director
of the Building Division stating whether the proposed division would reduce
required yard space or off-street parking space below minimum limits required
in the zoning code.
   (D)   In no event shall a division of platted lots be authorized where there
are any due and unpaid taxes or special assessments, or if improvements are
contained thereon, the division would reduce the required yard space or off-
street parking space below the minimums required by the Zoning Code.
   (E)   In no event shall division of property be considered until a finding
by the City Attorney that the parties signing the request have the necessary
interest in the property to request the division thereof.
(‘83 Code, § 151.62) (Ord. 72-007, passed 5-1-72; Am. Ord. 89-004, passed 6-19-
89; Am. Ord. 21-007, passed 6-21-21)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99
CHAPTER 153: INSPECTIONS
Inspection of Rental Dwellings
   
153.01   Definitions
   
153.02   Registration for rental or lease of dwellings
   
153.03   Application for registration
   
153.04   Inspection required for registration
   
153.05   Issuance of registration certificate
   
153.06   Maintenance of registered dwellings
   
153.07   Appeal of denial, suspension, or revocation of registration
certificate
   
153.08   Rental or lease time limit
INSPECTION OF RENTAL DWELLINGS
§ 153.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. The Community Development Department or any successor department
or division that may be established.
   DWELLING. A non-owner occupied dwelling as defined in the most recent state
building code or the state residential code, as promulgated by the state
Construction Code Commission, including all amendments and supplements; and any
accessory building or structure defined under the housing law for the state
and/or the city's zoning code, as amended.
   OWNER. The owner(s) of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate in the
premises, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, an assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, or any other person, sole proprietorship, partnership,
association, or corporation directly or indirectly in control of a dwelling, or
his/her/its agents, servants, or employees.
   OCCUPANT. In determining total occupancy of a unit, OCCUPANT shall mean any
individual who inhabits the unit for more than 24 hours. (Time does not have to
be consecutive.)
(Ord. 10-018, passed 11-8-10)
§ 153.02 REGISTRATION FOR RENTAL OR LEASE OF DWELLINGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an owner to rent or lease a dwelling unless a
registration certificate has been issued and maintained for the dwelling in the
manner required by this subchapter.
   (B)   Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
(Ord. 10-018, passed 11-8-10; Am. Ord. 18-015, passed 3-19-18)
§ 153.03 APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION.
   The department shall receive applications for the registration of dwellings
under the provisions of this subchapter upon forms provided by the department.
The application shall be signed by the owner of record, notarized, and attached
to the dwelling(s) to be registered. The application shall be accompanied by a
registration fee in such amount as City Council shall from time to time
establish by resolution.
(Ord. 10-018, passed 11-8-10)
§ 153.04 INSPECTION REQUIRED FOR REGISTRATION.
   The owner of the dwelling identified in the application shall make the
dwelling available for inspections by the department as may be necessary for
the department to determine whether the dwelling complies with the
International Property Maintenance Code, the state building code, the state
residential code, the state electrical code, the state mechanical code, the
state plumbing code, the state uniform energy code, the state elevator code,
the state housing law, and the city's zoning code, as amended.
(Ord. 10-018, passed 11-8-10)
§ 153.05 ISSUANCE OF REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.
   After receiving the application and fee for registration, the department
shall inspect the dwelling applying the standards set forth in the above-stated
codes, housing law, and zoning code. Upon determining that the dwelling is in
compliance, the department shall issue to the applicant a registration
certificate, which shall be valid for three calendar years. The registration
certificate shall be in the name of the owner and cannot be transferred.
(Ord. 10-018, passed 11-8-10)
§ 153.06 MAINTENANCE OF REGISTERED DWELLINGS.
   The owner of the dwelling registered under the provisions of this subchapter
shall maintain the dwelling and property in compliance with the above-stated
codes, housing law, and zoning code. Should the owner fail to maintain the
dwelling in compliance with said codes, housing laws, and zoning code, the
registration certificate shall be suspended or revoked by the department, which
may result in sanctions by the department and/or removal of the occupants
depending on the nature of the violation. The owner shall be given notice, in
writing, of the determination and the reasons for the determination. If
applicable, the owner may be given a time specified by the department to
rectify the violations. The notice shall be sent by first-class mail to the
address listed on the owner's application form.
(Ord. 10-018, passed 11-8-10)
§ 153.07 APPEAL OF DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION
CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   Should the department determine that the dwelling is not in
compliance, and for that reason deny, suspend, or revoke a registration
certificate, the owner shall have the right to appeal such determination in the
following manner:
      (1)   The owner shall file the appeal with the city's Zoning Board of
Appeals, in writing, within 15 days of the date of the department's
determination. Filing of the appeal shall stay any suspension or revocation of
a registration certificate until such time as the Zoning Board of Appeals
issues a final decision. The appeal shall contain a short and plain statement
of the matter(s) asserted by the owner, including factual and legal bases upon
which the owner relies.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the appeal, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
schedule a hearing and provide notice of the hearing to the owner by sending
written notice by first-class mail to the address listed on the owner's
application form. The owner may appear at the hearing in person, or by
representative. If the owner or representative fails to appear at the hearing
after proper notice, the Zoning Board of Appeals may proceed with the hearing
and issue a decision. The owner shall be given an opportunity to present
evidence and arguments on issues of law and fact.
      (3)   Within a reasonable period after the hearing is concluded, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall issue a final decision, in writing, setting forth
its findings. A copy of the decision shall be sent by first-class mail to the
address listed on the owner's application form, or to the representative that
appeared at the hearing.
      (4)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall:
         (a)   Affirm the determination of the department; or
         (b)   Reverse the determination of the department and order the
issuance or reinstatement of a registration certificate.
   (B)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have no power to vary or modify any
code, law, or ordinance nor may it vary or modify the procedures herein
provided.
(Ord. 10-018, passed 11-8-10)
§ 153.08 RENTAL OR LEASE TIME LIMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for an owner to rent or lease a dwelling for a time
period of less than 90 days at a time.
(Ord. 21-005, passed 2-22-21)
CHAPTER 154: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Preamble
   
154.002   Short title
   
154.003   Purpose
   
154.004   Rules of construction
   
154.005   Definitions
   
154.006   Amendments
General Zoning Regulations
   
154.020   Administrative regulations
   
154.021   Permitted uses
   
154.022   Accessory buildings and structures
   
154.023   Use of structure as dwelling unit
   
154.024   Residential design standards
   
154.025   Temporary structures and uses
   
154.026   Uses not normally permitted
   
154.027   Yard and bulk regulations
   
154.028   Public thoroughfares
   
154.029   Grading regulations
   
154.030   Lighting requirements
   
154.031   Dumping, filling and excavating
   
154.032   Standards for trash dumpsters
   
154.033   Safety provisions
   
154.034   Exemptions
   
154.035   Sidewalk requirements
   
154.036   Performance guarantee; requirements; permits and/or approvals
   
154.037   Fences
   
154.038   Signs
   
154.039   Satellite dish antennas
   
154.040   Outdoor displays; prohibitions
Nonconformities
   
154.050   Intent
   
154.051   General requirements
   
154.052   Nonconforming lots of record
   
154.053   Modification to nonconforming uses or structures
   
154.054   Acquisition by city; procedure
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
   
154.065   Scope of off-street parking requirements
   
154.066   General off-street parking requirements
   
154.067   Minimum off-street parking requirements
   
154.068   Layout and construction
   
154.069   Residential districts parking and driveway standards
   
154.070   Off-street loading space requirements
   
154.071   Access management
Landscaping
   
154.080   Intent and scope
   
154.081   General requirements
   
154.082   Requirements for specific districts
   
154.083   Standards for landscape materials
   
154.084   Installation and maintenance
   
154.085   Treatment of existing plant material
   
154.086   Modifications
Walls
   
154.100   Obscuring wall standards
   
154.101   Walls in residential districts
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
   
154.115   Short title
   
154.116   Purpose and intent
   
154.117   Facilities and services
   
154.118   Application; required information
   
154.119   Support structures
   
154.120   Colocation; new support structures
   
154.121   Removal of facilities
Site Development Standards Applicable to Specific Uses
   
154.135   Intent and scope
   
154.136   Automobile or vehicle sales
   
154.137   Automobile repair and filling stations
   
154.138   Car wash establishment
   
154.139   Drive-in establishments
   
154.140   Fast food/drive-through restaurants
   
154.141   Funeral homes
   
154.142   Child care centers
   
154.143   Hospitals
   
154.144   Junk yards
   
154.145   Kennels
   
154.146   Mini-warehouses
   
154.147   Hotels and motels
   
154.148   Nursing homes and other group homes
   
154.149   Open-air businesses
   
154.150   Restaurant site requirements
   
154.151   Radio and TV towers
   
154.152   Recreation facilities
   
154.153   Religious institutions
   
154.154   Stamping plant, punch presses and like machines
   
154.155   Veterinary clinics and hospitals
   
154.156   Veterinary hospitals
   
154.157   Accessory apartment dwellings
   
154.158   Senior citizen housing standards
   
154.159   Manufactured home park requirements
   
154.160   Single-family cluster option
   
154.161   Commercial/industrial developments
   
154.162   Automobile and/or vehicle rental establishments
   
154.163   Regulated uses
   
154.164   Home occupations
   
154.165   Medical marijuana facilities and adult use marijuana establishments
   
154.166   Outdoor seating and dining
   
154.167   Massage therapy and services
   
154.168   Hookah clubs
   
154.169   Cigar lounges
Performance Standards
   
154.175   Intent and scope
   
154.176   Noise and vibration
   
154.177   Dust, smoke and other air-borne matter
   
154.178   Odors
   
154.179   Glare and heat
   
154.180   Fire and safety hazards
   
154.181   Sewage and water pollution
   
154.182   Gases
   
154.183   Electromagnetic radiation
   
154.184   Radioactive materials
   
154.185   Determination of compliance; methods
Establishment of Zoning Districts
   
154.195   Creation of districts
   
154.196   Adoption of zoning map
   
154.197   Interpretation of district boundaries
   
154.198   Vacated areas
   
154.199   District requirements
   
154.200   Schedule of regulations; intent
R-1 One-Family Residential District
   
154.210   Purpose
   
154.211   Permitted uses and structures
   
154.212   Development standards
R-2 Two-Family Residential District
   
154.225   Purpose
   
154.226   Permitted uses and structures
   
154.227   Development standards
R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District
   
154.240   Purpose
   
154.241   Permitted uses and structures
   
154.242   Development standards
C-1 Local Business District
   
154.270   Purpose
   
154.271   Permitted uses and structures
   
154.272   Development standards
C-2 Community Business District
   
154.285   Purpose
   
154.286   Permitted uses and structures
   
154.287   Development standards
C-3 General Business District
   
154.300   Purpose
   
154.301   Permitted uses and structures
   
154.302   Development standards
M-1 Light Industrial District
   
154.315   Purpose
   
154.316   Permitted uses and structures
   
154.317   Development standards
PD Planned Development District
   
154.330   Purpose
   
154.331   Eligibility criteria
   
154.332   Project design standards
   
154.333   Procedures and requirements
   
154.334   Standards for review and approval
   
154.335   Phasing; commencement of construction
   
154.336   Development standards
MUO Mixed Use Overlay District
   
154.340   Purpose
   
154.341   Overlay district established
   
154.342   Permitted uses and structures
   
154.343   Development standards
CBD Central Business District
   
154.350   Purpose
   
154.351   Boundaries
   
154.352   Permitted uses and structures
   
154.353   Property general provisions
   
154.354   Site design regulations
   
154.355   Building design requirements
   
154.356   Development standards
VP Vehicular Parking District
   
154.370   Purpose
   
154.371   Permitted uses and structures
   
154.372   Development standards
PR Public Recreation District
   
154.385   Purpose
   
154.386   Permitted uses and structures
   
154.387   Development standards
Historic Structures and Sites District
   
154.390   Purpose
   
154.391   Permitted uses and structures
   
154.392   Development standards
Site Plan Review
   
154.400   Purpose
   
154.401   Site plan review
   
154.402   Site plan applications
   
154.403   Review and action
   
154.404   Required information
   
154.405   Standards for approval
   
154.406   Minor site modifications
Special Use Regulations
   
154.415   Purpose
   
154.416   Procedures and requirements
   
154.417   Standards for approval
Planned Development Procedures and Standards
   
154.430   Intent
   
154.431   Amendment required
   
154.432   Review procedures
   
154.433   Effect of approval
   
154.434   Zoning Board of Appeals authority
   
154.435   Application for building permit
   
154.436   Expiration of approval
   
154.437   Performance guarantee
   
154.438   Revision of approved plans
Variances and Appeals
   
154.450   Intent; purpose
   
154.451   Stay of proceedings
   
154.452   Application and procedures
   
154.453   Standards
Permits and Certificates
   
154.465   Permits
   
154.466   Certificate of occupancy
   
154.467   Zoning permits
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.480   Overview
   
154.481   Authority of City Council
   
154.482   Authority of Planning Commission
   
154.483   Zoning Board of Appeals
   
154.484   Authority of Zoning Enforcement Officials
   
154.485   Fees
   
154.486   Violations
   
154.487   Court action; other remedies
   
154.488   Records
Conditional Rezoning
   
154.520   Intent
   
154.521   Application and offer of conditions
   
154.522   Planning Commission review
   
154.523   City Council review
   
154.524   Approval
   
154.525   Compliance with conditions
   
154.526   Time period for establishing development or use
   
154.527   Reversion of zoning
   
154.528   Subsequent rezoning of land
   
154.529   Amendment of conditions
   
154.530   City right to rezone
   
154.531   Failure to offer conditions
   
154.532   Fee schedule
Sign Regulations
   
154.600   Findings
   
154.601   Purpose
   
154.602   Definitions
   
154.603   General standards
   
154.604   Prohibited signs
   
154.605   Signs permitted without a permit
   
154.606   Signs permitted with a permit
   
154.607   Billboards
   
154.608   Permits
   
154.609   Nonconforming signs
   
154.610   Variances
   
154.611   Sign removal by city action
   
154.612   Table of allowable signage
   
154.613   Changeable message standards
   
154.614   Illumination of signs
 
   
154.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:    Schedule of regulations
   
Appendix B:    Illustrations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 PREAMBLE.
   Pursuant to the authority conferred to the City of Garden City by Public Act
207 of 1921, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.581 - 125.590, as amended, the City Council
of the City of Garden City hereby adopts the following regulations and
restrictions on the use of land and structures for the purpose of promoting and
protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of its inhabitants.
These regulations are designed to protect and conserve the character, social,
and economic stability of the residential, commercial, industrial, and other
use areas; to secure the most appropriate location and relationships among uses
of land and structures; to limit the overcrowding of land and congestion of
population; to provide adequate light, air, and reasonable access; to
facilitate adequate and economical provision of energy, transportation, water,
sanitary sewer, education, recreation and public services and facilities.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.002 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as “The City of Garden City
Zoning Ordinance” or “The City of Garden City Zoning Regulations.” Within the
following text it may be referred to as the “Ordinance,” “this chapter,” or the
“Zoning Regulations.”
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.003 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is declared necessary for the preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and welfare of the people of the city and is given immediate
effect upon its publication.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.004 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The following rules of construction apply to the text of these Zoning
Regulations.
   (A)   The particular shall control the general.
   (B)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
   (C)   Words used in the singular numbers shall include the plural, and the
plural shall include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary.
   (D)   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word
“may” is permissive.
   (E)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   (F)   All measurements shall be to the nearest integer, unless otherwise
specified herein.
   (G)   The phrase “used for” includes "arranged for,” "designed for,”
"intended for,” “occupied for” and “maintained for.”
   (H)   The word “building” includes the word structure. The word “structure”
includes “building.” The word “build” includes the words “erect” and
“construct.” A “building” or “structure” includes any part thereof.
   (I)   The word “person” includes an individual a corporation, a partnership,
an incorporated association, or any similar entity.
    (J)   Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of
this chapter, its meaning shall be construed as defined herein. Words or terms
not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them.
   (K)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation
involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the
conjunction “and,” “or,” or “either/or,” the conjunction shall be interpreted
as follows.
      (1)   “And” indicates that all the connected items, conditions,
provisions, or events shall apply.
      (2)   “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or
events may apply singly or in any combination.
      (3)   “Either/or” indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
   (L)   Catch words and catch lines shall in no way by their presence or
absence limit or affect the meaning of these Zoning regulations.
   (M)   Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, where an
illustration accompanies any item within these Zoning regulations, the written
shall have precedence over the illustrations.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE, BUILDING, OR STRUCTURE. A use, building, or structure which
is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, subordinate to,
and is located on the same zoning lot as the principal use to which it is
exclusively related.
   ADULT BOOK OR SUPPLY STORE. An establishment having 10% or more of all
usable interior, retail, wholesale, or warehouse space devoted to the
distribution, display, or storage of books, magazines, and other periodicals
and/or photographs, drawings, slides, films, video tapes, recording tapes, and/
or novelty items which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matters depicting, describing, or relating to SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS as defined herein, or an establishment with a
segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material. Such
establishment or the segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such
material in an establishment is customarily not open to the public generally,
but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of
age.
   ADULT PHYSICAL CULTURE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment, club, or business
by whatever name designated, which offers or advertises, or is equipped or
arranged so as to provide as part of its services, massages, body rubs, alcohol
rubs, physical stimulation, baths, or other similar treatment by any person. A
tattoo parlor as defined herein is specifically included as an ADULT PHYSICAL
CULTURE ESTABLISHMENT. The following uses shall not be included within the
definition of an ADULT PHYSICAL CULTURE ESTABLISHMENT.
      (1)   Establishments which routinely provide such services by a licensed
physician, a licensed chiropractor, a licensed osteopath, a licensed physical
therapist, a licensed practical nurse, or any other similarly licensed medical
professional.
      (2)   Electrolysis treatment by a licensed operator of electrolysis
equipment.
      (3)   Continuing instruction in martial or performing arts, or in
organized athletic activities.
      (4)   Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics, or medical offices.
      (5)   Barber shops or beauty parlors and salons which offer massages to
the scalp, the face, the neck or shoulders only.
      (6)   Adult photography studios whose principal business does not include
the taking of photographs of specified human anatomical areas.
   ADULT MODEL STUDIO. Any place where models who display specified anatomical
areas as defined in this section, are present to be observed, sketched, drawn,
painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons who pay
some form of consideration or gratuity. This definition shall not apply to any
accredited art school or similar educational institution.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place where motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images
displayed depict, describe, or relate to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas as defined in this section.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building wherein still or motion
pictures, videotapes or similar materials are presented or viewed, which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as
defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein. Such an
establishment is customarily not open to the public generally, but only to one
or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age.
   ADULT OUTDOOR MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A drive-in theater used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas as defined in this section, for observation by patrons of the theater.
Such an establishment is customarily not open to the public generally, but only
to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age.
   ADULT USE MARIJUANA (MARIHUANA) ESTABLISHMENT. Any site, location, use,
business, building as the term is defined in the Michigan Regulation and
Taxation of Marihuana Act, Initiated Act 1 of 2018, as amended, which may
include:
      (1)   MARIHUANA GROWER ESTABLISHMENT. As that term is defined in the
Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act (MRTMA).
      (2)   MARIHUANA PROCESSOR ESTABLISHMENT. As that term is defined in the
Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act (MRTMA).
      (3)   MARIHUANA RETAILER. As that term is defined in the Michigan
Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act (MRTMA).
   ALLEY. A dedicated public vehicular or pedestrian way, usually between or
behind buildings, which affords a secondary means of access to abutting
property.
   ALTERATION. Any change, addition or modification to a structure or type of
occupancy, or any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls
or partitions, columns, or beams or girders, or any change which may be
referred to herein as “altered” or “reconstructed.”
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL. See HOSPITAL, VETERINARY, as defined in this section.
   APARTMENT. See DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY, as defined in this section
   ARCADE. Any place, premises, establishment or room within a building which
provides on its premises six or more machines which may be operated or used as
a game, contest or for amusement of any description. For the purposes of this
definition, MACHINE shall mean any device, apparatus, mechanical equipment or
machine operated as amusement for required compensation. The term does not
include vending machines used to dispense foodstuffs, toys, or other products
for use and consumption.
   ATTACHED WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY; ANTENNAS. Any wireless
telecommunication facility affixed to an existing structure, such as a
building, tower, water tank, utility pole, and the like, utilized to receive
and transmit federally or state-licensed telecommunications services via duly
licensed segments of the radio frequency spectrum. This definition shall not
include support structures.
   AUTOMOBILE. Any motorized vehicle capable of conveying passengers or
material by land usually on wheels or tracks, including cars, trucks, pickup
trucks, vans, motorcycles, snowmobiles and similar vehicles.
   AUTOMOBILE FILLING STATION. A place used for the retail sale and dispensing
of fuel or lubricants, together with the fixed equipment from which the fuel is
dispensed directly into motor vehicles. AUTOMOBILE FILLING STATIONS may also
incorporate a convenience store operation or a restaurant as an accessory use,
provided it is clearly incidental to the filling station use. Parking
requirements for filling station/convenience store or restaurant operations
shall be computed by adding together the parking space requirements for each
separate use.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR. Major or minor repair of automobiles shall be defined as
follows.
      (1)   MAJOR REPAIR. Engine and transmission rebuilding and general
repairs, rebuilding or reconditioning; collision service such as body, frame or
fender straightening or repair; steam cleaning, undercoating and rustproofing;
and similar servicing, rebuilding or repairs that normally do require
significant disassembly or storing of the automobiles on the premises
overnight.
      (2)   MINOR REPAIR. Engine tune-ups and servicing of brakes, air
conditioning, exhaust systems; oil change or lubrication; wheel alignment or
balancing; or similar servicing or repairs that do not normally require any
significant disassembly or storing of the automobiles on the premises
overnight.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A place where gasoline or other vehicle engine
fuel, kerosene, motor oil and lubricants, and grease are sold directly to the
public on the premises for the purposes of operation of motor vehicles;
including the sale of minor accessories such as tires, batteries, brakes, shock
absorbers, window glass, and the servicing of and minor repair of motor
vehicles.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE. An enclosed building where major automobile repair
services may be carried out.
   AUTOMOBILE OR VEHICLE SALES. A building or premises used primarily for the
sale automobiles and/or vehicles including the house trailers, recreational
vehicles, trucks and other vehicles.
   AUTOMOBILE AND/OR VEHICLE RENTAL ESTABLISHMENT. A building or premises used
primarily for the lease or rental of automobiles and/or vehicles, including
house trailers, recreational vehicles, trailers and other vehicles.
   AUTOMOBILE WASH OR CAR WASH ESTABLISHMENT.  An establishment contained
within a building or premises or portion thereof where automobiles are washed.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is partially or totally below
grade, but is so located that the vertical distance from the average finished
grade to the floor below is greater than the vertical distance from the average
finished grade to the ceiling. This definition shall not apply to earth-bermed
or earth-sheltered homes. A basement shall not be counted as a story.
   BEDROOM. A room designed or used in whole or part for sleeping purposes.
   BERM. See LANDSCAPING as defined in this section.
   BLOCK. The property bounded by a street or by a combination of streets and
public lands, railroad, utility, or public rights-of-way, rivers, drains, or
streams, boundary lines of the city, or any other barrier to the continuity of
development.
   BOARDING HOUSE or ROOMING HOUSE. A building, other than a hotel, where for
compensation or by prearrangement for definite periods of time, lodging or
lodging and meals are provided for three or more persons. A ROOMING HOUSE shall
be deemed a BOARDING HOUSE for the purposes of this chapter.
   BORDER TREATMENT. A low barrier of natural or artificial materials located
near the perimeter of a residential lot. Artificial materials commonly included
in BORDER TREATMENT construction include wood, wire, metal, or any other
material or combination of materials commonly used in fence construction.
Natural materials commonly used for creation of a BORDER TREATMENT include
deciduous and evergreen shrubs.
   BUILDABLE AREA. See BUILDING ENVELOPE as defined in this section.
   BUILDING. Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof or
other covering and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels, or property or materials of any kind. A building shall
include tents, awnings, or vehicles situated on a parcel and used for the
purposes of a building. A building shall not include such structures as signs,
fences or smokestacks, but shall include structures such as storage tanks, coal
bunkers, oil cracking towers, or similar structures.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building or, where the context so indicates, a group
of buildings which are permanently affixed to the land and which are built,
used, designed or intended for the shelter or enclosure of the principal use of
the parcel.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. See ACCESSORY USE, BUILDING, OR STRUCTURE as defined in
this section.
   BUILDING, TEMPORARY. A building which is not permanently affixed to the
property, and is permitted to exist for a specific reason for a specific period
of time. Construction of temporary buildings shall be subject to the
requirements of current adopted building codes of the city.
   BUILDING ENVELOPE. The area of a lot which is defined by the minimum setback
requirements within which building construction is permitted by the terms of
this chapter.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the finished grade to:
      (1)   The highest point of the coping of a flat roof;
      (2)   The deck line of a mansard roof; or
      (3)   The average height between the eaves and the ridge for the highest
gable, hip studio or gambrel roof; or
      (4)   Seventy-five percent of the height of an A-frame.
   Where a building is located on sloping terrain, the height shall be measured
from the average finished ground level of the building wall (see Appendix B,
Illustration 1, Building Height Requirements).
   BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required
front setback line (see Appendix B, Illustration 2, Building Line ).
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The City Official(s) designated by the City Manager to
administer and enforce the Building Codes of the city.
   BULX. The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings and
structures and the location of same with respect to one another, including
standards for the height and area of buildings; the location of exterior walls
in relation to lot lines, streets, and other buildings; gross floor area of
buildings in relation to lot area; open space; and the amount of lot area
required for each dwelling unit.
   CABARET. An establishment where live entertainment such as, but not limited
to, comedy or theater, is provided, presented, permitted or performed, which
performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on or
relationship to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as
defined in this section, for observation by or participation of patrons
therein. Also, an establishment which features any of the following: topless
dancers and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers, male and/or female
impersonators or similar entertainers, topless and/or bottomless waiters,
waitresses and/or employees.
   CEMETERY. Land used for the burial of the dead, including columbariums,
crematories and mausoleums.
   CHILD CARE CENTER. A facility, other than a private residence, receiving one
or more preschool or school-age children for care for periods of less than 24
hours a day, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available
to the child. CHILD CARE CENTER or DAY CARE CENTER includes a facility which
provides care for not less than two consecutive weeks, regardless of the number
of hours of care per day. The facility may also be described as a day care
center, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, play group, or drop-in
center.
   CHURCH OR SYNAGOGUE. Any structure wherein persons regularly assemble for
religious activity.
   CIGAR LOUNGE.  Any establishment where patrons smoke cigars and which is
operating under a cigar bar exemption from the state’s smoking prohibition
enacted by Public Act No. 188 of 2009, as amended. This establishment shall not
include any establishment licensed by the state for the consumption of
marihuana in any form.
   CIRCULAR DRIVEWAYS. A vehicle access driveway for residential uses with two
driveway approach access points on the same street or on two different streets
in the case of corner lots.
   CITY. The City of Garden City, Wayne County, Michigan.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Garden City, Wayne County,
Michigan.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Garden City, Wayne County,
Michigan.
   CLINIC, MEDICAL. An establishment where human patients who are not lodged
overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians,
dentists, or similar professionals. A medical clinic may incorporate customary
laboratories and pharmacies incidental to or necessary for its operation or to
the service of its patients, but may not include facilities for overnight
patient care or major surgery.
   CLINIC, VETERINARY. An institution which is licensed by the Michigan
Department of Health to provide for the care, diagnosis, and treatment of sick
or injured animals, including those in need of medical or surgical attention. A
veterinary clinic shall not include customary pens or cages for the overnight
boarding of animals, nor such related facilities as laboratories, testing
services, and offices.
   CLUB or FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. An organization of persons for special
purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, science, agriculture,
literature, politics, or similar activities, but not operated for profit or to
espouse beliefs or further activity that is not in conformance with the
Constitution of the United States or any laws or ordinances. The facilities
owned or used by such organization may be referred to as a CLUB in this
chapter.
   COMMERCIAL USE. The use of property for retail sales or similar businesses
where goods or services are sold or provided directly to the consumer. As used
in this chapter, COMMERCIAL USE shall not include industrial, manufacturing, or
wholesale businesses.
   COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city as organized under Public
Act 207 of 1921, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.581 - 125.590, as amended.
   CONDOMINIUM. A system of separate ownership of individual units in multi-
unit projects according to Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 -
559.272, as amended. In addition to the interest acquired in a particular unit,
each unit owner is also a tenant in common in the underlying fee and in the
spaces and building parts used in common by all the unit owners. For the
purposes of this chapter, CONDOMINIUM terms shall be defined as follows.
      (1)   CONDOMINIUM ACT. Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 -
559.272, as amended.
      (2)   CONDOMINIUM LOT. That portion of the land area of a site
condominium project designed and intended to function similar to a platted
subdivision lot for purposes of determining minimum yard setback requirements
and other requirements set forth in Appendix A, Schedule of Regulations.
      (3)   CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION PLAN. Drawings and information which show
the size, location, area, and boundaries of each condominium unit, building
locations, the nature, location, and approximate size of common elements and
other information required by § 66 of Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§
559.101 - 559.272, as amended.
      (4)   CONDOMINIUM UNIT. That portion of the condominium project designed
and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed
for the condominium project.
      (5)   CONTRACTIBLE CONDOMINIUM. A condominium project from which any
portion of the submitted land or buildings may be withdrawn pursuant to
provisions in the condominium documents and in accordance with this chapter and
the Condominium Act.
      (6)   CONVERSION CONDOMINIUM. A condominium project containing
condominium units, some or all of which were occupied before the establishment
of the condominium project.
      (7)   CONVERTIBLE AREA. A unit or a portion of the common elements of the
condominium project referred to in the condominium documents within which
additional condominium units or general or limited common elements may be
created pursuant to provisions in the condominium documents and in accordance
with this chapter and the Condominium Act.
      (8)   COMMON ELEMENTS. Portions of the condominium project other than the
condominium units.
      (9)   EXPANDABLE CONDOMINIUM. A condominium project to which additional
land may be added, pursuant to express provision in the condominium documents
and in accordance with this chapter and the Condominium Act.
      (10)   GENERAL COMMON ELEMENTS. Common elements other than the limited
common elements, intended for the common use of all co-owners.
      (11)   LIMITED COMMON ELEMENTS. Portions of the common elements reserved
in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all co-owners.
      (12)   MASTER DEED. The condominium document recording the condominium
project, to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the
by-laws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan.
      (13)   SITE CONDOMINIUM PROJECT. A condominium project designed to
function in a similar manner, or as an alternative to a platted subdivision. A
residential site condominium project shall be considered as equivalent to a
platted subdivision for purposes of regulation in this chapter.
   CONGREGATE HOUSING. See HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY as defined in this section.
   CONTRACTOR’S YARD. A site on which a building or construction contractor
stores equipment, tools, vehicles, building materials, and other appurtenances
used in or associated with building or construction. A contractor’s yard may
include outdoor or indoor storage, or a combination of both.
   CONVALESCENT HOME. See NURSING SOME as defined in this section.
   CONVENIENCE STORE. A retail store that is designed and stocked to sell
primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to customers who
purchase only a relatively few items, in contrast to a supermarket. Convenience
stores are designed to attract a large volume of stop-and-go traffic.
   CO-OP or COOPERATIVE HOUSING. A multiple dwelling owned by a corporation
which leases its units to stockholders on a proprietary lease arrangement.
   CURB CUT. The entrance to or exit from a property provided for vehicular
traffic to or from a public or private thoroughfare.
   DECK. A platform, commonly constructed of wood, which is typically attached
to a house, and which is typically used for outdoor leisure activities.
   DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
      (1)   GROSS DENSITY. The number of units per acre of total land being
developed.
      (2)   NET DENSITY. The number of units per acre of land devoted to
residential use.
   DETENTION BASIN. A man-made or natural water collector facility designed to
collect surface water in order to impede its flow and to release the water
gradually, at a rate not greater than that prior to the development of the
property, onto natural or man-made outlets.
   DEVELOPMENT. The construction of a new building, reconstruction of an
existing building, or improvement of a structure on a parcel or lot, the
relocation of an existing building to another lot, or the improvement of open
land for a new use.
   DISTRIBUTION CENTER. A use which typically involves both warehouse and
office/ administration functions, where short and/or long term storage takes
place in connection with the distribution operations of a wholesale or retail
supply business.
   DRIVE-IN. A business establishment so designed that its operation involves
providing a service or a product to patrons while they are in their cars,
rather than within a building or structure.
   DRIVE-THROUGH. A business establishment whose method of operation involves
the delivery of a product or service directly to a customer inside a motor
vehicle, typically through a window or other appurtenance to a building.
   DWELLING. Any building, or part thereof, containing sleeping, kitchen, and
bathroom facilities designed for and occupied by one family. In no case shall a
travel trailer, motor home, automobile, tent or other portable building not
defined as a recreational vehicle be considered a dwelling. In the case of
mixed occupancy where a building is occupied in part as a dwelling unit, the
part so occupied shall be deemed a dwelling unit for the purposes of this
chapter.
      (1)   DWELLING, ACCESSORY APARTMENT. A dwelling unit that is accessory to
and typically contained within a conventional single-family dwelling, and which
is occupied by persons related to the occupant of the principal residence by
blood, marriage or legal adoption, or domestic servants or gratuitous guests.
An accessory apartment commonly has its own kitchen, bath, living area,
sleeping area, and usually a separate entrance. May also be referred to as an
in-law apartment or granny flat.
      (2)   DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, built in a factory to HUD
Title 6 standards and transportable in one or more sections, which is built
upon a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent
foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained in the
structure as defined and regulated in the Mobile Home Commission Act, PA 96 of
1987, as amended. Recreational vehicles as described and regulated in this
section shall not be considered MANUFACTURED HOME DWELLINGS for the purpose of
this chapter.
      (3)   DWELLING, MODULAR.  A building or portion of a building designed
and constructed for long-term residential use as a dwelling which is secured
permanently to a foundation on land owned by the same owner of the modular
dwelling and not located in a Manufactured Home Park. The modular dwelling
shall also be characterized by all of the following.
         (a)   The structure is produced and substantially assembled in a
factory in accordance with City of Garden City building code standards.
         (b)   The structure is designed to be transported to the site in a
nearly complete form, where it is placed on a foundation and connected to
utilities.
         (c)   The structure is designed to be used as either an independent
building or as a module to be combined with other elements to form a complete
building on the site.
      (4)   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building designed for and occupied by
three or more families living independently, with separate housekeeping,
cooking, and bathroom facilities for each. Examples of multiple-family
dwellings units include those commonly known as apartments, which are defined
as follows.
         (a)   APARTMENT. An attached dwelling unit with party walls, contained
in a building with other apartment units which are commonly reached off of a
common stair, landing or walkway. Apartments are typically rented by the
occupants. Apartment buildings often may have a central heating system and
other central utility connections. Apartments typically do not have their own
yard space. Apartments are also commonly known as garden apartments or flats.
         (b)   EFFICIENCY UNIT or STUDIO APARTMENT. A type of multiple-family
or apartment unit consisting of one principal room, plus bathroom and kitchen
facilities, hallways, closets, and/or a dining alcove located directly off the
principal room.
      (5)   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY OR SINGLE-FAMILY. An independent, detached
residential dwelling designed for and used or held ready for use by one family
only.
      (6)   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED or TOWNHOUSE. An attached single-
family dwelling unit with party walls, designed as part of a series of three or
more dwellings, with its own front door which opens to the outdoors at ground
level, its own basement, and typically, with its own utility connections and
front and rear yards. Townhouses are sometimes known as row houses.
      (7)   DWELLING, SITE BUILT: A dwelling unit which is substantially built,
constructed, assembled, and finished on the premises which are intended to
serve as its final location. Site built dwelling units shall include dwelling
units constructed of pre-cut materials and panelized wall, roof and floor
section when such sections require substantial assembly and finishing on the
premises which are intended to serve as its final location.
      (8)   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY or DUPLEX. A detached building, designed
exclusively for and occupied by two families living independently of each
other, with separate housekeeping, cooking, and bathroom facilities for each.
Also known as a duplex dwelling.
      (9)   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms, along with bathroom and kitchen
facilities, designed as a self-contained unit for occupancy by one family for
living, cooking, and sleeping purposes.
   EARTH-SHELTERED HOME. A building constructed partially below the surrounding
average finished grade that is designed to conserve energy and is intended to
be used as a single-family dwelling.
   EASEMENT. A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of
private land for a public or quasi-public purpose, and within which the owner
of the property shall not erect any permanent structures.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. The effective date of any amendments to this chapter if the
amendments created a nonconforming situation.
   ENGINEER, CITY. The CITY ENGINEER is the person or firm authorized to advise
the City Administration, City Council, and Planning Commission on drainage,
grading, paving, storm water management and control, utilities, and other
related site engineering and civil engineering issues. The CITY ENGINEER may be
a consultant or an employee of the city.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The person or persons with the responsibility for
enforcing and administering requirements of applicable sections of this
chapter. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL may be referred to as the Zoning
Administrator, Building Official, or other appropriate party. Such titles do
not refer to a specific individual, but generally to the office, department, or
city official(s) most commonly associated with the administration of the
regulation being referenced.
   ERECTED.  Any physical change on a site, including construction,
reconstruction, or alteration of buildings or structures thereon. Excavation,
fill, drainage, and the like shall be considered part of erection.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance
by public or quasi- public utilities or municipal departments or city-certified
cable television companies or underground, surface or overhead gas, steam,
electrical fuel or water systems for the purposes of transmission,
distribution, collection, communication, supply, or disposal; including towers,
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms and
police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar equipment, which are
necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal
departments for the general health, safety, and welfare of the public.
Essential services shall not include storage yards, sales or business offices,
or commercial buildings or activities, or wireless telecommunication facilities
that are solely used for private commercial purposes.
   EXCAVATION. The removal or movement of soil, sand, stone, gravel, or fill
dirt on or from any parcel except for common household gardening, farming, and
general ground cars.
   EXEMPTION. An exclusion from the normal Zoning rules and regulations for the
purposes of permitting particular uses or structures which are considered
essential or appropriate in certain locations or under certain conditions. A
variance is not required for uses or structures which are permitted because of
an exception.
   FAMILY.
      (1)   One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption,
plus up to a total of three additional persons not so related, who are either
domestic servants or gratuitous guests, occupying a single dwelling unit and
living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit.
      (2)   A collective number of individuals living together in one dwelling
unit, whose relationship is of a continuing, non-transient, domestic character,
and who are cooking and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit. This
definition shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority,
association, lodge, coterie, organization or group of students or other
individuals whose domestic relationship is of a transitory or seasonal nature
or for an anticipated duration of a school term or terms or other similar
determinable period.
   FARM. A parcel of land containing at least ten acres, which is used for gain
in the raising of agricultural products, livestock, poultry, and dairy
products, including necessary farm structures within the prescribed limits and
the storage of related equipment used. A FARM shall exclude the raising of fur-
bearing animals, riding academies, livery or boarding stables, and dog kennels.
   FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. A private home in which one but less than seven minor
children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than 24
hours a day, attended by other than a parent or legal guardian, except children
related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption.
Family day care includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for
more than four weeks during the calendar year.
   FENCE. An artificially constructed barrier of wood, wire, metal, or any
other material or combination of materials, used to prevent or control
entrance, confine within, or mark a boundary.
   FILL or FILLING. The deposit or dumping of any matter onto or into the
ground, except for common household gardening, farming, and general ground
care.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The total area of a building measured by taking the
outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy
or storage.
   FLOOR AREA, NET. See FLOOR AREA, USABLE RESIDENTIAL and FLOOR AREA USABLE
NONRESIDENTIAL as defined in this section.
   FLOOR AREA, USABLE RESIDENTIAL. The gross floor area minus areas in
basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, and enclosed or unenclosed
porches.
   FLOOR AREA, USABLE NONRESIDENTIAL. Eighty percent of the gross floor area.
   FORTUNE TELLING AND SIMILAR USES. Telling fortunes, forecasting of future
events or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by the
ordinary process of knowledge, by means of any occult or psychic power, faculty
or force, including, but not limited to clairvoyance, clairaudience,
cartomancy, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other such reading, medium-ship,
seer-ship, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind-reading
telepathy, or other craft, art, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism,
magnetized article or substance, crystal gazing, or magic of any kind or
nature.
   FOSTER CARE HOME. See STATE LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY as defined in this
section.
   FOSTER CHILD. A child unrelated to a family by blood or adoption with whom
he or she lives for the purposes of care and/or education.
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. See CLUB as defined in this section.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building used for the parking or storage of
motor vehicles owned and used solely by the occupants of the building to which
it is accessory. Private garages shall not have public repair facilities. A
private garage may be either attached to or detached from the principal
structure.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. See AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE as defined in this section.
   GAS STATION. See AUTOMOBILE FILLING STATION and AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION
as defined in this section.
   GRADE. The ground elevation, established for the purpose of regulating the
number of stories or height of a building. The building grade shall be the
level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade
is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by
averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the building.
   GREENBELT. See LANDSCAPING as defined in this section.
   GROUP DAY CARE HOME. A private home which more than six but no more than 12
minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours
a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an
adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. GROUP DAY CARE HOME
includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four
weeks during a calendar year.
   GROUP HOME. See STATE LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY as defined in this
section.
   GYM or GYMNASIUM. A room or building equipped for gymnastics, exercise or
sport.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND CHEMICALS. All highly flammable materials or
products which may react to cause a fire or explosion hazard; or which because
of their toxicity, flammability, or liability for explosion, render fire
fighting abnormally dangerous or difficult. This also includes flammable
liquids or gases which are chemically unstable and which may spontaneously form
explosive compounds or undergo spontaneous reactions of explosive violence or
with sufficient evolution of heat to be a fire hazard. Hazardous materials and
chemicals shall include flammable solids, corrosive liquids, radioactive
materials, oxidizing materials, potentially explosive chemicals, highly toxic
materials, and poisonous gases that have a degree of hazard rating in the
health, flammability or reactivity of 3 or 4 as ranked by NFPA 704 and as
adopted by the city.
   HAZARDOUS USES. All uses which involve the storage, sale, manufacture, or
processing of materials and/or chemicals which are defined as hazardous
materials and chemicals in this chapter. These uses include, but are not
limited to, all high hazard uses listed in the current adopted Building Code of
the city.
   HEALTH OR EXERCISE CLUB. A building or portion of a building designed and
equipped for the conduct of sports, physical exercise, organized classes,
martial arts, personal training, or other customary and usual recreational
activities that occur in an entirely enclosed building. Such uses are operated
for profit or not-for-profit, and which can be open only to bona fide members
and guests of the organization or open to the public for a fee. Such uses may
also include saunas, locker rooms, showers, or personal services. Such uses
shall not include court sports facilities with spectator seating for organized
sporting events or activities that utilize firearms such as a gun range.
   HIGHWAY. See STREET as defined in this section.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or profession conducted entirely within a
dwelling by the inhabitant thereof, where the use is clearly incidental to the
principal use of the dwelling as a residence.
   HOOKAH CLUB. Any establishment where patrons share shisha, tobacco or
another legal inhalant from a hookah, water pipe or similar device, which is
either shared communally or from one placed at each table or bar, and which is
operating under a tobacco specialty retail store exemption from the state's
smoking prohibition enacted by Public Act No. 188 of 2009, as amended. This
establishment shall not include any establishment licensed by the state for the
consumption marihuana in any form.
   HOSPITAL. An institution which is 1icensed by the Michigan Department of
Health to provide in- patient and out-patient medical and surgical services for
the sick and injured, and which may include such related facilities as
laboratories, medical testing services, central service facilities, and staff
offices.
   HOSPITAL, VETERINARY. An institution which is licensed by the Michigan
Department of Health to provide for the care, diagnosis, and treatment of sick
or injured animals, including those in need of medical or surgical attention. A
veterinary hospital may include pens or cages for the overnight boarding of
animals and such related facilities as laboratories, testing services, and
offices.
   HOTEL. A building occupied as a more or less temporary abiding place for
individuals who are lodged with or without meals in rooms consisting of a
minimum of one bedroom and a bath, occupied for hire, and which typically
provides hotel services such as maid service, the furnishing and laundering of
linens, telephone and secretarial or desk service, the use of furniture, a
dining room and general kitchen, and meeting rooms.
   HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY. A facility other than a hospital, hotel, or nursing
home, which provides room and board to non-transient persons primarily 60 years
of age or older. Housing for the elderly may include the following.
      (1)   CONGREGATE HOUSING. A type of semi-independent housing facility
containing congregate kitchen, dining, and living areas, but with separate
sleeping rooms. Such facilities typically provide special support services,
such as transportation and limited medical care.
      (2)   DEPENDENT HOUSING FACILITIES. Facilities such as nursing homes
which are designed for older persons who need a wide range of health and
support services, including personal nursing care.
      (3)   ELDERLY HOUSING COMPLEX. A building or group of buildings
containing dwellings where the occupancy is restricted to persons 60 years of
age or older or couples in which either the husband or wife is 70 years of age
or older.
      (4)   SENIOR APARTMENTS. Multiple-family dwelling units occupied by
persons 55 years of age or older.
   ICE CREAM PARLOR. A retail establishment whose business is limited to the
sale of ice cream, frozen desserts, dessert items, candies and confections, and
beverages in a ready-to-eat state. Businesses serving hot dogs, hamburgers,
salads, pizza, hot or cold sandwiches, or similar entree items are not
considered ICE CREAM PARLORS for the purposes of this chapter.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface that has been compacted or covered with a
layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
Types of materials include asphalt, concrete, gravel and any other surface with
a water infiltration rate of 0.01 inches per hour or less.
   INDUSTRY, HEAVY. A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of
materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials or
products, or a use engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes using
flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that
potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
   INDUSTRY, LIGHT. A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from
previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage,
sales, and distribution of the products, but excluding basic industrial
processing.
   INGRESS AND EGRESS. Generally used in reference to a driveway which allows
vehicles to enter or leave a parcel of property, or to a sidewalk which allows
pedestrians to enter or leave a parcel of property, a building, or another
location.
   JUNK. Any motor vehicles, machinery, appliances, products or merchandise
with parts missing, or other scrap materials that are damaged, deteriorated, or
are in a condition which prevents their use for the purpose for which the
product was manufactured.
   JUNKYARD or SALVAGE YARD. An area where waste and used or secondhand
materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled,
or handled, including, but not limited to junk, scrap iron, metals, paper,
rags, tires, bottles and automobiles.
   KENNEL. Any lot or premises an which three or more dogs, cats, or other
domestic animals six months or older are kept, either permanently or
temporarily, either for sale, breeding, boarding, training, hobby, protection,
or pets, subject to the regulations set forth herein regulating private and
commercial kennels.
   LANDFILL. A tract of land that is used to collect and dispose of solid waste
as defined and regulated in Public Act 641 of 1979, as amended.
   LANDSCAPING. The treatment of the ground surface with live plant materials
such as, but not limited to, grass, ground cover, trees, shrubs, vines, and
other live plant material. In addition, a landscape design may include other
decorative, man-made materials, such as wood chips, crushed stone, boulders, or
mulch. Structural features, such as fountains, pools, statues, and beaches
shall also be considered a part of landscaping, but only if provided in
combination with live plant material. Artificial plant materials shall not be
counted toward meeting the requirements for landscaping. Various landscaping-
related terms are defined as follows.
      (1)   BERM. A continuous, raised earthen mound with a flattened top and
sloped sides, capable of supporting live landscaping materials, and with a
height and width that complies with the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   GRASS. Any of a family of plants with narrow leaves normally grown
as permanent lawns in Wayne County.
      (3)   GREENBELT. A strip of land of definite width and location reserved
for the planting of a combination of shrubs, trees, and ground cover to serve
as an obscuring screen or buffer for noise or visual enhancement, in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter.
      (4)   GROUND COVER. Low-growing plants that form a dense, extensive
growth after one complete growing season, and tend to prevent weeds and soil
erosion.
      (5)   HEDGE. A row of closely planted shrubs or low-growing trees which
commonly form a continuous visual screen, boundary, or fence.
      (6)   HYDRO-SEEDING. A method of planting grass in which a mixture of the
seed, water, and mulch is mechanically sprayed over the surface of the ground.
      (7)   INTERIOR PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING. A landscaped area located in the
interior of a parking lot in such a manner as to improve the safety of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic, guide traffic movement, and improve the
appearance of the parking area.
      (8)   MULCH. A layer of wood chips, dry leaves, straw, hay, plastic, or
other materials placed on the surface of the soil around plants to retain
moisture, prevent weeds from growing, hold the soil in place, or aid plant
growth.
      (9)   NURSE GRASS. Any of a variety of rapidly-growing annual or
perennial rye grasses used to quickly establish ground cover to prevent dust or
soil erosion.
      (10)   SCREEN or SCREENING. A wall, wood fencing, or combination of
plantings of sufficient height, length, and opacity to form a visual barrier.
If the screen is composed of non-living material, the material shall be
compatible with materials used in construction of the main building, but in no
case shall include wire fencing.
      (11)   SHRUB. A self-supporting, deciduous or evergreen woody plant,
normally branched near the base, bushy, and less than 15 feet in height.
      (12)   SOD. An area of grass-covered surface soil held together by matted
roots.
      (13)   TREE. A self-supporting woody, deciduous or evergreen plant with a
well-defined central trunk or stem which normally grows to a mature height of
15 feet or more.
         (a)   DECIDUOUS TREE. A variety of tree that has foliage that is shed
at the end of the growing season.
         (b)   EVERGREEN TREE. A variety of tree that has foliage that persists
and remains green throughout the year.
      (14)   ORNAMENTAL TREE. A deciduous tree which is typically grown because
of its shape, flowering characteristics, or other attractive features, and
which grows to a mature height of 25 feet or less.
      (15)   SHADE TREE. For the purposes of this chapter, a SHADE TREE is a
deciduous tree which has a mature crown spread of 15 feet or greater, and has a
trunk with at least five feet of clear stem at maturity.
      (16)   VINE. A plant with a flexible stem supported by climbing, twining,
or creeping along the surface, and which may require physical support to reach
maturity.
   LIGHTING, ROPE. Lighting that is primarily used as a decorative lighting
fixture, featuring small light bulbs linked together and encased in a clear,
flexible material to create a rope.
   LIGHTING, STRING. A series of lights located along a coated wire (e.g.,
holiday lights).
   LIGHTING, TUBE. A gas-filled tubing which, when subjected to an electric
current, becomes luminescent in a color characteristic of the particular gas
used (e.g., neon, argon, xenon, and similar gases). The tube is commonly bent
into various forms for use as decoration and/or signage. Common fluorescent
light bulbs are not considered tube lighting.
   LOADING SPACE. A space which is safely and conveniently located on the same
lot as the building or buildings being served, for the temporary parking of
delivery vehicles while loading and unloading merchandise and materials.
   LOT or ZONING LOT. For the purposes of enforcing this chapter, a lot is
defined as a piece of land under single ownership or control that is at least
sufficient in size to meet the minimum requirements for use, coverage, area,
setbacks, access, and open space as required herein. Single ownership may
include ownership by an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an
incorporated association, joint tenancy, or any similar entity. A lot shall
have frontage on a dedicated road or, if permitted by the regulations set forth
herein, on an approved private road. A lot may consist of the following.
      (1)   A single lot of record.
      (2)   A portion of a lot of record.
      (3)   A combination of complete lots of record, or portion thereof.
      (4)   A condominium lot.
      (5)   A piece of land described by metes and bounds.
   LOT AREA, GROSS. The net lot area plus one-half of the area of any public
right-of-way area or private road easement immediately adjacent to or abutting
the let.
   LOT AREA, NET. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot,
exclusive of any abutting public street right-of-way or private road easements,
or the area of any lake. The NET LOT AREA shall be used in determining
compliance with minimum lot area standards.
   LOT, CONTIGUOUS. Lots adjoining each other.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting on and at the intersection of two or more
streets. For the purposes of this definition, the street lot line shall be the
line separating the lot from the street or road right-of- way.
   LOT COVERAGE. The part or percentage of the lot that is occupied by
buildings, structures and impervious surfaces.
   LOT DEPTHS. The horizontal distance between the front street line and rear
lot line, measured along the median between the side lot lines.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE or THROUGH LOT. A lot other than a corner lot having
frontage on two more or less parallel streets. In the case of a row of double
frontage lots, one street shall be designated as the front street for all lots
in the plat and in the request for a zoning compliance permit. If there are
existing buildings in the same block fronting on one or both of the streets,
the required minimum front yard setback shall be observed on those streets
where buildings presently front.
   LOT, FLAG. A lot which is located behind other parcels or lots fronting on a
public road, but which has a narrow extension to provide access to the public
road.
   LOT, INTERIOR. Any lot other than a corner lot with only one lot line
fronting on a street.
   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot are as follows.
      (1)   FRONT LOT LINE. In the case of a lot not located on a corner, the
line separating the lot from the public or private road right of way. In the
case of a corner lot or double frontage lot, the FRONT LOT LINE shall be that
line that separates the lot from the right-of-way for the road which is
designated as the front on the plat, or which is designated as the front on the
site plan review application or request for a building permit, subject to
approval by the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator. On a flag lot, the
front lot line shall be the interior lot line most parallel to and nearest the
street from which access is obtained.
      (2)   REAR LOT LINE. Ordinarily, that lot line which is opposite and most
distant from the front lot line. In the case of irregular, triangular, wedge-
shaped, or lots that are pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an
imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet in
length, lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. In
cases in which the rear lot line definition can not be easily applied, the
Zoning Administrator shall designate the rear lot line.
      (3)   SIDE LOT LINE. Any lot line other than the front or rear lot lines.
A SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from a road right-of-way is a SIDE STREET LOT
LINE. A SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from another lot or lots is an INTERIOR
SIDE LOT LINE. In cases in which the side lot line definition cannot be easily
applied, the Zoning Administrator shall designate the SIDE LOT LINE(S).
   LOT OF RECORD. A parcel of land, the dimensions and configuration of which
are shown on a subdivision plat recorded in the offices of the County Register
of Deeds, or accepted by the County Department of Equalization, or a lot or
parcel described by metes and bounds, and accuracy of which is attested to by a
land surveyor registered and licensed in the State of Michigan, and likewise
recorded with the County Register of Deeds. A LOT OF RECORD may also be
identified by attachment to a sidwell or tax parcel identification number.
   LOT WIDTH. The straight line distance between the side lot lines, measured
at the two points where the minimum front yard setback line intersects the side
lot lines (see Appendix B, Illustration 4, Lot Width and Setback). At no time
shall the measured lot width at the street line be less than half of the
required lot width.
   MAIN ACCESS DRIVE. Any private street designed to provide access from a
pubic street or road to a mobile home park, apartment or condominium complex,
or other private property development.
   MANUFACTURED HOME.  See DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME, as defined in this
section.
   MANUFACTURED HOME LOT. An area within a manufactured home park which is
designated for the exclusive use of a specific manufactured home.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A parcel or tract of land under the control of a
person upon which three or more manufactured homes are located on a continual
non-recreational basis, and which is offered to the public for that purpose,
regardless of whether a charge is made thereof, together with any building,
structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use
incident to the occupancy of a mobile home, subject to conditions set forth in
the Manufactured Home Commission rules and Public Act 419 of 1976, being
M.C.L.A. Sec. 125.2301 et seq., as amended.
   MARGINAL ACCESS ROAD. See SECONDARY ACCESS DRIVE as defined in this section.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT or UNLICENSED MASSAGE PARLOR. A place where
manipulated massage or manipulated exercises are practiced for pay upon the
human body by any unlicensed individual using mechanical, therapeutic, or
bathing devices or techniques. A MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT may include, but is not
limited to, establishments commonly known as massage parlors, sauna baths,
turkish bathhouses, and steam baths. MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS, as defined herein,
shall not include properly licensed hospitals, medical clinics or nursing
homes, therapeutic massage facilities, or beauty salons or barber shops in
which massages are administered only to the scalp, the face, the neck or the
shoulders.
   MASSAGE THERAPIST. An individual specifically trained and licensed pursuant
to Public Act 471 of 2008, as amended.
      (1)   THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE. A method by which a person utilizes his or her
hands, feet or an instrument for treating the superficial parts of a customer's
body for medical, hygienic, relaxation or therapeutic purposes by rubbing,
stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding or vibrating.
   MASTER PLAN. A document which is prepared under the guidance of the City
Planning Commission and consists of graphic and written materials which
indicate the general location for streets, parks, schools public buildings and
all physical development of the city. Specifically, it refers to the MASTER
PLAN adopted by the Planning Commission in September, 1980, as amended.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA CLINIC AND/OR COUNSELING CENTER.  A facility for the
assessment and certification of clients under a physician's care, to obtain a
medical marijuana qualified user card in accordance with the State of Michigan
Initiated Law 1 of 2008, being M.C.L.A. §§ 333.26423 et seq., legislation
adopted pursuant thereto, and subsequent amendments. Product, including seeds
and plants, not to be dispensed, kept, or stored on the premises.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITY. Any site, facility, location, use, cooperative
or business, including vending machines at or from which marijuana, as that
term is defined in the Medical Marijuana Facilities Licensing Act, Public Act
281 of 2016 (M.C.L.A. 333.27101 et seq.) is distributed, compensated,
exchanged, processed, delivered, given away, or cultivated, including by any
primary caregiver who has been issued and possesses a registry identification
card also as provided in Initiated Law 1 of 2008 (M.C.L.A. 333.26423 et seq.)
for a qualifying patient who has been issued and possesses a registry
identification card as provided in Initiated Law 1 of 2008, or any of the
following facilities:
      (1)   MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROW OPERATION. A commercial facility licensed
under Public Act 281 of 2016 that cultivates, dries, trims, or cures marijuana
for sale to a processor or provisioning center. A medical marijuana grow
operation shall be further classified as a Class A, Class B, or Class C grow
facility. Class A grow operations are defined as facilities that grow up to 500
marijuana plants, Class B grow operations are defined as facilities that grow
up to 1,000 marijuana plants, and Class C grow operations are defined as
facilities that grow up to 1,500 marijuana plants.
      (2)   MEDICAL MARIJUANA PROCESSING FACILITY. A commercial facility
licensed under Public Act 281 of 2016 that purchases marijuana from a licensed
grow operation and extracts resin from the marijuana or creates a marijuana-
infused product for sale and transfer in packaged form to a provisioning
center.
      (3)   MEDICAL MARIJUANA SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITY. A commercial facility
licensed under Public Act 281 of 2016 that receives marijuana from a licensed
grow operation, licensed processing facility, or licensed caregiver, tests it
for contaminants and for tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids, returns
the test results, and may return the marijuana to the marijuana facility.
      (4)   MEDICAL MARIJUANA SECURE TRANSPORTER. A commercial facility
licensed under Public Act 281 of 2016 that stores marijuana and transports
marijuana between marijuana facilities for a fee.
      (5)   MEDICAL MARIJUANA PROVISIONING CENTER. A commercial facility
licensed under Public Act 281 of 2016 that purchases marijuana from a licensed
grower or processor and sells, supplies, or provides marijuana to registered
qualifying patients, directly, or through the patients' registered primary
caregivers. The term "provisioning center" shall include any commercial
property where marijuana is sold at retail to registered qualifying patients or
registered primary caregivers. A noncommercial location used by a primary
caregiver to assist a qualifying patient connected to the caregiver through the
department's marijuana registration process in accordance with the Michigan
Medical Marijuana Act is not a provisioning center for purposes of this
chapter.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROWING CENTERS. Any site, facility, location, use,
cooperative or business, including vending machines at or from which marijuana,
as that term is defined in Initiated Law 1 of 2008 (M.C.L.A. 333.26423 et seq.)
is distributed, compensated, exchanged, processed, delivered, given away, or
cultivated to or for an individual that is a qualifying patient who has been
issued and possesses a registry identification card as provided in Initiated
Law 1 of 2008 or a primary caregiver who has been issued and possesses a
registry identification card also as provided in Initiated Law 1 of 2008.
   MINI-WAREHOUSE. A building or group of buildings, each of which contains
several individual storage units, each with a separate door and lock, and which
can be leased on an individual basis. MINI- WAREHOUSES are typically contained
within a fenced, controlled-access compound.
   MORTUARY or FUNERAL HOME. An establishment where the dead are prepared for
burial or cremation, and where wakes or funerals may be hold.
   MOTEL. A building or group of buildings occupied as a more or less temporary
abiding place for individuals who are lodged with or without meals in rooms
consisting of a minimum of a bedroom and bath, occupied for hire, in which
provision is not usually made for cooking within the rooms, and which provides
customary motel services such as maid service, linen service, telephone and/or
desk service, and the use of furniture. MOTELS typically provide exterior
entrances and on-site parking for each unit. A MOTEL may also include
conference room or banquet facilities, an attached dining room, and/or an
unattached standard restaurant.
   NATURAL FEATURES. Soils, wetlands, floodplain, water bodies and channels,
topography, trees and other types of vegetative cover, and geologic formations.
   NONCONFORMING BUILDING. A building or portion thereof which was lawfully in
existence at the effective date of this chapter, or amendments thereto, that
does not meet the limitations on building size, location on a lot, or other
regulations for the district in which the building is located.
   NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot which was lawfully in existence at the effective
date of this chapter, or amendments thereto, that does not meet the minimum
area or lot dimensional requirements of the district in which the lot is
located.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN.  A sign which was lawfully in existence on the effective
date of this chapter, or amendments thereto, that does not conform to one or
more regulations set forth in this chapter.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A use which was lawfully in existence at the effective
date of this chapter, or amendment thereto, and which does not now conform to
the use regulations of this chapter for the zoning district in which it is now
located.
   NONCONFORMITY. Any structure, lot, or use of any structure, lot, or land,
which does not conform at the time of adoption of this chapter or any amendment
thereto, to the regulations for the district in which it is located.
   NUISANCE. Any offensive, annoying, or disturbing practice or object which
prevents the free use of one's property, or which renders its ordinary use or
physical occupation uncomfortable. NUISANCE commonly involves continuous or
recurrent acts which give offense to the senses, violate the laws of decency,
obstruct reasonable and comfortable use of property, or endangers life and
health.
   NURSERY, DAY NURSERY, or NURSERY SCHOOL. See CHILD CARE CENTER as defined in
this section.
   NURSERY, PLANT MATERIAL. A space, building, and/or structure, or combination
thereof, where live trees, shrubs, and other plants used for gardening and
landscaping are propagated, stored, and/or offered for sale on the premises.
   NURSING HOME, CONVALESCENT HOME or REST HOME. A home for the care of the
aged, infirm, or those suffering from bodily disorders, wherein two or more
persons are housed or lodged and furnished with nursing care. Such facilities
are licensed in accordance with Public Act 139 of 1956, as amended.
   OCCUPANCY, CHANGE OF. A discontinuance of an existing use or tenant and the
substitution of a use of a different kind or class, or the expansion of a use.
   OCCUPIED. Used in any way at the time in question.
   OFFICE. A building or portion of a building wherein services are performed
involving predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical operations.
   OPEN AIR BUSINESS. Any business that is conducted primarily out-of-doors.
Unless otherwise specified herein, OPEN AIR BUSINESS shall include the
following.
      (1)   Retail sales of garden supplies and equipment, including but not
limited to trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil, trellises, and
lawn furniture.
      (2)   Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural products, including
fruits, vegetables, and Christmas trees.
      (3)   Various outdoor recreation uses, including but not limited to
tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts, miniature golf,
golf driving ranges, and amusement parks.
      (4)   Outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools, playground
equipment, and similar uses.
   OPEN SPACE. That part of a zoning lot, including courts and/or yards, which
is open and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, and is accessible to
all residents upon the zoning lot.
   OUTDOOR DISPLAY. The keeping in an unenclosed area, outside the principal
building or structure, of any goods, material, merchandise, automobiles, and/or
vehicles.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE. The keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any goods, material,
merchandise or vehicles (excluding permitted new or used car establishments) in
the same place for more than 24 hours. All storage must be directly related to
principal use of the business and shall not pose a threat to public health and
safety.
   OUTLOT. A parcel of land which is designated as an OUTLOT on the recorded
plat, and which is usually not intended to be used for the same purposes as
other lots in the plat.
   PARCEL. A continuous area, tract or acreage of land that has not been
divided or subdivided according to the provisions of the Subdivision Control
Act and has frontage on a public street.
   PARKING LOT, OFF-STREET. An area within a lot or parcel which provides
vehicular parking spaces along with adequate space for maneuvering, to provide
safe and convenient access for entrance and exit of more than three vehicles.
   PARKING SPACE. An area of definite length and width as designated in this
chapter for parking an automobile or other permitted vehicle, and which is
fully accessible for such purposes.
   PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. A financial guarantee to ensure that specific
improvements, facilities, or work required by this chapter shall be completed
in compliance with the ordinance, regulations and approved plans and
specifications of the development.
   PERSON. An individual, trustee, executor, fiduciary, corporation, firm,
partnership, association, organization or any other legal entity serving as a
unit.
   PERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface that permits full or partial absorption of storm
water with a water infiltration rate greater than 0.01 inches per hour.
   PET. A domesticated dog, cat, bird, gerbil, hamster, guinea pig, turtle,
fish, rabbit, or other similar animal that is commonly available and
customarily kept for pleasure or companionship.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A planning or construction project involving the use of
special zoning requirements and review procedures which are intended to provide
design and regulatory flexibility, so as to encourage innovation in land use
planning and design, and thereby achieve a higher quality of development than
might otherwise be possible.
   PLANNER, CITY. The person or firm designated by the City Council and
Planning Commission to advise the City Council, City Manager, City Planning
Commission, and city staff on planning,
zoning, land use, housing, and other related planning and development issues.
The CITY PLANNER may be a consultant or an employee of the city.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission as organized under Public Act
207 of 1921, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.581 - 125.590, as amended.
   POOL OR BILLIARD HALL. An establishment wherein the substantial or
significant portion of all usable floor area is devoted to the use of pool or
billiard tables.
   PRE-RELEASE ADJUSTMENT CENTER. An establishment which provides shelter,
supervisory and social services to convicts in a pre-release parole preparation
program, as authorized by the State Corrections commission or the Federal
Bureau of Prisons.
   PRIVATE STREET or ROAD. See ROAD as defined in this section.
   PROPERTY LINE. The line separating a piece of property from the street
right-of-way, and the lines separating a parcel of property from the parcels
next to it.
   PUBLIC LODGING HOUSE. A commercial establishment or place in which five or
more members of the public, whether travelers or not, are charged for or are
provided sleeping quarters in the form of cots or beds in the same room.
   PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL. Refers generally to the departments or persons who
perform police, fire fighting, and other public safety functions for the city.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any persons, firm, corporation, municipal department or
board duly authorized to furnish to the public, under government regulations,
electricity, gas, steam, communications services, cable television services,
transportation services, water, sewer service, or sewage treatment.
      RECREATION FACILITY. An establishment which provides courts, fields,
tracks, lanes, alleys, pools or other specialized sport facilities, and which
may include spectator seating in conjunction with the sports facilities. Such
uses shall not include activities that utilize firearms such as a gun range.
      (1)   INDOOR RECREATION FACILITY. Any RECREATION FACILITY where all
sports facilities are completely enclosed within a building or structure.
      (2)   OUTDOOR RECREATION FACILITY. Any RECREATION FACILITY where all or a
portion of the sports facilities are not completely enclosed within a building
or structure.
      (3)   PRIVATE RECREATION FACILITY. Any RECREATION FACILITY owned and/or
operated by a non-government entity affiliated private individual, business,
club or organization as a for-profit or non-profit facility.
      (4)   PUBLIC RECREATION FACILITY. Any RECREATION FACILITY owned and/or
operated by a government entity.
   RECREATIONAL LAND. Any public or privately owned lot or land that is
utilized for recreation. activities such as, but not limited to, sports fields,
camping, swimming, picnicking, hiking, and nature trails.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES. Shall include the following.
      (1)   BOAT and BOAT TRAILER. Shall include boats, floats, rafts, canoes,
plus the normal equipment to transport them on the highway.
      (2)   FOLDING TENT TRAILER. A folding structure, mounted on wheels and
designed for travel and vacation use.
      (3)   MOTOR HOME. A recreational vehicle intended for temporary human
habitation, sleeping, and/or eating, mounted upon a chassis with wheels and
capable of being moved from place to place under its own power. MOTOR HOMES
generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities.
      (4)   PICKUP CAMPER. A structure designed to be mounted on a pickup or
truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a
temporary dwelling during the process of travel, recreational, and vacation
uses.
      (5)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A portable vehicle on a chassis, which is designed
to be used as a temporary dwelling during travel, recreational, and vacation
uses, and which may be identified as a TRAVEL TRAILER by the manufacturer.
TRAVEL TRAILERS generally include self-contained sanitary, water, and
electrical facilities.
      (6)   OTHER RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Includes snowmobiles, jet skis, all-
terrain or special terrain vehicles, plus the normal equipment used to
transport them on the highway.
   RECOGNIZABLE AND SUBSTANTIAL BENEFIT. A clear benefit, both to the ultimate
users of the property in question and to the community, which would reasonably
be expected to accrue, taking into consideration the reasonably foreseeable
detriments of the proposed development and uses. Such benefits may include
long-term protection or preservation of natural resources and natural features,
historical features, or architectural features; or elimination of or reduction
in the degree of nonconformity in a nonconforming use or structure.
   RECYCLING CENTER. A facility at which used material is separated and
processed prior to shipment to others who will use the materials to manufacture
new products.
   RECYCLING COLLECTION STATION. A facility for the collection and temporary
storage of recoverable resources, prior to shipment to a recycling center for
processing.
   RESTAURANT. Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of food
and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose method of
operation is characteristic of a fast-food restaurant, a standard restaurant, a
bar/lounge, or combination thereof, defined as follows. When characteristics of
two or more restaurant types are contained within a single business
establishment, the requirements for each type of restaurant must be satisfied
proportionate to the amount of floor area used by each type of restaurant
within the establishment.
      (1)   BAR or TAVERN. A type of restaurant which is operated primarily for
the dispensing of alcoholic beverages, although the sale of prepared food or
snacks may also be permitted. If a BAR, LOUNGE or TAVERN is part of a large
dining facility, it shall be defined as that part of the structure so
designated or operated.
      (2)   RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD. A fast-food establishment whose method of
operation involves minimum waiting for delivery of ready-to-consume food to the
customer at a counter or cafeteria line, or in the customer’s motor vehicle for
consumption at the counter where it is served, or at tables, booths, or stands
inside the structure or out, or for consumption off the premises, but not in a
motor vehicle at the site. Carry-out, drive-in, drive-through and delivery
restaurants are different types of FAST-FOOD RESTAURANTS.
         (a)   RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT. A fast-food restaurant whose method of
operation involves sale of food, beverages, and/or frozen desserts in
disposable or edible containers or wrappers in a ready-to-consume state for
consumption off the premises.
         (b)   RESTAURANT, DELIVERY. A fast-food restaurant whose method of
operation involves sale of food, beverages, and/or frozen desserts in
disposable or edible containers or wrappers in a ready-to-consume state for
consumption off the premises. No drive-in, drive-through, counter or other
customer accessible service area is available on the DELIVERY RESTAURANT site.
Food is delivered to customers after the customer telephonically transmits an
order; customers do not visit the DELIVERY RESTAURANT site to obtain food.
         (c)   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN. A fast-food restaurant whose method of
operation involves delivery of prepared food so as to allow its consumption in
a motor vehicle or elsewhere on the premises, but outside of an enclosed
building.
         (d)   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH. A fast-food restaurant whose method
of operation involves the delivery of the prepared food to the customer in a
motor vehicle, typically through a drive-through window, for consumption off of
the premises.
      (3)   RESTAURANT, STANDARD. A business establishment whose method of
operation involves one of the following.
         (a)   The delivery of prepared food by waiters or waitresses to
customers seated at tables within a completely enclosed building.
         (b)   The prepared food is acquired by customers at a cafeteria line
and is subsequently consumed by the customers at tables within a completely
enclosed building.
         (c)   Carry-out orders may also be filled by a standard restaurant
provided that additional parking facilities are provided for the carry-out
facilities consistent with the requirements for carry-out restaurants.
   RETENTION BASIN. A pond, pool or basin used for the permanent storage of
storm water runoff.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The strip of land over which an easement exists to allow
facilities such as streets, roads, highways, and power lines to be built.
   ROAD. Any public or private thoroughfare or right-of-way other than a public
or private alley, dedicated to or designed for travel and access to any land,
lot or parcel whether designated as a road, avenue, highway, boulevard, drive
lane, place, court, or any similar designation. Various types of roads are
defined as follows.
      (1)   ARTERIAL ROAD. A road which carries high volumes of traffic and
serves as an avenue for circulation of traffic into, out of, or around the
city. An arterial road may also be a major thoroughfare.
      (2)   COLLECTOR STREET. A road whose principal function is to carry
traffic between minor and local roads and arterial roads, but may also provide
direct access to abutting properties.
      (3)   CUL-DE-SAC. A road that terminates in a vehicular turn-around.
      (4)   LOCAL STREET. A road whose principal function is to provide access
to abutting properties and is designed to be used or is used to connect minor
and local roads with collector or arterial roads.
      (5)   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE. An arterial road which is intended to service a
large volume of traffic for both the immediate area and the region beyond, and
may be designated as a thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway or equivalent
term to identify those roads comprising the basic structure of the roads plan.
Any road with an existing or proposed right-of-way width of 120 feet, and any
road proposed as a major thoroughfare in the Master Plan, shall be considered a
major thoroughfare.
      (6)   MINOR ROAD. A road whose sole function is to provide access to
abutting properties.
      (7)   PRIVATE ROAD. Any road which is to be privately maintained and has
not been accepted for maintenance by the city, county, state or the federal
government, but which meets the requirements of this chapter or has been
approved as a private road by the city under any prior ordinance.
      (8)   PUBLIC ROAD. Any road or portion of a road which has been dedicated
to and accepted for maintenance by the city, county, state or the federal
government.
   ROOM. For the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density in a
multiple-family district, a ROOM is a living room, dining room or bedroom,
equal to at least 80 square feet in area. A ROOM shall not include the area in
kitchen, sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways and
storage. Plans presented showing one, two or three-bedroom units and including
a “den,” “library,” or other extra room shall count the extra room as a bedroom
for the purpose of computing density.
   ROOMING HOUSE. See BOARDING HOUSE as defined in this section.
   ROPE LIGHTING. See LIGHTING, ROPE.
   SCREENING. An intermediate level or levels between the floor and ceiling of
any story with an aggregate floor area of not more than one-third of the floor
area of the story in which the level or levels are located.
   SECONDARY ACCESS DRIVE. Any private road that is generally parallel to and
adjacent to an arterial road, and that is designed to provide access to
abutting properties so that these properties are somewhat sheltered from the
effects of the through traffic on the arterial road, and so that the flow of
traffic on the arterial road is not impeded by direct driveway access from a
large number of abutting properties.
   SECONDHAND STORE. Any building, structure, premises, or part thereof used
solely or partially for the sale of used or secondhand clothing, furniture,
books or household goods, or used solely or primarily for the sale of used or
secondhand household appliances or business equipment.
   SEMI-TRAILER. A trailer which may be enclosed or not enclosed, having wheels
generally only at the rear, and supported in front by a truck tractor or towing
vehicle.
   SERVICE TRUCK. A pick-up truck or van that is used in conjunction with a
repair or maintenance business, such as a plumbing, electrical, or carpentry
business.
   SETBACK. The distance between a front, side or rear lot line or setback
measurement line and the nearest supporting member of a structure on the lot.
The MINIMUM REQUIRED SETBACK is the minimum distance between a front, side or
rear lot line or setback measurement line and the nearest supporting member of
a structure in order to conform to the required yard setback provisions of this
chapter.
   SETBACK MEASUREMENT LINE. A line drawn parallel to the centerline of the
road on the Zoning Map from which the front setback shall be measured.
   SHOPPING CENTER. A grouping of retail businesses and service uses on a
single site with common parking facilities.
   SIGN. Any device, structure, fixture, or placard which uses figures, graphic
designs, logos or trademarks for the purpose of informing or attracting the
attention of persons. Unless otherwise indicated, the definition of SIGN
includes interior and exterior SIGNS which are visible from any public street,
sidewalk, alley, park, or public or public property, but not SIGNS which are
primarily directed at persons within the premises upon which the SIGN is
located. Various types of SIGNS and sign-related terms are defined and
regulated by Chapter 153 of this Code.
   SITE PLAN. A plan, prepared to scale, as required in this chapter, showing
accurately and with complete dimensions, the boundaries of a site and the
location of all buildings, structures, uses and principal site development
features proposed for a specific parcel of land.
   SMOKE SHOP. A retail establishment where 50% or more of the retail floor
area, defined as wall to wall, is used for the display, promotion, or sale of
the inhalants and inhalant-related products listed below; or a retail
establishment where the sale of inhalants and inhalant-related products listed
below constitutes greater than 50% of the establishment’s merchandise:
      (1)   Cigarettes, cigars and packaged tobacco or shisha;
      (2)   Tobacco or shisha for smoking paraphernalia products including, but
not limited to, pipes for smoking tobacco, cigarette holders and cigarette
rolling papers;
      (3)   Tobacco promotional merchandise. including, but not limited to,
posters, shirts, jackets, and hats advertising tobacco or shisha products;
      (4)   Vapor containing nicotine and/or flavoring and vape-related
products, including, but not limited to, electronic cigarettes, vape pens and
vape cartridges; and
      (5)   Shisha that may or may not contain tobacco and/or flavoring and
shisha-related products, including, but not limited to, hookahs, water pipes,
or any instrument for heating or vaporizing and then smoking shisha.
   SPECIAL EVENT. An occurrence or noteworthy happening of seasonal, civic or
religious importance, which is organized and sponsored by a nonprofit community
group, club or society, and which offers a distinctive service to the
community, such as public entertainment, community education, civic
celebration, or cultural or community enrichment. SPECIAL EVENTS typically run
for a short period of time (less than two weeks), and are unlike the customary
or usual activities generally associated with the property where the SPECIAL
EVENT is to be located.
   SPECIAL LAND USE. Uses, either public or private, which possess unique
characteristics and therefore cannot be properly classified as a use permitted
by right in a particular zoning district or districts. Special land uses
include regulated land uses. After due consideration of the impact of such
proposed use upon the neighboring land and of the public need for the
particular use at the proposed location, special land uses may be permitted
following review and approval, subject to the terms of this chapter.
   SPECIALLY DESIGNATED DISTRIBUTOR’S ESTABLISHMENT. A retail establishment of
less than 25,000 gross square feet of usable retail space, or any retail
establishment where more than 10% of the distribution space is utilized for the
distribution of alcoholic liquor, licensed by the State Liquor Control
Commission to distribute alcoholic liquor, or other than beer and wine under
20% by volume, in the original package for consumption off the premises.
   SPECIALLY DESIGNATED MERCHANT’S ESTABLISHMENTS. Retail establishments of
less than 15,000 gross square feet of usable retail space, or any retail
establishment where more than 10% of the usable retail space is utilized for
the distribution of alcoholic liquor, licensed by the State Liquor Control
Commission, to sell beer and wine for consumption off the premises
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Portions of the human body defined as follows.
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or female breast below the point immediately above the top of
the areola.
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. The explicit display of one or more of the
following.
      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy.
      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of the genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or female breast.
   STATE LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. Any structure constructed for
residential purposes, that is licensed by the state pursuant to Public Act 287
of 1972, Public Act 11 of 1973, or Public Act 218 of 1979. These acts provide
for the following types of residential structures.
      (1)   ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY. A residential structure that is
licensed to provide room, board and supervised cars, but not continuous nursing
care, for unrelated adults over the age of 17, in accordance with Public Act
228 of 1979, as amended, and the Adult Foster Care Administrative Rules as
administered by the Michigan Department of Social Services. The following four
types of Adult Foster Care Homes are provided for by these rules.
         (a)   ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOME. Residence for 13 to 20
adults. Licensee is not required to live in the home. Local zoning approval is
required prior to issuance of a license.
         (b)   ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOME. Residence for 12 or fewer
adults. Licensee is not required to live in the home. Local zoning approval is
required prior to issuance of a license only if seven or more residents will
live in the home.
         (c)   CONGREGATE FACILITY. Residence for more than 20 adults.
         (d)   FAMILY HOME. Private residence for six or fewer adults. Licensee
must live in the home, and local zoning approval is not required prior to
issuance of a license.
      (2)   FOSTER FAMILY GROUP HOME. A private residence that houses more than
four but less than seven minor children, up to age 19, under constant care and
supervision. Under Public Act 116 of 1973, being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.111 - 722.128,
a Foster Family Group Home requires local zoning approval before being licensed
by the Department of Social Services.
      (3)   FOSTER FAMILY HOME. A private residence that houses four or fewer
foster children, up to age 19, under constant child care and supervision. Under
Public Act 116 of 1973, being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.111 - 722.128, a Foster Family
Home does not require local zoning approval before being licensed by the
Department of Social Services.
   STORY. That portion of a building, other than a basement or mezzanine as
defined in this section, included between the upper surface of any floor and
the upper surface of the floor or roof next above it (see Appendix B,
Illustration 5, Basic Structural Terms, and Illustration 6, Basement and
Story).
      (1)   A mezzanine shall be deemed a full story when it covers more than
one-third of the area of the story underneath, or, if the vertical distance
from the floor next below the mezzanine to the floor above it is 24 feet or
more.
      (2)   A basement shall be deemed a full story when the vertical distance
from the average grade to the floor below is less than the vertical distance
from the average grade to the ceiling.
      (3)   In an earth sheltered home, any separate level below ground shall
be considered a full story.
   STORY, HALF. The uppermost story lying under a pitched roof, the usable
floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds of the floor area of the
uppermost full story. The usable floor area of a half story shall be at least
200 square feet with a minimum clear height of seven feet, six inches.
   STREET. See ROAD as defined in this section.
   STREET LOT LINE. A dividing line between the street and a lot, also known as
the right-of-way line.
   STRING LIGHTING. See LIGHTING, STRING.
   STRUCTURAL ADDITION. Any alteration that changes the location of the
exterior walls or area of a building.
   STRUCTURAL NONCONFORMITY. A nonconformity that exists when the height, size,
or minimum floor space of a structure, or the relationship between an existing
building and other buildings or lot lines, does not conform to the standards of
the district in which the property is located. Also sometimes referred to as a
DIMENSIONAL NONCONFORMITY.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground
and extending at least nine inches above the ground surface. Structures
include, but are not limited to principal and accessory buildings, towers,
decks, fences/privacy screens, walls, antennas, swimming pools, and signs.
   SUBDIVISION PLAT. The division of a tract of land for the purpose of sale or
building development, in accordance with the Subdivision Control Act, Public
Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293, as amended, and the
City Subdivision Control Regulations.
   SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT FACILITY. Any establishment used for the
dispensing, on an in-patient or out-patient basis, of compounds or prescription
medicines directly to persons having drug or alcohol abuse problems. A
generally recognized pharmacy or licensed hospital dispensing prescription
medicines shall not be considered a SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT FACILITY.
   SWIMMING POOL. Any permanent, non-portable structure or container, located
either partially or totally below grade, designed to hold water to a depth of
greater than 24 inches, intended for swimming or bathing. A SWIMMING POOL shall
be considered an accessory structure for purposes of computing lot coverage,
   TATTOO PARLOR. Any business having as its principal activity the application
or placing, by any method, permanent or semi-permanent, designs, letters,
scrolls, figures, symbols, or any other marks upon or under the human skin
within, or any other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the
aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin.
   TEMPORARY USE OR BUILDING. A use or building permitted to exist for a
limited period of time under conditions and procedures as provided for in this
chapter.
   THEATER. An enclosed building used for presenting performances or motion
pictures which are observed by paying patrons from seats situated within the
building.
   THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE. A method by which a person utilizes his or her hands,
feet or an instrument for treating the superficial parts of a customer’s body
for medical, hygienic, relaxation or therapeutic purposes by rubbing, stroking,
kneading, tapping, pounding or vibrating.
   THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE FACILITY or PHYSICAL THERAPY FACILITY. A place where a
duly licensed physician, osteopath, or chiropractor; a registered or practical
nurse operating under a physician’s directions; a registered physical or
occupational therapist or speech pathologist who treat patients referred by a
licensed physician and operate only under the physician’s direction; or a
massage therapist licensed pursuant to Public Act 471 of 2008, as amended,
utilize their hands, feet or an instrument for treating the superficial parts
of a customer’s body for medical, hygienic, relaxation or therapeutic purposes
by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding or vibrating.
   THOROUGHFARES, MAJOR. See ROAD as defined in this section.
   TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS WASTE. Waste or a combination of waste and other
discarded material (including but not limited to solid, liquid, semisolid, or
contained gaseous material) which, because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly
contribute to the following if improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
      (1)   An increase in mortality.
      (2)   An increase in serious irreversible illness.
      (3)   Serious incapacitating, but reversible illness.
      (4)   Substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment.
   TRANSITION ZONE. Generally refers to a zoning district, an arrangement of
lots or land uses, a landscaped area, or similar means of providing a buffer
between land uses or districts.
   TRUCK TERMINAL. A structure to which goods, except raw or unprocessed
agricultural products, natural minerals, or other resources, are delivered for
immediate distribution or to be amalgamated or divided for delivery in larger
or smaller units to other points, or for distribution, amalgamation, or
division involving transfer to other modes of transportation.
   TUBE LIGHTING. See LIGHTING, TUBE.
   UNLICENSED MASSAGE PARLOR or MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. A place where
manipulated massage or manipulated exercises are practiced for pay upon the
human body by any unlicensed individual using mechanical, therapeutic, or
bathing devices or techniques. A MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT may include, but is not
limited to, establishments commonly known as massage parlors, sauna baths,
turkish bathhouses, and steam baths. MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS, as defined herein,
shall not include properly licensed hospitals, medical clinics or nursing
homes, therapeutic massage facilities, or beauty salons or barber shops in
which massages are administered only to the scalp, the face, the neck or the
shoulders.
   UNDERLYING ZONING. The zoning classification and regulations applicable to
the property immediately preceding the approval of an application to designate
a parcel Planned Development.
   USE. The purpose for which land, lots, or buildings thereon is designed,
arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied, maintained, let or leased.
      (1)   USE, ACCESSORY. See ACCESSORY USE, BUILDING, OR STRUCTURE as
defined in this section.
      (2)   USE, CONDITIONAL. See CONDITIONAL USE as defined in this section.
      (3)   USE, NONCONFORMING. See NONCONFORMITY as defined in this section.
      (4)   USE, PERMITTED. A use which may be lawfully established in a
particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements,
regulations, and standards of that district.
      (5)   USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land and buildings and the main
purpose for which land and buildings exist.
      (6)   USE, SPECIAL LAND. See SPECIAL LAND USE as defined in this section.
   UTILITY TRAILER. A small trailer that is designed to be pulled by an
automobile, van, or pick-up truck.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. See HOSPITAL, VETERINARY as defined in this section.
   VARIANCE. A modification of the literal provisions of this chapter granted
by the Zoning Board of Appeals when strict enforcement of this chapter would
cause practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship owing to circumstances
unique to the individual property on which the variance is granted. A VARIANCE
to permit a use not otherwise permitted within a zoning district (i.e., a use
variance) shall not be permitted.
   WALL. An upright structure serving to enclose, divide, or protect an area,
typically constructed of wood, masonry, or stone materials.
   WALL, OBSCURING. A structure of definite height and location to serve as an
opaque screen in carrying out the requirements of this chapter.
   WAREHOUSE. A building used primarily for storage of goods and materials.
   WHOLESALE SALES. The sales of goods generally in large quantities and
primarily to customers engaged in the business of reselling the goods.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY. All facilities, structural, attached,
accessory or otherwise, related to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for
the purposes of transmitting or receiving radio signals, and may include, but
is not limited to radio and television towers, telephone devices and exchanges,
microwave relay towers, telephone transmission equipment buildings and
commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not included within this definition
are citizen-band radio facilities, short-wave facilities, ham and amateur radio
facilities, television reception antennas, satellite dishes, and governmental
facilities which are subject to state and federal law or regulations that
preempt municipal regulatory authority.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY; COLOCATION. The location by two or more
wireless telecommunications providers, public authorities or other duly
authorized parties of wireless telecommunications facilities on a common
structure, tower or building, in a manner that reduces the overall need for
additional or multiple freestanding single-use telecommunications facilities
and/or support structures within the city.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SUPPORT STRUCTURE; TOWER. Any wireless
telecommunication facility erected or modified to support attached wireless
telecommunication facilities, or other antennas or facilities, including
supporting lines, cables, wires, braces and masts, intended primarily for the
purpose of mounting an attached wireless telecommunication facility or similar
apparatus above grade. This includes, but is not limited to, any ground or
roof-mounted pole, monopole, lattice tower, light pole, utility pole, wood
pole, guyed wire tower, spire, other similar structure or combination thereof,
or other structures which appear to be something other than a mere support
structure.
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise permitted in this
chapter. The MINIMUM REQUIRED SETBACK is the minimum depth of a front, rear or
side yard necessary to conform to the required yard setback provisions of this
chapter. (see Appendix B, Illustration 7, Yard Terms, and Illustration 8,
Yards).
      (1)   YARD, FRONT. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line or
setback measurement line (where appropriate) and the nearest line of the
principal building. Unless otherwise specified, each yard with street frontage
shall be considered a front yard.
      (2)   YARD, REAR. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot
line and the nearest line on the principal building. On corner lots, the REAR
YARD may be opposite either street frontage, but there shall only be one REAR
YARD.
      (3)   YARD, SIDE. An open space between a principal building and the side
lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which
shall be the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the side lot line to
the nearest point on the principal building.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The City Official(s) authorized to administer the
Zoning Regulations on a day-to-day basis, including but not limited to
processing applications, granting ministerial approvals, maintaining the
records of Planning Commission actions, ending notices of public hearings, and
similar work.
   ZONING DISTRICT. A portion of the city within which, on a uniform basis,
certain uses of land and buildings are permitted, and within which certain
yards, open spaces, lot areas, and other requirements are established.
   ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS. The Garden City zoning Board of Appeals, created
pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 98-006, passed 6-29-98; Am. Ord. 99-003,
passed 2-8-99; Am. Ord. 01-005, passed 5-21-01; Am. Ord. 02-012, passed 8-5-02;
Am. Ord. 08-004, passed 11-5-07; Am. Ord. 09-007, passed 4-20-09; Am. Ord. 10-
011, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 10-016, passed 6-7-10; Am. Ord. 12-010, passed
11-19-12; Am. Ord. 17-002, passed 9-25-17; Am. Ord. 18-020, passed 8-6-18; Am.
Ord. 20-003, passed 7-6-20; Am. Ord. 21-004, passed 2-8-21; Am. Ord. 22-001,
passed 1-24-22; Am. Ord. 24-008, passed 8-26-2024; Am. Ord. 24-010, passed 10-
28-24)
§ 154.006 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Initiation of amendment. The City Council may, from time to time, at
its own initiative or upon recommendation from the Planning Commission or on
petition, amend, supplement, or change the district boundaries or the
regulations herein, pursuant to the authority and procedures set forth in
Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended. Text amendments may be proposed by any
governmental body or any interested person or organization. Changes in district
boundaries may be proposed by any governmental body, any person having a
freehold interest in the subject property, or by the designated agent of a
person having a freehold interest in the property.
   (B)   Application for amendment. A petition for an amendment to the text of
this chapter, or an amendment to change the zoning classification of a
particular property, shall be commenced by filing a petition with the Building
Department, on the forms and accompanied by the fees specified. The petition
shall explicitly describe the proposed amendment and shall be signed by the
applicant. Petitions for rezoning of a specific site shall be accompanied by a
plot plan or survey, which shall contain the following information.
      (1)   Applicant's name, address, and telephone number.
      (2)   Scale, northpoint, and dates of submission and revisions.
      (3)   Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting
parcels.
      (4)   Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas,
driveways, and other improvements on the site and within 100 feet of the site.
      (5)   Dimensions, centerlines, and right-of-way widths of all abutting
streets and alleys.
      (6)   Location of existing drainage courses, floodplains, lakes and
streams, and wood lots.
      (7)   All existing and proposed easements.
      (8)   Location of sanitary sewer system, existing and proposed.
      (9)   Location and size of water mains and building service leads,
existing and proposed.
   (C)   Review procedures. After the completed petition and all required
supporting materials have been received and fees paid, the petition shall be
reviewed in accordance with the following procedures.
      (1)   Planning Commission review.
         (a)   The petition shall be placed on the agenda of the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall
review the petition for amendment in accordance with the procedures in division
(C)(3) of this section and hold a public hearing in accordance with Public Act
110 of 2006, as amended.
         (b)   Notice of the public hearing shall be given in the manner
prescribed by Public Act 110 of 2006, Sections 103 and 202. If an individual
property or several adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, the Planning
Commission shall give notice of the proposed rezoning to the owner of the
property in question at least 15 days before the hearing.
         (c)   In addition, any petition for amendment shall require a public
hearing, notice of which shall be given by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city. Notice of the time and place of the hearing
shall also be given by mail to each utility company, telecommunication service
provider, and railroad operating within the district affected, and airport
manager of each airport that registers its name and mailing address with the
City Clerk for purpose of receiving the notice of public hearing.
      (2)   Action by the Planning Commission and City Council.
         (a)   Following the hearing on the proposed amendment, the Planning
Commission shall make written findings of fact which it shall transmit together
with the comments made at the public hearing, and its recommendations to the
City Council.
         (b)   The City Council may, by majority vote of its membership, at its
next regularly scheduled meeting do one of the following.
            1.   Adopt the proposed amendment with or without amendments. If
amended as to any manner of substance, Council shall not adopt until the
amendment has been subject to all of the procedures required above.
            2.   Reject the proposed amendment.
            3.   Whenever a written protest against a proposed amendment is
presented in writing to the City Clerk, signed by the owners of at least 20% of
the area included in the proposed change, or by the owners of at least 20% of
the area of land included within an area extending outward 100 feet from any
point on the boundary of land included in the proposed change, excluding
publicly-owned land in calculating the 20% requirement, the amendment shall not
be passed except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the entire City
Council.
            4.   No application for a map amendment which has been denied by
the City Council shall be reconsidered for one year unless there have been
changes in the facts, evidence, and/or conditions in the case. Determination of
whether there have been such changes shall be made by the Planning Commission
at the time the application is submitted for processing.
      (3)   Review considerations. The Planning Commission and City Council
shall, at minimum, consider the following before taking action on any proposed
amendment.
         (a)   Will the proposed amendment be in accordance with the basic
intent and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance?
         (b)   Will the proposed amendment further the comprehensive planning
goals of the city?
         (c)   Have conditions changed since the Zoning Ordinance was adopted,
or was there a mistake in the Zoning Ordinance, that justify the amendment?
         (d)   Will the amendment correct an inequitable situation created by
the Zoning Ordinance, rather than merely grant special privileges?
         (e)   Will the amendment result in unlawful exclusionary zoning?
         (f)   Will the amendment set an inappropriate precedent, resulting in
the need to correct future planning mistakes?
         (g)   If a rezoning is requested, is the proposed zoning consistent
with the zoning classification of surrounding land?
         (h)   If a rezoning is requested, could all requirements in the
proposed zoning classification be complied with on the subject parcel?
      (4)   Notice and record of amendment adoption. Following adoption of an
amendment by the City Council, notice shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city within 15 days after adoption; in accordance
with Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended. The notice shall include either a
summary of the regulatory effect of the amendment, including the geographic
area affected, or the text of the amendment; the effective date of the
amendment; and the item and place where a copy of the ordinance may be
purchased or inspected. A record of all amendments shall be maintained by the
city. A master Zoning Map shall be maintained by the Zoning Administrator,
which shall identify all map amendments by number and date.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 11-005, passed 4-11-11; Am. Ord. 20-003,
passed 7-6-20)
  GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
§ 154.020 ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Scope of regulations. No structure or tract of land shall hereafter be
used or occupied, and no structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, altered,
or moved, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. However,
where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in
accordance with law prior to the effective date of this chapter, and
construction is begun within six months of the effective date, the building or
structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans. The effective
date shall be February 17, 1992. Furthermore, upon completion, the building may
be occupied and a certificate of occupancy for the use for which the building
was originally designated, subject thereafter to the provisions of §§
154.050 through
154.054 concerning nonconformities. Any subsequent text or map amendments shall
not affect previously issued valid permits.
   (B)   Minimum requirements. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety,
convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity, and general welfare.
   (C)   Relationship to other ordinances or agreements. This chapter is not
intended to abrogate or annul any ordinance, rule, regulation, permit,
easement, covenant, or other private agreement previously adopted, issued, or
entered into and not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. However,
where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or requirements than other ordinances, rules, regulations, permits,
easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements of this
chapter shall govern.
   (D)   Vested right. Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted or
construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of
any particular use, district, zoning classification, or permissible activities
therein. Furthermore, any rights as may exist through enforcement of this
chapter are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or
modification as may be necessary for the preservation or protection of public
health, safety, and welfare.
   (E)   Conformity with yard and bulk regulations.  
      (1)   The owner of a building or the property on which it is located
shall maintain all required setbacks, open space, and other minimum yard and
bulk requirements for as long as the building is in existence.
      (2)   No portion of a lot used in complying with the provisions of this
chapter in connection with an existing or planned building, shall again be used
to qualify or justify any other building or structure existing or intended to
exist at the same time.
   (F)   Division and consolidation of land. No zoning lot shall hereafter be
divided into two or more zoning lots, and no portion of any zoning lot shall be
sold, unless all zoning lots resulting from each division or sale conform with
all regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located.
   (G)   Unlawful buildings, structures, site designs and uses. A building,
structure, or use which was not lawfully existing at the time of adoption of
this chapter shall not be made lawful solely by adoption of this chapter. In
case any building, or part thereof, is used, erected, occupied or altered
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the building or use shall be deemed
an unlawful nuisance and may be required to be vacated, torn down or abated by
any legal means, and shall not be used or occupied until it has been made to
conform to the provisions of this chapter. Public expenditures toward abating
any nuisance shall become a lien upon the land.
   (H)   Voting place. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to
interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in
connection with a public election.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see
§ 154.999
§ 154.021 PERMITTED USES.
   Only the following uses of land, buildings, or structures shall be allowed
in the city.
   (A)   Uses lawfully established, on the effective date of this chapter,
except that the previous Zoning Ordinance text and Zoning Map shall remain in
effect for a period of 90 days following publication of the notice of adoption
of the new Zoning Ordinance, for the sole purpose of processing site plan
review, special use, and variance applications received by the city prior to
the date and time of adoption of the new Zoning Ordinance text and Zoning Map.
   (B)   Uses for which a building permit had been issued in accordance with §§
154.465 and
154.466.
   (C)   Permitted uses in the applicable zoning districts, subject to the
requirements specified.
   (D)   Conditional and special uses in the applicable zoning districts,
subject conditions and requirements specified.
   (E)   Temporary uses subject to the requirements specified in
§ 154.025.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see
§ 154.999
§ 154.022 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Timing of construction. No accessory building, structure, or use
shall be constructed or established on a parcel unless there is a principal
building, structure, or use being constructed or already established on the
same parcel of land.
      (2)   Site plan approval. If submission of a site plan for review and
approval is required, then the site plan shall indicate the location of
proposed accessory buildings, structures, or uses.
      (3)   Nuisances. Accessory uses such as household animal enclosures, dog
runs, central air conditioning units, heat pumps, and other mechanical
equipment that could produce noise, odors, or other nuisances shall not be
located adjacent to an adjoining property owner's living or sleeping area where
windows and/or doors would be exposed to the nuisance.
      (4)   Conformance with lot coverage standards. Accessory buildings and
permanent structures which actually cover a portion of the lot shall be
included in computations to determine compliance with maximum lot coverage
standards, where applicable.
      (5)   Location in proximity to easements or rights-of-way. Accessory
buildings, structures, or uses shall not be located within a dedicated easement
or right-of-way, except as permitted in the regulations for essential services
or as permitted within an executed easement agreement.
      (6)   Use of accessory structures. Attached and detached accessory
buildings or structures in residential districts shall not be used as dwelling
units (except for permitted accessory dwellings in compliance with §
154.157) or for any business, profession, trade or occupation (except for any
home occupation in compliance with §
154.164). Any garage shall be used only for the storage of vehicles by the
occupants of the residence to which it is accessory.
      (7)   Building code requirement. All accessory buildings and structures
greater than 200 square feet in area shall comply with the Michigan Uniform
Code in effect at the time of application.
      (8)   Materials. Compliance with the following standard shall be
determined by the Zoning Administrator, the official or board holding final
zoning approval authority.
         (a)   Permanent accessory buildings, including the walls and roof,
shall be constructed of durable, all weather materials, including, but not
limited to, wood, masonry, fiber cement, ridged plastic or metal. The use of
plastic film, canvas or pliable vinyl for a permanent accessory building is
prohibited.
         (b)   Attached permanent accessory buildings for residential uses
shall utilize the same materials, color, and architectural style of the
principal residential building.
   (B)   Attached accessory buildings. Accessory buildings or structures which
are attached to the principal building (such as an attached garage, breezeway,
deck, car port, lean-to, porte cochere, or workshop) shall be considered a part
of the principal building. Any deck that provides entry into the principal
building, whether physically attached to the principal building or a separate
self-supporting structure, shall be considered attached to the principal
building.Attached accessory buildings shall comply with all area, setback,
height, and bulk requirements applicable to the principal building, unless
otherwise specified in this section. The floor area of a garage attached to a
principal residence shall not exceed 50% of the floor area of the residence or
720 square feet.
   (C)   Detached accessory buildings.
      (1)   Location. Detached accessory buildings shall not be located in a
front yard or a required side yard; except that the following accessory uses
may be permitted in the front or side yards of commercial or industrial
districts, subject to the approval of the Planning Commission: buildings for
parking attendants, guard shelters, gate houses, and transformer pads.
      (2)   Setbacks. Detached accessory buildings shall comply with the
following setback requirements.
         (a)   Front yard setback. Accessory buildings shall comply with the
front setback requirements for the district in which they are located. However,
in no case shall an accessory building be located closer to the front lot line
than the principal building.
         (b)   Side yard setback. The accessory building shall comply with the
side yard setback for the district in which it is located, except that the
minimum side yard setback for accessory buildings in single-family districts
shall be three feet.
         (c)   Rear yard setback. Accessory buildings shall be located no
closer than three feet to the rear lot line. Where the rear lot line is
coterminous with an alley right-of-way line, the accessory building may be
located within one foot of the rear lot line.
         (d)   Distance from other buildings. Detached accessory buildings
shall be located at least ten feet from the principal building on the site or
any principal building on an adjacent lot. The Zoning Board of Appeals may
permit an accessory building to be located within five feet of the principal
building, upon finding that there will be no threat to public health and
safety, and that fire safety standards related to the fire ratings of walls,
emergency access, and similar standards will be complied with.
         (e)   Setback on corner lots. Accessary buildings on a corner lot
shall comply with the front setback requirements on any side that faces a
street, if there is at least one house in the same block that fronts on the
street. If there are no houses fronting on the street, then the corner house
shall provide a minimum setback of three feet on the side street.
      (3)   Size and lot coverage.  Detached accessory buildings may occupy up
to 50% of the required rear yard. The total of all accessory buildings shall
not exceed 1,200 square feet in area. Lots greater than 20,000 square feet in
area that are occupied by a single family residential structure shall be
permitted to have a maximum sum total area of all accessory structures not
exceeding 2,000 square feet. Detached accessory buildings and structures shall
be included in the calculation of lot coverage.
      (4)   Height.
         (a)   1.   Detached accessory buildings in residential districts shall
not exceed 21 feet in height as measured from the ground level to the top of
the ridge.
            2.   Sidewalls of accessory buildings in residential districts
shall not exceed ten feet in height.
         (b)   Detached accessory buildings in nonresidential districts shall
comply with the maximum height standards for the district in which they are
located.
      (5)   Foundation. All enclosed detached accessory buildings 200 square
feet or less in area shall be placed on one of the following foundations:
         (a)   A minimum four inch thick poured concrete slab in combination
with a rat wall a minimum of four inches wide and 24 inches deep below grade.
         (b)   A two inch thick pressure treated wood floor material or a 5/
4 flooring in combination with a rat wall a minimum of four inches wide and 24
inches deep below grade. The top of the rat wall shall be a minimum of four
inches above grade if not using an integral concrete slab.
   (D)   Accessory structures.
      (1)   General requirements. Accessory structures (for example, swimming
pools, tennis courts, antennas) shall be located in the rear yard and shall
comply with height, setback, and lot coverage requirements for accessory
buildings, unless otherwise permitted in this chapter.
      (2)   Solar panels. Freestanding solar panels shall be considered
accessory structures and shall be located in the rear yard, subject to the
setback requirements for accessory buildings.
      (3)   Added lot coverage for swimming pools and decks. Swimming pools and
decks may cover the lot an added amount up to 40% of the lot.
      (4)   Shipping containers. Containers constructed for the shipment,
storage and handling of materials, items or products, e.g. cargo containers or
shipping containers, shall only be permitted in the M-1, Light Industrial
District. A maximum of two containers may be permitted per lot and shall only
be located in a rear yard that is screened on all sides in accordance with §
154.100. Shipping containers shall be prohibited in all other zoning districts.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 93-016, passed 7-6-93; Am. Ord. 94-003,
passed 7-5-94; Am. Ord. 04-003, passed 4-4-04; Am. Ord. 19-011, passed 10-3-19;
Am. Ord. 24-008, 8-26-24)  Penalty, see
§ 154.999
   § 154.023 USE OF STRUCTURE AS DWELLING UNIT.
   (A)   Incompletely constructed structures. Any incompletely constructed
structure which does not meet the requirements of the Building Code or this
chapter shall not be issued a certificate of occupancy and shall not be used as
a dwelling. For the purposes of this section, a basement which does not have a
residential structure constructed above it shall be considered an incompletely
constructed structure.
   (B)   Caretaker residence. No dwelling shall be erected in a commercial or
industrial district, except for the living quarters of a watchman or caretaker
and his/her immediate family. Any living quarters shall consist of a structure
which is permanently affixed to the ground, constructed in accordance with the
adopted Building Code, and provided with plumbing, heating, bathroom, and
kitchen facilities. In no case shall the living quarters be used as a permanent
single-family residence by anyone other than a watchman or caretaker and his/
her immediate family.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see
§ 154.999
§ 154.024 RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Compliance with design standards. All dwellings, including modular
dwellings and manufactured homes dwellings, shall be erected or constructed
only if in compliance with the following residential design standards. The
Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to determine if the following
requirements are being complied with.
   (B)   General requirements.
      (1)   Area and bulk regulations. All dwellings shall comply with the
minimum floor area requirements specified for the zoning district where the
structure is located.
      (2)   Foundation. All dwellings shall be placed on a permanent foundation
to form a complete enclosure under the exterior walls. The foundation shall be
constructed in accordance with the adopted Building Code of the city. A
manufactured home shall be securely anchored to its foundation in order to
prevent displacement during windstorms. The wheels, tongue and hitch assembly,
and other towing appurtenances, shall be removed before attaching a
manufactured home to its permanent foundation.
      (3)   Other regulations. Residential structures shall be constructed in
compliance with applicable state, federal, or local laws or ordinances.
Manufactured homes shall comply with the most recent regulations specified by
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, Mobile Home
Construction and Safety Standards, 24 CFR 3280, as amended and with the Mobile
Home Commission Act, PA 96 of 1987, as amended.
      (4)   Use. All dwellings shall be used only for the purposes permitted in
the zoning district in which they are located.
      (5)   Attachments. Any exterior attachments or extensions onto a dwelling
unit, such as entry steps and storage buildings, shall comply with the adopted
Building Code of the city.
      (6)   Utility connections. All dwellings shall be connected to the public
sewer and water systems.
      (7)   Compatibility with other residences. New dwellings, shall be
aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the
vicinity. To assess compatibility, the Zoning Administrator shall evaluate the
dwelling's architectural design and character which shall include, but not be
limited to, the position of windows, exterior wall colors and color
combinations, type of materials, architectural design elements, architectural
style, variety and percentage of materials, and other features of the new
structure in relation to existing structures within 1,000 feet.
      (8)   Roof pitch. The pitch of the main roof shall have a minimum
vertical rise of one foot for each four feet of horizontal run, and the minimum
distance from the eaves to the ridge shall be ten feet, except where the
specific housing design dictates otherwise (i.e., French provincial,
Italianate, and the like). The roof shall be finished with a type of shingle or
other material that is commonly used in standard on-site residential
construction.
      (9)   Exterior materials. The exterior siding shall consist of materials
that are generally acceptable for site-built housing in the vicinity, provided
that the reflection from the exterior surface shall be no greater than from
white semi-gloss exterior enamel and provided further that any exterior is
comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding
commonly used in standard residential construction. A minimum of two different
types of materials shall be used on all dwellings.
      (10)   Elevation widths. All single-family dwellings shall have a minimum
width across front, side, and rear elevations of 24 feet and comply in all
respects with the building code.
      (11)   Roof overhang. All dwellings shall be designed with a roof
overhang of not less than six inches on all sides, with window sills and roof
drainage systems to concentrate roof drainage at collection points along the
sides of the dwelling.
      (12)   Exterior doors. All dwellings shall have not less than two
exterior doors which shall not be located on the same side of the building.
      (13)   Storage area. All single-family, attached single-family and two-
family dwellings shall contain a storage area in a basement located under the
dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separately constructed
building of equal or of better quality than the principal dwelling. The
required storage area shall be equal to 10% of the square footage of the
dwelling or 200 square feet, whichever shall be less.
      (14)   Garage. All single-family dwellings shall provide an attached or
detached garage for the parking of two vehicles.
      (15)   Front porch. All single-family dwellings shall provide a porch on
the front elevation. The front porch shall have a width equal to no less than
20% of the dwelling's front elevation and a depth of no less than five feet.
The base, skirt or apron of all porches and stairs must be fully enclosed with
a solid material. Lattice or balusters which are framed may be used only in
combination with columns or piers.
      (16)   Landscaping. All dwellings shall provide a minimum of one tree in
the front yard and one shrub for every six feet of front elevation width
planted along the front foundation. All areas disturbed during construction on
a single-family dwelling lot shall be fully graded and planted with grass,
ground cover, shrubbery or other suitable live plant material extending to any
abuting street pavement edge. Grass areas in the front yard of all single-
family dwellings shall be planted with sod.
      (17)   Manufactured home dwelling regulations. Manufactured home
dwellings shall only be located in a manufactured home park. The foregoing
standards shall not apply to a manufactured home dwelling located in a licensed
manufactured home park except to the extent allowed by state or federal law, or
otherwise specifically required in the city Zoning Ordinance pertaining to such
parks.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 21-004, passed 2-8-21)  Penalty, see
§ 154.999
§ 154.025 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES.
   Temporary buildings and structures shall comply with the following general
requirements.
   (A)   Temporary structures used for residential purposes. A building or
structure may be approved for temporary residential use only while damage to
the principal dwelling due to fire, flood, ice, wind, or other natural disaster
is being repaired. Any temporary building shall not be used as a residence
without prior review and approval by the Public Safety and Building Officials,
and subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   Permits may be issued by the Building Official for up to six months
in duration, provided that the applicant provides a month-by-month schedule for
the completion of the reconstruction. Permits may be renewed for another six-
month period subject to the following conditions.
         (a)   The applicant must submit a progress report that demonstrates
that reconstruction of the main dwelling is proceeding as expeditiously as
possible.
         (b)   The applicant shall identify any conditions that may have
delayed the progress of reconstruction of the main dwelling.
         (c)   The applicant shall provide a month-by-month schedule for
completion of the reconstruction.
      (2)   The total duration of a temporary permit shall not exceed 12
months.
      (3)   Temporary structures shall comply with the setback standards for
the district in which they are located.
      (4)   The Building Official shall approve electrical and utility
connections to any temporary structure.
      (5)   An approved temporary structure may be moved onto a site 14 days
prior to commencement of construction and shall be removed within 14 days
following issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the permanent dwelling.
      (6)   The applicant shall furnish the city with a performance guarantee
in the amount of $500 to assure removal of the temporary structure.
   (B)   Temporary structures used for nonresidential purposes. Temporary
structures for nonresidential use, including semi-trucks/trailers and concrete
batch plants, shall be permitted only when the intended use is by a contractor
or builder in conjunction with a specific construction project, and only after
review and approval by the Building Official. Such temporary structures shall
be removed immediately upon completion of the construction project and prior to
a request for a certificate of occupancy for the project.
   (C)   Permits. A permit shall be required prior to locating any temporary
structure on a parcel. The permit shall specify a date for removal of the
temporary structure, but the period of approval shall not exceed one year or
the time limit specific in this section.
   (D)   Use as an accessory structure. A temporary building or structure shall
not be used as an accessory building or structure, except as permitted herein.
   (E)   Special events and other temporary uses. The Zoning Administrator may
grant temporary use of land and structures for special events and other
temporary uses, as defined in
§ 154.005 of this chapter, subject to the following general conditions.
      (1)   Adequate off-street parking shall be provided.
      (2)   The applicant shall specify the exact duration of the temporary
use.
      (3)   Electrical and utility connections shall be approved by the
Building Official.
      (4)   The applicant shall furnish the city with a performance guarantee
in the amount of $500 to assure removal of the temporary structure.
   (F)   Conditions and maximum durations which apply to specific temporary
uses.
      (1)   Carnival, circus, or festival. 
         (a)   Maximum duration. Ten days.
         (b)   Operator or sponsor. Nonprofit entity.
         (c)   Location. Shall not be located in or adjacent to any developed
residential area except on church, school or park property.
      (2)   Christmas tree sales.
         (a)   Maximum duration. 45 days.
         (b)   Clean-up. Stumps, branches, other equipment, and debris shall be
restored to its original grade and condition (holes filled, lights completely
removed from site. Leftover trees shall be removed and property removed and
general cleanup performed to the satisfaction of the city), within two weeks
after Christmas.
      (3)   General sidewalk sales.
         (a)   Maximum duration.    Seven days.
         (b)   Location. Commercial districts only.
      (4)   Seasonal outdoor sales and storage.  
            Maximum duration.    180 days.
      (5)   Other outdoor sales and storage (if not listed above).
            Maximum duration.    To be determined by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator; not to exceed 180 days.
   (G)   Other temporary structures. Any temporary structure located on
commercial or industrial zoned property shall be required to obtain a zoning
permit prior to placement on a parcel in the city unless the temporary
structure is included within the scope of work of a building permit.
      (1)   Collection boxes.
         (a)   Maximum duration. 180 days in a 12 month period; one collection
box per property.
         (b)   Location. Commercial and industrial districts only. Any lot with
a collection box shall be at least 2,000 feet from any other lot where a
collection box is located. The separation distance shall be measured from the
nearest point on the property line where a collection box is located to the
nearest point on the property line of any other lot with a collection box.
         (c)   Ownership. The name of the charity, a contact name, and phone
number must be posted on the collection box.
         (d)   Additional requirements. Must be located on site so as not to
interfere with vehicle and pedestrian traffic; area must be policed and kept
clean with no pile up of goods.
      (2)   Construction waste dumpsters.
         (a)   Maximum duration. 30 days in a 12 month period, one dumpster
only per property. A construction waste dumpster may exceed the 30 day period
and shall be permitted for the duration of either an open building permit or a
renovation project where the scope of work is approved by the building
official.
         (b)   Location. Shall only be placed on a lot where the existing
structure(s) are undergoing renovation or remodeling.
         (c)   Additional requirements. The waste dumpsters must be located in
the driveway of the property at the furthest accessible point from the street.
The dumpster must be located on a hard surface.
      (3)   Portable storage units.
         (a)   Maximum duration. 30 days per six-month period; one unit per
property. A portable storage unit may be permitted for the duration of an open
building permit for a renovation project.
         (b)   Additional requirements. A unit must be located in the driveway
of the property at the furthest accessible point from the street. The unit must
be located on a hard surface. The unit shall be prohibited to be utilized as a
permanent accessory structure.
      (4)   Tent.
         (a)   Single family residential uses. On lots with single family
residences tents may be used for private events and may be erected for a
maximum of five days without a permit. No more than three private events shall
be allowed per 12 month period. Any tent 200 square feet in area or less shall
be exempt from this time restriction. Tents shall not be used for the permanent
or temporary storage of any items or property.
            1.   Location. Tents shall only be permitted behind the front
building line of the principal structure. Tents shall be located at least three
feet from any side or rear property line.
         (b)   Multiple family residential and non-residential uses. No tents
shall be erected on a lot except as an approved component of a special event
permit.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 02-011, passed 8-5-02; Am. Ord. 10-014,
passed 1-11-10; Am. Ord. 24-008, passed 8-26-24)  Penalty, see
§ 154.999
§ 154.026 USES NOT NORMALLY PERMITTED.
   A land use which is not cited by name as a permitted use in a zoning
district may be permitted upon determination by the Zoning Administrator that
the use is clearly similar in nature and compatible with the listed or existing
uses in that district. In making such a determination, the Zoning Administrator
shall consider the following.
   (A)   Determination of compatibility. In making the determination of
compatibility, the Zoning Administrator shall consider specific characteristics
of the use in question and compare those characteristics with those of the uses
which are expressly permitted in the district. Those characteristics shall
include, but are not limited to, traffic generation, types of service offered,
types of goods produced, methods of operation, and building characteristics.
   (B)   Conditions by which use may be permitted. If the Zoning Administrator
determines that the proposed use is compatible with permitted and existing uses
in the district, the Zoning Administrator shall then decide whether the
proposed use shall be permitted by right, as a special use, or as a permitted
accessory use. The proposed use shall be subject to the review and approval
requirements for the district in which it is located.
   (C)   Planning Commission determination. In the event that the Zoning
Administrator is unable to decide if a use should be considered a permitted use
in a particular zoning district, then the determination shall be made by the
Planning Commission, which may elect to resolve the case by initiating an
amendment to the Zoning Ordinance.
   (D)   Uses listed in another district. No use shall be permitted in a
district under the terms of this section if the use is specifically listed as a
use permitted by right or as a special use in any other district.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see
§ 154.999
§ 154.027 YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS.
   All lots, buildings, and structures shall comply with the following general
yard and bulk regulations, unless specifically stated otherwise in this
chapter.
   (A)   Minimum lot size. Every building hereafter erected on a lot or parcel
of land created subsequent to the effective date of this chapter shall comply
with the lot size, lot coverage, and setback requirements for the district in
which it is located. No yards in existence on the effective date of this
chapter shall subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced if already less
than, the minimum yard requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Number of principal uses per lot. Only one principal building shall be
placed on a lot of record or site in single-family residential districts.
   (C)   Projections into required yards. Fire escapes, fire towers, chimneys,
platforms, balconies, boiler flues, and other projections shall be considered
part of the building, subject to the setback requirements for the district in
which the building is located. The following table identifies permitted
projections in required yards.
   Permitted Projections into Required Yards
Projection All Yards Rear Yard Interior Side Yard Corner Side Yard Court- yard
   Permitted Projections into Required Yards
Projection       All Yards Rear Yard Interior Side Corner Side Yard Court- yard
                                     Yard
Air conditioning
equipment                  X         X             X                X
shelters
Access Drives    X
Arbors and       X
trellises
Awnings and      X
canopies
Bay windows      X
Decks, if not              X
enclosed
Eaves,           X
overhanging
Fences*          X
Flagpoles        X
Gardens          X
Gutters          X
Hedges           X
Laundry drying             X         X
equipment
Light standards, X
ornamental
Parking, off-    X
street*
Paved terraces
and open                   X
porches*
Porches,
unenclosed with            X
or without roof*
Approved signs*  X
Stairways, open  X
unroofed
Steps            X
TV or radio
towers or                  X         X             X
antennas*
Trees, shrubs    X
and flowers
Walls, (see      X
fences)*
Legend.
   * See additional regulations in this chapter.
   X--permitted
   Notes related to table.
      (1)   Architectural features. Bay windows, window sills, belt courses,
cornices, eaves, overhanging eaves, and other architectural features may
project into a required side yard not more than two inches for each one foot of
width of the side yard, and may extend into any front or rear yard not more
than 24 inches.
      (2)   Terraces and porches. Open paved terraces and open porches may
project into a required rear yard up to ten feet, provided that the unoccupied
portion of the rear yard has a depth of at least 25 feet.
      (3)   Access drives and walkways. Access drives may be placed in the
required front or side yards so as to provide access to rear yards or accessory
or attached structures. Further, any walk, terrace or other pavement serving a
like function, shall be permitted in any required yard, providing the pavement
is no higher than six inches above grade.
      (4)   Unenclosed porches, with or without roof. Unenclosed porches may
project into the required 30-foot front yard set-back up to six feet, and shall
maintain a minimum side yard setback of three feet. In cases where single-
family houses maintain a front yard setback greater than 30 feet, one
additional foot of projection shall be permitted per each foot of additional
setback outside of the 30-foot requirement; not to exceed a total front porch
projection of ten feet.
   (D)   Unobstructed sight distance. 
      (1)   No fence, wall, structure, or planting shall be erected,
established, or maintained on any lot which will obstruct the view of drivers
in vehicles approaching an intersection of two roads or the intersection of a
road and a driveway (see Appendix B, Illustration 9, Unobstructed Sight
Distance). Fences, walls, structures, or plantings located in the triangular
area described below shall not be permitted to obstruct cross-visibility
between a height of 30 inches and six feet above the lowest point of the
intersecting road(s).
      (2)   Trees shall be permitted in the triangular area provided that limbs
and foliage are trimmed so that they do not extend into the cross-visibility
area or otherwise create a traffic hazard. Landscaping, except required grass
or ground cover, shall not be located closer than three feet from the edge of
any driveway or road pavement within the triangular area.
   (E)   Unobstructed sight area. The unobstructed triangular area is described
as follows.
      (1)   The area formed at the corner intersection of two public right-of-
way lines, the two sides of the triangular area being 25 feet in length
measured along abutting public rights-of-way lines, and the third side being a
line connecting these two sides, or
      (2)   The area formed at the corner intersection of a public right-of-way
and a driveway, the two sides of the triangular area being ten feet in length
measured along the right-of-way line and edge of the driveway, and the third
side being a line connecting these two sides.
   (F)   Lots adjoining alleys. In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins
an alley for the purposes of applying lot area and setback requirements, one-
half of the width of the alley shall be considered a part of the lot. However,
if a portion of the lot is occupied by an alley currently in use (i.e., not
vacated), then the area shall not be used in lot area computations related to
the landscaping standards.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 04-002, passed 4-4-04) Penalty, see
§ 154.999
§ 154.028 PUBLIC THOROUGHFARES.
   (A)   Intent. Unimpeded, safe access to parcels of land throughout the city
is necessary to provide adequate police and fire protection, ambulance
services, and other public services, and to otherwise promote and protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public. The standards and specifications set
forth herein are determined to be the minimum standards and specifications
necessary to meet the above stated intentions.
   (B)   Public access required. The front lot line of all lots shall abut onto
a publicly dedicated road right-of-way.
   (C)   Driveway dimensions. Driveways providing access to residential,
commercial or industrial properties shall comply with the dimensional standards
specified in
§ 154.068.
   (D)   Access across residential district land. No land which is located in a
residential district shall be used for a driveway, walkway, or access purposes
to any land which is located in a nonresidential district, unless access is by
way of a public road.
   (E)   Service roads. If the Planning Commission determines that proposed or
anticipated development will result in an excessive number of entrance or exit
drives onto a public road, thereby creating potentially hazardous traffic
conditions and diminishing the carrying capacity of the road, the Commission
may permit or require construction of service roads across abutting parcels and
generally parallel to the arterial street, to allow traffic to circulate from
one parcel to another without re-entering the public road. The front edge of
any secondary access drive shall be located no closer to the road than the
future right-of-way line. The secondary access drive shall conform to the
minimum specifications established by the City Engineer.
   (F)   Performance guarantee. To assure completion of a private road or
service road in conformance with the requirements set forth herein, the
Building Official or Zoning Administrator may require the applicant or owner to
provide a performance guarantee, in accordance with
§ 154.036.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.029 GRADING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Intent and scope of requirements. Compliance with the grading
regulations set forth herein shall be required as follows.
      (1)   Intent. Grading regulations are established to control the
excavation and filling of land, to assure adequate drainage away from
structures and to a natural or established drainage course, and to assure
protection of trees on sites where grading is to take place. The regulations
set forth herein also establish procedures and requirements for grading
permits, inspection of finished grading operations, and penalties for violation
of the grading regulations.
      (2)   Scope of application. A permit shall be required in all instances
where grading, excavating, filling, stockpiling, or other alteration to the
land are proposed. Filling shall include the dumping of soil, sand, clay,
gravel, or other material on a site. However, where minor alterations to the
land which do not affect the storm drainage pattern are proposed, a grading
permit shall not be required.
   (B)   Grading plan.
      (1)   Grading plan. In the event that a grading permit is required, the
applicant shall first submit a grading plan for review and approval by the City
Engineer and/or Director of Public Services. Grading plans may be submitted in
conjunction with a site plan review, or may be submitted as a separate plan.
The plans shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer.
      (2)   Grading plan standards. At a minimum, grading plans shall show
grade elevations adjacent to existing and proposed structures and at the
nearest side of structures on adjacent properties, and sufficient existing and
proposed elevations on the site to be altered and on as much of the adjacent
property as is necessary to establish the proposed surface water drainage
pattern. If excavation or filling is proposed, the amount of material to be
excavated or filled shall be indicated on the grading plan. All elevations
shall be based on U.S.G.S. datum. Elevations and location of bench marks used
for determining elevations shall be shown on the plan.
      (3)   Subdivision grading plans. For any proposed subdivision, a grading
plan prepared by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer shall be
submitted with the preliminary subdivision plan. The grading plan shall show
the topography of the area to be platted, the existing drainage pattern, and
the
proposed surface water drainage pattern. Drainage easements shall be provided
across private property where necessary for handling surface drainage from
adjacent properties.
   (C)   Grading standards.
      (1)   Slope away from buildings. All buildings and structures shall be
constructed at an elevation which provides a sloping grade away from the
building or structure, thereby causing surface water to drain away from the
walls of the building to a natural or established drainage course. Unless
insufficient space exists on a site, a minimum 5% slope away from all sides of
a building or structure shall be provided for a minimum distance of ten feet.
      (2)   Runoff onto adjacent properties. New grades shall not be
established that would permit an increase in the runoff of surface water onto
adjacent properties, except through established drainage courses.
   (D)   Review, inspection, and approval procedures.  
      (1)   Grading plans shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and/or
Director of Public Services. In the event that the grading plan is submitted in
conjunction with a site plan submission, the Planning Commission shall review
the grading plan as a part of normal site plan review. The Building Official
shall issue a grading permit after the determination has been made that the
requirements set forth herein and in other applicable ordinances have been
complied with.
      (2)   For residential properties, compliance with a grading plan and
permit shall be verified by the Building Official after visual on-site
inspection. The City Engineer and/or Director of Public Services shall be
responsible for verifying compliance with grading plans and permits for
nonresidential uses. Before final inspection and issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, the rough grading must be completed; final grading shall be
completed within six months after a certificate of occupancy has been issued.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.030 LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS.
   Subject to the provisions set forth herein, all parking areas, walkways,
driveways, building entryways, off-street parking and loading areas, and
building complexes with common areas shall be sufficiently illuminated to
assure the security of property and the safety of persons using such public or
common areas. All lighting must comply with Chapter 92, §
92.03(B) of the City Code of Ordinances.
   (A)   Permitted lighting.  Only non-glare, color-corrected lighting shall be
permitted. Lighting shall be placed and shielded so as to direct the light onto
the site and away from adjoining properties. The lighting source shall not be
directly visible from adjoining properties. Lighting shall be shielded so that
it does not cause glare for motorists (see
Appendix B, Illustration 10, Lighting Requirements).
   (B)   Intensity. In parking areas, the light intensity shall average a
minimum of 1.0 footcandle, measured five feet above the surface. In pedestrian
areas, the light intensity shall average a minimum of 2.0 footcandles, measured
five feet above the surface.
   (C)   Height. Except as noted below, lighting fixtures shall not exceed a
height of 25 feet measured from the ground level to the centerline of the light
source. Fixtures should provide an overlapping pattern of light at a height of
approximately seven feet above ground level. The Planning Commission may modify
these height standards in commercial and industrial districts, based on
consideration of the position and height of buildings, other structures, and
trees on the site; the potential off-site impact of the lighting; the character
of the proposed use; and the character of surrounding land use. In no case
shall the lighting exceed the maximum building height in the district in which
it is located.
   (D)   Sign lighting. Signs shall be illuminated in accordance with the Sign
Regulations set forth in §§
154.600 through
154.999 of this Code.
   (E)   Site plan requirements. All lighting, including ornamental lighting,
shall be shown on site plans in sufficient detail to allow determination of the
effects of the lighting upon adjacent properties, traffic safety, and overhead
sky glow. The objective of these specifications is to minimize undesirable off-
site effects.
   (F)   Lighting around architectural building features. Lighting around
architectural building features is subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Static light only. Only static light is permitted around
architectural building features, and any flashing, fading, dissolving, or any
other change in color or illumination level is prohibited.
      (2)    Maintenance of bulbs.  All bulbs around architectural building
features must be functional. Bulbs that are nonfunctional or dysfunctional must
be replaced with a bulb of the same color as, or sequence of color of, the
other bulbs to maintain uniformity.
      (3)   Standards applicable to architectural outline lighting. Tube
lighting around architectural features on any existing or proposed building may
be approved administratively through the zoning permit process of §
154.467, provided the tube lighting does not cause glare and is not hazardous
to traffic safety. In considering whether to approve the architectural
lighting, the city shall consider the light's impact on traffic, neighboring
properties, and the night sky in accordance with the requirements of this
section. The city may require the lighting to be shielded or diffused by
translucent panels, tubes, or similar methods. String lights, rope lighting,
and other similar lighting with exposed or visible bulbs are prohibited on
architectural features.
   (G)   Window tube lighting and rope lighting prohibited. Tube lighting and
rope lighting is prohibited around or within the perimeter of windows unless
the tube lighting is part of a conforming illuminated sign pursuant to §§
154.600 through
154.999 of this Code.
   (H)   Temporary lighting. Temporary string lights and other lighting around
windows and architectural building features are permitted not more than 90 days
in a calendar year (e.g., holiday lighting, etc.). These forms of temporary
lighting are subject to all illumination standards of this section.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 17-005, passed 10-23-17; Am. Ord. 18-
020, passed 8-6-18) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.031 DUMPING, FILLING AND EXCAVATING.
   The dumping of waste or other materials, grading, excavating, filling, and
similar “earth changes” shall be subject to the following regulations.
   (A)   Dumping of waste, junk, or similar materials. The use of land for the
storage, collection or accumulation of used construction materials, or for the
dumping or disposal of refuse, ash, garbage, rubbish, waste material or
industrial by-products, shall not be permitted in any district.
   (B)   Excavation. The excavation or continued existence of unprotected
holes, pits, or wells which constitute or are reasonably likely to constitute a
danger or menace to the public health, safety, and welfare is prohibited.
However, this restriction shall not apply to excavations for which a permit has
been acquired, provided the excavations are properly protected with fencing,
guard rails, and warning signs. Excavations which may be permitted if proper
permits are acquired include excavation related to construction of a driveway,
walk, a permitted wall, or building or part thereof, or movement of soil within
the boundaries of a parcel for the purposes of preparing a site for building
construction or another permitted use.
   (C)   Dumping of soil, sand, clay, gravel or similar material. The dumping
or filling with soil, sand, clay, gravel or similar earthen material (excluding
waste, junk, or contaminated material) on any lot or parcel of land shall not
occur unless the plans for dumping or filling have first been reviewed and
appropriate permits issued by the Building Official. Land within a drainage
easement shall not be filled unless approved by the City Engineer and\or the
Director of Public Services.
   (D)   Removal of soil, sand or similar materials. Approval of the Zoning
Administrator shall be required prior to the removal of topsoil, sand, gravel,
or similar earthen material from any site in the city. A permit shall be issued
only upon finding that removal will not cause stagnant water to collect or
leave the surface of the land in an unstable condition or unfit for the growing
of turf and other land uses permitted in the district in which the site is
located.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.032 STANDARDS FOR TRASH DUMPSTERS.
   (A)   Location. Dumpsters shall be permitted in the side or rear yard,
provided that no dumpster shall extend closer to the front of the lot than any
portion of the principal structure, and provided further that the dumpster
shall not encroach on a required parking area, is clearly accessible to
servicing vehicles, and is located at least ten feet from any building.
Dumpsters shall comply with the setback requirements for the district in which
they are located. Dumpsters shall be located as far as practicable from any
adjoining residential district.
   (B)   Concrete pad. Dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad. The
concrete pad should extend a minimum of three feet in front of the dumpster
enclosure.
   (C)   Screening. Dumpsters shall be screened from view from adjoining
property and public streets and thoroughfares. Dumpsters shall be screened on
three sides with a decorative masonry wall, similar in material and/or color to
the main structure, not less than six feet in height or at least six inches
above the height of the enclosed dumpster, whichever is taller. The fourth side
of the dumpster screening shall be equipped with an opaque, lockable metal gate
that is the same height as the enclosure around the other three sides.
Commercial grade slats are required for a chain link gate. The gate shall
remain closed and shall only be opened for the loading and unloading of the
dumpster.
   (D)   Bollards. Bollards (concrete-filled metal posts) or similar protective
devices shall be installed at the opening to prevent damage to the dumpster
enclosure.
   (E)   Site plan requirements. The location and method of screening of
dumpsters shall be shown on all applications and sketch plans submitted for
administrative approval or site plans submitted for approval by the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission encourages the sharing of dumpsters by
businesses.
   (F)   Exception.
      (1)   The requirements of this section may be modified or waived upon a
determination that the location, screening, or removal of refuse will be
handled in a manner acceptable to the Planning Commission or Zoning
Administrator. The Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator shall consult
with the Fire Chief and Director of the Department of Public Services when
determining the acceptability of the requested modification or waiver. The
Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator may require additional landscaping,
screening or other site improvements as an alternative to adhering to the
requirements of this section. If a requirement for a dumpster is waived, the
site plan or sketch plan shall show a future dumpster location to be built when
or if the use of the building changes prior to occupancy.
      (2)   Prior to granting any exception, the property owner shall submit a
written request. The owner shall provide a list of all standards requiring a
waiver or modification. Any waiver or modification granted shall be limited to
the use of the property at the time the request is made and evaluated. Any
change in use or development of the site upon which the dumpster is located may
required compliance with all standards of this section.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 09-004, passed 3-5-09; Am. Ord. 13-015,
passed 9-9-13; Am. Ord. 15-003, passed 6-29-15) Penalty, see
154.999
§ 154.033 SAFETY PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Public service access. All structures shall be provided with adequate
access for fire, police, sanitation, and public works services. The Planning
Commission or other public body or official charged with enforcement of this
chapter shall determine if adequate access has been provided, based upon
criteria in this chapter and in other applicable ordinances and laws (such as
the Building Code, Fire Codes, City engineering standards, and the like) and
subject to review and input from the Fire Chief, Building Official, Police
Chief, City Engineer, or other knowledgeable official as deemed appropriate.
   (B)   Fire protection. All structures shall be provided with adequate fire
protection, including adequate water supply for fire fighting purposes,
adequate internal fire suppression system, use of fire walls and fireproof
materials, and other fire protection measures deemed necessary by the Fire
Chief or Building Official.
      (1)   Fire protection systems. The Fire Chief or Building Official shall
have the authority to require fire protection systems installed in any zoning
district.
      (2)   Site development standards. To facilitate fire protection during
site preparation and construction of buildings, consideration shall be given to
the following.
         (a)   Water mains and fire hydrants shall be installed prior to
construction above the foundation. Hydrants shall be spaced to provide adequate
fire fighting protection for all buildings and uses, subject to applicable
codes and review by the city officials.
         (b)   Prior to construction of buildings and other large structures, a
hard-surfaced roadbed shall be provided to accommodate access of heavy fire
fighting equipment to the immediate job site at the start of construction. The
roadbed shall be maintained until all construction is completed or until
another means of access is constructed.
         (c)   Free access from the street to fire hydrants and to outside
connections for standpipes, sprinklers, or other fire extinguishing equipment,
whether permanent or temporary, shall be provided and maintained at all times.
         (d)   The building permit holder shall provide scheduled daily cleanup
of scrap lumber, paper products, corrugated cardboard and other debris.
Construction debris shall be disposed of in accordance with methods approved by
the Building Official.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.034 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Essential services.
      (1)   Essential services, as defined in §
154.005, shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by state, federal, and
local ordinances and laws, it being the intention hereof to exempt those
essential services from those regulations governing area, height, placement,
and use of land in the city which would not be practical or feasible to comply
with.
      (2)   Although exempt from certain regulations, proposals for
construction of essential services shall still be subject to site plan review,
it being the intention of the city to achieve efficient use of the land and
alleviate adverse impact on nearby uses or lands. Essential services shall
comply with all applicable regulations that do not affect the basic design or
operation of those services.
   (B)   Exemptions to height standards. The height limitations of this chapter
shall not apply to chimneys, church spires, public monuments, wireless
transmission towers, water towers, and flag poles, provided that the following
requirements are complied with.
      (1)   Wind-driven energy devices. The maximum height of wind-driven
energy devices shall be 35 feet, provided that the device is set back from all
property lines a distance equal to the height of the device. The devices shall
be located in the rear yard of a residential district, and shall be subject to
the regulations in §§
150.20 and
150.21 of this Code.
      (2)   Antennas in residential districts. Private television antennas,
pole antennas, and other private communication antennas or towers shall be
permitted in residential districts as follows.
         (a)   Rooftop antennas. Except as otherwise noted in this subdivision,
antennas having a wind resistance surface of seven square feet or less may be
located on the rooftop, provided that any such antennas shall not exceed 45
feet in height, measured from the base to the top of the antenna.
         (b)   Freestanding antennas. Except as otherwise noted in this
subdivision, freestanding antennas shall be permitted subject to the following
conditions.
            1.   Freestanding antennas shall be permitted in the rear yard
only.
            2.   Freestanding antennas shall be set back from all property
lines a distance equal to 20% of the tower height.
            3.   Freestanding antennas shall not exceed 60 feet in height,
measured from grade level.
            4.   Any freestanding antenna shall be located to obscure its view
from adjacent properties and roads, to the maximum extent possible.
         (c)   Open element and monopole antennas. Open element and monopole
antennas shall be permitted in residential districts, provided they do not
exceed 60 feet in height, measured from grade level. Such antennas shall be set
back from all property lines a distance equal to 20% of the antenna height.
         (d)   Satellite dish antennas. Satellite dish antennas shall be
subject to the regulations in §
154.039 of this chapter.
      (3)   Antennas in nonresidential districts. Television antennas, pole
antennas, and other communication antennas or towers shall be permitted in
nonresidential districts as follows.
         (a)   Rooftop antennas. Except as otherwise noted in this subdivision,
antennas having a wind resistance surface of seven square feet or less may be
located on the rooftop, provided that any such antennas shall not exceed 45
feet in height, measured from the base to the top of the antenna. Any such
antenna shall be located to obscure its view from adjacent properties and
roads, to the maximum extent possible.
         (b)   Freestanding antennas. Except as otherwise noted in this
subdivision, freestanding antennas shall be permitted subject to the following
conditions.
            1.   Freestanding antennas having a wind resistance surface of
seven square feet or less shall be permitted in the side or rear yard.
Freestanding antennas having a wind resistance surface of more than seven
square feet shall be permitted in the rear yard only.
            2.   Freestanding antennas shall be set back from all property
lines a distance equal to 20% of the tower height.
            3.   Freestanding antennas shall not exceed 60 feet in height,
measured from grade level.
            4.   Any freestanding antenna shall be located to obscure its view
from adjacent properties and roads, to the maximum extent possible.
         (c)   Open element and monopole antennas. Open element and monopole
antennas shall be permitted in nonresidential districts, provided they do not
exceed 60 feet in height, measured from grade level. Such antennas shall be set
back from all property lines a distance equal to 20% of the antenna height.
         (d)   Satellite dish antennas. Satellite dish antennas shall be
subject to the regulations set forth in §
154.039.
      (4)   Variances. Variances from height standards may be sought from the
Zoning Board of Appeals. In considering such a request, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall consider, at minimum, the character of the surrounding uses, the
height of surrounding structures, the potential to obscure light or view to or
from existing buildings or surrounding properties, and potential detriment to
the use or value of surrounding properties.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.035 SIDEWALK REQUIREMENTS.
   Sidewalks shall be subject to the requirements in Chapter 94 of this code,
and the following regulations.
   (A)   Location and width. Required sidewalks shall be five feet in width and
shall be located one foot off the property line in the road right-of-way,
except where the planned right-of-way is greater in width than the existing
right-of-way, in which case the sidewalk shall be located one foot inside the
planned right-of-way. The Planning Commission may modify this requirement in
consideration of the location of utilities, existing landscaping, or other site
improvements.
   (B)   Design standards. Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete in
accordance with established engineering standards for the city.
   (C)   Alignment with adjacent sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be aligned
horizontally and vertically with existing sidewalks on adjacent properties. The
Planning Commission may modify this requirement if existing adjacent sidewalks
are not constructed in conformance with the standards set forth herein.
   (D)   Permits. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or developer to
secure any required permits from city, county or state agencies to allow
sidewalk construction in the road right-of-way.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.036 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE; REQUIREMENTS; PERMITS AND/OR APPROVALS.
   (A)   Intent and scope of requirements. To insure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and any conditions imposed thereunder, the Planning
Commission, Community Development Director, Zoning Administrator or their
designee may require that a performance guarantee be deposited with the city,
prior to the issuance of permits or approvals, to insure faithful completion of
improvements, in accordance with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of
2006, as amended. Improvements for which the city may require a performance
guarantee include, but are not limited to roadways, lighting, utilities,
sidewalks, driveways, screening, grading and drainage, incomplete structures,
site clean-up and landscape buffers.
   (B)   General requirements. The performance guarantee shall meet the
following requirements.
      (1)   The performance guarantee shall be in the form of cash, certified
check, irrevocable letter of credit from a Michigan lending institution, surety
bond or performance bond which names the property owner/developer/contractor as
the obligor and the city as the at-will oblige or beneficiary.
      (2)   The performance guarantee shall be submitted at the time of
issuance of the permit authorizing the activity or project.
      (3)   The amount of the performance guarantee shall be sufficient to
cover the estimated cost of the project/development/improvements for which the
performance guarantee is required. Prior to the issuance of the permit
authorizing the activity or project, the applicant shall provide an itemized
schedule of estimated costs to complete the project/development/improvements.
The amount of the performance guarantee shall be determined by the Zoning
Administrator or Building Official and shall be reasonably related to the costs
incurred by the city to complete the project/development/improvements.
      (4)   The entire performance guarantee shall be returned to the applicant
following issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Building Official and/
or final site approval by the Community Development Director or designee where
appropriate. The performance guarantee may be released to the applicant in
proportion to the work completed on various elements, provided that a minimum
of 10% shall be retained on each element until satisfactory completion of the
entire project.
   (C)   Unsatisfactory completion of improvements. Whenever required
improvements are not installed or maintained within the time stipulated or in
accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter or the Approved Site
Plan, the city may complete the necessary improvements and assess all costs of
completing the improvements plus interest against the performance guarantee.
Prior to the city completing the improvements, the city shall notify the owner,
site plan review applicant, or other firm or individual responsible for
completion of the required improvements.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 06-004, passed 2-13-06; Am. Ord. 13-014,
passed 9-9-13)  Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.037 FENCES.
    Every fence constructed or erected in the city shall comply with the
regulations of this section. No fence shall be erected or constructed until a
permit has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (A)   Permit required.  Anyone desiring to construct a fence upon property
in the city shall first apply to the Building Department for a permit. There
shall be a permit fee as passed by City Council. The permit shall be issued by
the Building Department upon a written application, which application shall
request that the city establish the grade at which the fence is to be
constructed and shall also contain such information as may be required by the
Building Inspector in order to determine compliance with the provisions of this
code.
   (B)   General requirements.
      (1)   Fence materials. Fences shall consist of materials commonly used in
conventional fence construction, such as wood or metal. Razor wire shall not be
permitted. Fences which carry electric current are prohibited. Barbed wire
shall be permitted only in industrial districts, provided that the barbed wire
is at least eight feet above the ground, and provided further that the barbed
wire shall be installed on supports that extend toward the interior of the
site. Fence posts shall be sunk into the ground at least three feet, and all
posts shall be encased in concrete below the surface of the ground.
      (2)   Fence appearance. If, because of the design or construction, one
side of the fence has a more finished appearance than the other, the side of
the fence with the more finished appearance shall face the exterior of the lot,
with the following exceptions.
         (a)   When a fence is approved for construction under a joint permit,
the joint permit holders shall determine the preferred orientation of the more
finished side of the fence along the common property line(s) of the joint
permit holders.
         (b)   An owner of abutting property may waive the right for the more
finished side of a fence to face his abutting property. The waiver of right
must be in the form of a written consent statement, signed by the owner of the
property where the fence would face under the normal requirements of this
subdivision. The written consent statement shall be attached to the permit
application and maintained with the permit records of the Building Official.
      (3)   Obstruction to use of adjoining property.  No fence shall be
erected where it would prevent or unreasonably obstruct the use of adjacent
property, nor shall a fence be erected where it would obstruct or prevent the
continued safe use of an existing driveway or other means of access to adjacent
property. In enforcing this provision, the Building Official may require a
fence to be set back a minimum distance of not more than two feet from a
driveway or property line in order to provide for the safe passage of
pedestrians, bicyclists or vehicular traffic or other safety related concerns.
      (4)   Fence maintenance. Fences shall be maintained in good condition.
Rotten or broken components shall be replaced, repaired, or removed. As
required, surfaces shall be painted, stained, or otherwise treated with
materials to protect and preserve the fence and provide an attractive finish.
If a fence is found to be in need of repair by the Building Official, the
Building Official shall issue orders to complete the repairs. Failure to comply
with written notice from the Building Official ordering completion of repairs
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
      (5)   Location; general requirements.  Any fence shall be located
entirely on the private property of the person constructing it. However,
adjoining property owners may jointly apply for a fence permit, in which case
the Building Official may permit it to be constructed on their common property
line. A fence shall not be attached to or touch a fence located on another
owner's lot without the express written agreement of the owners of both fences.
No more than three inches is permitted between fences. In every case, fences
must be constructed with adequate posts and other supports so that each fence
is capable of maintaining an upright position and the location described in the
original application for permit to construct the fence.
      (6)   Corner clearance. Fences located adjacent to a street or driveway
shall be designed to provide unobstructed sight distance for drivers in
accordance with §
154.027(D) of this Code.
      (7)   Nonconforming fences. Any future additions or improvements will be
required to conform to this chapter.
   (C)   Review and approval procedures.
      (1)   Application for permit.
         (a)   No fence shall be erected or constructed until a permit has been
issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. If a fence is
proposed in conjunction with a development that requires site plan review, then
the fence shall be shown on the site plan which shall be reviewed in accordance
with normal site plan review procedures. No additional permit is required when
a fence is approved as part of a site plan. In all other cases, an application
for a permit to construct a fence shall be filed with the Building Official.
The application shall be accompanied by drawings and other information to
illustrate the dimensions, design and location of the proposed fence. The
following minimum information shall be included on the drawing submitted in
support of a fence permit application.
            1.   Fence location.
            2.   Location of all structures within 25 feet of the proposed
fence.
            3.   Location of all driveways within 25 feet of the proposed
fence.
            4.   Location of all sidewalks within 25 feet of the proposed
fence.
            5.   Location of all existing fences within ten feet of the
proposed fence.
         (b)   The Building Official may determine other additional information
is reasonably necessary to provide a complete review of the proposed fence. Any
additional information shall be provided by the applicant as may be required by
the Building Official to assure compliance with the regulations set forth in
this chapter and to assure the fence is constructed with sound materials.
      (2)   Application review fee. Each fence permit application shall be
accompanied by an application review fee to recover the reasonable costs of
review and permit issuance. The amount of the fee shall be fixed by resolution
of the City Council and posted in the Building Department. If the fence is
constructed before an application for a permit is obtained, the fee shall be
increased to an amount equal to twice the fee that is required if the permit
application and fee were obtained prior to construction of a fence.
      (3)   Survey required. In the event lot lines for the subject property
cannot be located to the satisfaction of the Building Official, the Building
Official may require the applicant to establish lot lines on the property
through placement of permanent stakes located by a licensed surveyor. Lot lines
must be located before the fence permit is issued. The Building Official may
withhold issuance of the permit to construct the fence until the lot lines are
located and permanent stakes are placed by a licensed surveyor.
      (4)   Administrative rules. The Building Official may establish
reasonable rules and procedures, consistent with the intentions of this
chapter, which may be necessary to provide for the proper administration of
this section.
      (5)   Application review and permit issuance by the Building Official.
The Building Official shall review the fence application and supporting data
with respect to the standards set forth in this chapter, the adopted Building
Code, and administrative rules which may be established to provide for proper
administration of this section. The Building Official shall grant a permit to
construct a proposed fence upon finding that the proposed fence fully complies
with all applicable regulations.
      (6)   Appeal of a decision. An applicant may appeal a decision of the
Building Official or Planning Commission concerning a proposed fence or
enforcement of the provisions of this section to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the appeal in accordance with the
standards and procedures set forth for a dimensional variance set forth in §§
154.450 through
154.453 of this chapter.
   (D)   Fence regulations in residential districts.
      (1)   Location and height.
         (a)   Fences not to exceed six feet in height shall be permitted in
the rear yard and permitted to extend into the side yard either up to two feet
beyond an existing side door or no closer than ten feet to the front line of
the house.
         (b)   A fence not to exceed four feet in height shall be permitted in
side yards but shall not extend past the front line of the house.
         (c)   Fences on corner lots shall comply with the following:
            1.   Fences located along the side lot line abutting a street on a
corner lot shall be located no closer than one foot to the edge of the
sidewalk, or on the lot line if there is no sidewalk adjacent to the lot line;
            2.   No fence shall be erected, established, or maintained on any
lot that will obstruct the view of drivers in vehicles at the intersection of a
driveway and a road; and
            3.   A ten-foot clear vision area is required (see illustration in
Appendix B).
      (2)   Border treatment.
         (a)   A border treatment, as defined in §
154.005, shall not exceed 30 inches in height. Typical border treatments
include, but are not limited to those devices known as split rail fences and
picket fences. A border treatment may be created in any required yard area in
accordance with the following limitations.
            1.   If a border treatment is used at a property corner to deter
pedestrians from walking on a private yard area, the border treatment that will
be visible must be visible so as not to present a safety hazard at night or
during other times of low visibility.
            2.   Thin strands of wire, cable or cord shall not be permitted to
be attached to standing poles to form a border treatment.
            3.   The border treatment shall be located on the private property
owner's lot not less than two feet from all sidewalks and driveways, and not
less than one foot from all lot lines.
            4.   No permit shall be required for a border treatment. However, a
border treatment must comply with these specifications and the general
requirements as described in divisions (A)(2), (A)(3) and (A)(6) of this
section.
      (3)   Fences enclosing public areas. Fences which enclose public parks,
playgrounds, or similar public areas located within a residential district
shall not exceed eight feet in height, measured from the surface of the ground.
   (E)   Fence regulations in nonresidential districts.
      (1)   Location.
         (a)   Except as otherwise permitted in this section for industrial
facilities, fences shall be permitted in the rear or side yards of
nonresidential districts, provided that no fence shall extend closer toward the
front of the lot than any portion of the principal structure.
         (b)   A fence may also be installed in the front yard of a lot located
in the M-1 Light Industrial District for the purpose of providing security of
goods, supplies, and vehicles stored on the industrial lot. An application for
the security fence shall be considered consistent with the special use approval
procedures described in §§
154.415 through
154.417 of this chapter. The fence permit application for the security fence
shall be accompanied by an application for special use approval. Reasonable
conditions for the placement of such fences may be included when the fence is
approved as a special use.
         (c)   Fences located along the side lot line abutting a street on a
corner lot shall be located no closer than one foot to the edge of the sidewalk
or on the lot line if there is no sidewalk adjacent to the lot line.
         (d)   Fences on corner lots shall comply with the corner clearance
requirements of § 154.027(E) of this chapter.
      (2)   Height. Fences in commercial districts shall not exceed six feet in
height. Fences in industrial districts shall not exceed eight feet in height,
except that barbed wire shall be at least eight feet above the ground, as
specified in division (A)(1) of this section. If barbed wire is attached to the
top of a fence in an industrial district, the barbed wire may extend not more
than one foot above the height of the fence.
      (3)   Signs attached to fences. Signs advertising the availability of
services or products shall not be attached to any fence. The only sign that may
be attached to a fence shall indicate the name of the individual or company
that constructed the fence, and that sign shall not exceed one square foot in
area.
   (F)   Walls. This section shall in no way alter or affect the requirements
for walls set forth in §§
154.100 and
154.101 of this chapter.
(Ord. 98-006, passed 6-29-98; Am. Ord. 98-023, passed 9-21-98; Am. Ord. 09-006,
passed 4-20-09; Am. Ord. 19-011, passed 9-23-19)  Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.038 SIGNS.
   All signs shall comply with the Sign Regulations set forth in
Chapter 153 of this Code.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.039 SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS.
   Satellite dish antennas may be permitted as an accessory use in any zoning
district, subject to the following conditions.
   (A)   Roof-mounted antennas. Roof-mounted dish antennas up to ten feet in
diameter shall be permitted in commercial and industrial districts only,
provided that the antennas comply with the height standards for the district in
which they are located.
   (B)   Ground-mounted antennas. Ground-mounted antennas up to ten feet in
diameter shall be permitted in all districts subject to the following
conditions.
      (1)   Maximum height permitted shall be 20 feet.
      (2)   The satellite dish structure shall be securely mounted and anchored
to a pole and secured in accordance with the requirements of the manufacturer
and the Building Code.
      (3)   If elevated off of the ground, all antennas shall be located so
that there is an eight-foot clearance between the lowest part of the dish and
grade.
      (4)   Satellite dish antennas shall comply with setback requirements for
the district in which they are located, and shall not be permitted in front
yards.
      (5)   All electrical and antenna wiring shall be placed underground.
      (6)   The surface of the dish shall be painted or treated so as not to
reflect glare from sunlight, and shall not be used as any sign or message
board. All installations shall employ (to the extent possible) materials and
colors that blend in with the surroundings.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.040 OUTDOOR DISPLAYS; PROHIBITIONS.
   The outdoor display of any goods, materials, vehicles, or merchandise, shall
not exceed a continuous 24-hour period unless otherwise approved by the
Planning/Zoning Administrator. Outdoor displays shall be set back at least
three feet from the property line, shall not impede normal pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, shall not pose a risk of injury or threat to public health,
safety and welfare, shall be directly related to the principal business
conducted on the premises, and shall be displayed only during normal business
hours.
(Ord. 08-004, passed 11-5-07)
NONCONFORMITIES
§ 154.050 INTENT.
   Nonconformities are uses, structures, buildings, or lots which do not
conform to one or more provisions or requirements of this chapter or a
subsequent amendment, but which were lawfully established prior to the time of
adoption of the chapter or amendment. Such nonconformities are not compatible
with the current or intended use of land in the district in which they are
located. Therefore, it is the intent of this chapter to permit those
nonconformities to continue under certain conditions, but to discourage their
expansion, enlargement, or extension. Accordingly, the purpose of this
subchapter is to establish regulations that govern the completion, restoration,
reconstruction, extension, and/or substitution of nonconformities, and to
specify the circumstances and conditions under which nonconformities shall be
permitted to continue.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.051 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The following regulations shall apply to all nonconforming uses, structures,
and lots.
   (A)   Continuation of nonconforming uses and structures. Any lawful
nonconforming use established on or before the effective date of this chapter
or amendment thereto may be continued and shall not be considered to be in
violation of this chapter, provided that, unless otherwise noted in this
subchapter, the building and land involved shall neither be structurally
altered, nor enlarged unless the modifications conform to the provisions of
this chapter for the district in which it is located. Nothing in this chapter
shall he deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition
of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by an official charged
with protecting the public safety, upon order of that official.
   (B)   Buildings under construction. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this
chapter shall be deemed to require a change in plans, construction, or
designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun
prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, and upon
which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. ACTUAL
CONSTRUCTION is defined to include the placing of construction materials in
permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where demolition or
removal of an existing building has begun preparatory to rebuilding, the work
shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that the work shall be
diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.
   (C)   Discontinuation of nonconforming uses and structures.
      (1)   Nonconforming structure. When a nonconforming use of a structure,
or structure and land in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six
consecutive months, or discontinued for any period of time without a present
intention to reinstate the nonconforming use, the structure or structure and
land in combination shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the
provisions of the district in which it is located.
      (2)   Nonconforming uses of open land. If any nonconforming use of open
land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 180 days, any subsequent
use of the land shall conform to the provisions of the district in which it is
located.
      (3)   Seasonal uses. In applying this division to seasonal uses, the time
during the off-season shall not be counted.
   (D)   Purchase or condemnation. In order to accomplish the elimination of
nonconforming uses and structures which constitute a nuisance or are
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, the city, pursuant to §
3a, Public Act 207 of 1921, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.581 - 125.590, as amended,
may acquire by purchase, condemnation or otherwise, private property for the
purpose of removal of nonconforming uses or structures. Where acquisition is
contemplated, the procedures set forth in §
154.054 shall be followed.
   (E)   Recording of nonconforming uses and structures. The Building Official
shall be responsible for maintaining records of nonconforming uses and
structures as accurate as is feasible, and for determining legal nonconforming
uses and structures in existence on the effective date of this chapter. Failure
on the part of a property owner to provide the Building Official with necessary
information to determine legal nonconforming status may result in denial of
required or requested permits
   (F)   Establishment of a conforming use or structure. In the event that a
nonconforming principal use or structure is superseded by a conforming
principal use or structure on a site, the nonconforming use or structure shall
be immediately and permanently removed.
   (G)   Change of tenancy or ownership. In the event there is a change in
tenancy, ownership, or management, an existing nonconforming use or structure
shall be allowed to continue, provided there is no change in the nature or
character of the nonconformity.
   (H)   Exceptions and variances. Any use for which a special exception or
variance has been granted as provided in this chapter shall not be deemed a
nonconformity.
   (I)   Unlawful nonconformities. No nonconformity shall be permitted to
continue in existence if it was unlawful at the time it was established.
   (J)   Substitution. A nonconforming use may be changed to another
nonconforming use upon approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals, provided that
no structural alterations are required to accommodate the new nonconforming
use, and that the proposed use is equally or more appropriate in the district
than the existing nonconformity. In permitting such a change, the Zoning Board
of Appeals may require conditions to accomplish the purposes of this chapter.
   (K)   Change of location. Should a nonconforming structure be moved to
another parcel or to another location on the same parcel for any reason
whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.052 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   The following regulations shall apply to any nonconforming lot of record or
nonconforming lot described in a deed or land contract executed and delivered
prior to the effective date of this chapter or amendment thereto.
   (A)   Use of nonconforming lots. Any nonconforming lot shall be used only
for a use permitted in the district in which it is located. In any district in
which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single- family dwelling and
customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record in
existence, subject to the requirements in division (C) of this section. This
provision shall apply even though a single-family lot fails to meet the
requirements for area or width that are applicable in the district, provided
that the lot and buildings comply with setbacks and other requirements (other
than lot area and width) for the district.
   (B)   Variance from area and bulk requirements. If the use of a
nonconforming lot requires a variation from the area or bulk requirements, then
the use shall be permitted only if a variance is granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
   (C)   Nonconforming contiguous residential lots under the same ownership. If
two or more residential lots or combinations of lots with contiguous frontage
in single ownership are of record at the time of adoption or amendment to this
chapter, and if each lot has an area of less than 3,500 square feet, then the
lots involved shall be considered to be an individual parcel for purposes of
this chapter. Any residential lot of record having an area less than 5,000
square feet or having a width less than required shall be used only for a
single-family dwelling and customary accessory building.
   (D)   Combination of nonconforming lots. Upon application to the Zoning
Administrator, the Zoning Administrator may permit the combination, in whole or
in part, of nonconforming lots of record into building sites less than the size
requirements established by this chapter, provided that the combination of lots
reduces the degree of nonconformity and results in a parcel which is capable of
accommodating a structure that is in conformance with the building area,
setback, and side yard requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.053 MODIFICATION TO NONCONFORMING USES OR STRUCTURES
   No nonconforming use or structure shall be enlarged, extended, or
structurally altered, nor shall any nonconformity be changed to a different
nonconformity which increases the intensity of use or nonconformity, except as
specifically permitted by the following regulations.
   (A)   Applicability. The following regulations shall apply to any
nonconforming use or structure, including:
      (1)   Nonconforming use of open land;
      (2)   Nonconforming use of buildings designed or used for a conforming
use;
      (3)   Nonconforming use of buildings specifically designed for the type
of use which occupies them but not suitable for a conforming use;
      (4)   Buildings designed and used for a conforming use but not in
conformance with area and bulk, parking, loading, or landscaping requirements;
      (5)   Nonconforming structures such as fences and signs.
   (B)   Enlargement, extension or alteration.  
      (1)   Increase in nonconformity prohibited. Except as specifically
provided in this section, no person may engage in any activity that causes an
increase in the extent of any nonconformity. For example, physical alterations
of new structures on open land is unlawful if the activity results in one the
following.
         (a)   An increase in the total amount of space devoted to a
nonconforming use.
         (b)   A decrease in the amount of required yard area, such as would be
caused by an addition to a nonconforming building where the addition intrudes
into a yard setback otherwise required by this chapter.
         (c)   Enlargement of a use on a site which does not meet all site
development standards required for the use.
         (d)   Greater nonconformity with respect to dimensional restrictions,
such as setback requirements, height limitations, density requirements, or
other requirements in the district in which the property is located.
      (2)   Permitted extension. Any nonconforming use may be extended
throughout any part of a building which was manifestly arranged or designed for
such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use
shall be extended to occupy any land outside the building. No nonconforming use
of land shall be enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of
land, nor shall any such use be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the
lot or parcel than was occupied on the effective date of this chapter or
amendment thereto.
      (3)   Alterations that decrease nonconformity. Any nonconforming
structure or any structure or portion thereof containing a nonconforming use
may be altered if the alteration serves to decrease the nonconforming nature of
the structure or use. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine if a proposed
alteration will decrease the degree of nonconformity.
      (4)   Variance to area and bulk regulations. If a proposed alteration is
deemed reasonable by the Zoning Board of Appeals by virtue of the fact that it
would decrease the nonconforming nature of a structure or use, but the
alteration requires a variation of the area or bulk requirements, then the
alteration shall be permitted only if a variance is granted by the Zoning Board
of Appeals. Additionally, the Zoning Board of Appeals may grant variances to
required site development standards applicable to specific uses to permit
expansion of an existing use located on a nonconforming site consistent with
the guidelines and standards of §§
154.450 through
154.453.
   (C)   Repairs, improvements, and modernization.
      (1)   Required repairs. Repairs or maintenance deemed necessary by the
Building Official to keep a nonconforming building structurally safe and sound
are permitted. However, if a nonconforming structure or a structure containing
a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe and/or unlawful due to lack of
maintenance and repairs and is declared as such by the Building Official, it
shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in full
conformity with the regulations in the district in which it is located.
      (2)   Additional permitted improvements. Additional repairs,
improvements, or modernization of nonconforming structures, beyond what is
required to maintain the safety and soundness of the structure, shall be
permitted, provided the repairs or improvements do not exceed 25% of the market
value of the structure (as determined by the City Assessor) during any period
of 12 consecutive months. Any repairs, improvements, and modernization shall
not result in enlargement of the cubic content of the nonconforming structure.
The provisions in this subdivision shall apply to all structures except as
otherwise provided in this subchapter for single-family residential uses and
for reconstruction of structures damaged by fire or other catastrophe.
   (D)   Damage by fire or other catastrophe. 
      (1)   Any nonconforming structure or structure housing a nonconforming
use that is damaged by fire, flood, or other means in excess of 50% of the
structure’s pre-catastrophe fair market value (as determined by the City
Assessor) shall not be rebuilt, repaired, or reconstructed, except in complete
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   In the event that the damage is less than 50% of the structure"s
pre-catastrophe fair market value, the structure may be restored to its pre-
catastrophe status. Restoration shall take place only upon approval of the
Zoning Administrator and in full compliance with applicable provisions of this
chapter. Any rebuilding, repair, or restoration shall be completed within one
year from the date of the catastrophe.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord 94-004, passed 7-5-94) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.054 ACQUISITION BY CITY; PROCEDURE.
   The Building Official, from time to time, may recommend to the City Council
the acquisition of private property for the purpose of removal of
nonconformities. Where acquisition is contemplated, the following procedures
shall be followed.
   (A)   Building Department documentation and recommendation. The Building
Department shall prepare a report for City Council, which shall include the
following.
      (1)   A list of ordinance requirements which the subject property does
not conform to.
      (2)   Estimates of the expense of acquisition and removal of the
nonconformities.
      (3)   Estimates of the probable resale price of the property.
      (4)   Recommendations concerning the allocation of costs to the
surrounding district.
   (B)   City Council consideration.
      (1)   Public hearing. After receiving and reviewing the report from the
Building Official, the City Council shall determine if acquisition should be
pursued. If the Council decides to pursue acquisition, then it shall first set
a public hearing. Not less than 15 days prior to the public hearing, notice of
the time, place, and purpose of the public hearing shall be published in the
official newspaper of the city, and sent by mail to the owners of property for
which acquisition is being considered. The notice shall be sent to the owner's
address as stated in the latest assessment roll.
      (2)   Special assessment. If any or all of the expense related to
acquisition of the subject property is assessed to a special district, then the
City Assessor shall be directed to furnish the City Council with a tentative
special assessment district and tentative plan of assessment. The names and
addresses of the owners of property located in the district (as stated in the
latest assessment roll) shall be provided to City Council. Notice of the time,
place, and purpose of the public hearing shall be sent by mail to the owners of
property located in the tentative special assessment district.
      (3)   City Council determination. If, following the public hearing, the
City Council finds that elimination of the nonconforming use or structure would
be for a public purpose and for a public use, then it shall declare by
resolution that the city shall proceed to acquire the nonconforming use or
structure in accordance with the laws of the state, the city Charter, and
applicable ordinances of the city. The City Clerk shall send by registered mail
a certified copy of the City Council resolution to the owners of property to be
acquired, and to owners of property in any special assessment district, at the
addresses stated in the latest assessment roll.
   (C)   Removal of nonconformity. Upon passing of title of the property so
acquired by the city, the City Council shall cause the discontinuance or
removal of the nonconforming use, or the removal, demolition or remodeling of
the nonconforming building or structure.
   (D)   Disposition of property. The City Council may thereafter elect to
retain all or part of the property so acquired for municipal purposes. If
acquisition costs and expenses are to be assessed against a special district,
the amount to be assessed shall be reduced by the market value of the property
retained for municipal use, as determined by the City Assessor. The City
Council shall thereafter order the sale of the portion of the property not
retained for municipal purposes, but only for use in conformance with this
chapter. The City Council shall confirm the expense of the project and report
any assessable cost to the City Assessor, who shall then prepare an assessment
roll in the manner provided for in the City Charter and Chapter 41 of this
Code. Such an assessment may, at the discretion of the City Council, be paid in
one or more, but not to exceed ten, annual installments.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.065 SCOPE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Compliance with the off-street parking regulations shall be required as
follows.
   (A)   General applicability. For all buildings and uses established after
the effective date of this chapter, off-street parking shall be provided as
required in this subchapter. However, where a building permit has been issued
prior to the effective date of this chapter and construction has been
diligently carried on, compliance with the parking requirements at the time of
issuance of the building permit shall be required.
   (B)   Change in use or intensity.  
      (1)   Whenever use of a building, structure, or lot is changed, parking
facilities shall be provided as required by this chapter for the new use,
regardless of any variance which may have been in effect prior to change of
use.
      (2)   If the intensity of use of any building, structure, or lot is
increased through the addition of dwelling units, increase in floor area,
increase in seating capacity, or through other means, additional off-street
parking shall be provided for the increase in intensity of use.
   (C)   Existing parking facilities.  
      (1)   Off-street parking facilities in existence on the effective date of
this chapter shall not thereafter be reduced below, or if already less than,
shall not be further reduced below the requirements for the use being served as
set forth in this chapter.
      (2)   An area designated as required off-street parking shall not be
changed to any other use unless equal facilities are provided elsewhere in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Additional off-street parking. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed
to prevent voluntary establishment of off-street parking facilities to serve an
existing use of land or buildings, or to prevent provision of additional
parking facilities beyond what is required by this chapter provided all parking
conforms with the regulations herein.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.066 GENERAL OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Location.
      (1)   Proximity to building or use being served. Except as otherwise
permitted for shared off-street parking, off-street parking for multiple-family
and nonresidential uses shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the
building, or within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve, as
measured from the nearest point of the building or use to the nearest point of
the parking.
      (2)   Within yards.
         (a)   Off-street parking in commercial and office districts may be
located in a front, side, or rear yard, provided that all landscaping and berm
requirements in §§
154.080 through
154.086 are met, and provided further that off-street parking shall not be
permitted within 20 feet of a residential district boundary, nor within 20 feet
of the traveled portion of any road right-of-way, unless screening is provided
in accordance with §§
154.100 and
154.101.
         (b)   Off-street parking in multiple-family and industrial districts
may be located in a side or rear yard or a non-required front yard, provided
that all landscaping and berm requirements in Sec.
154.080 through
154.086 are complied with, and provided further that off-street parking serving
an industrial use shall not be within 20 feet of a residential district.
   (B)   Residential parking.
      (1)   Off-street parking spaces in single-family residential districts
shall consist of a parking strip, driveway, garage, or combination thereof, and
shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve. No parking shall
be permitted on a regular basis on lawns or other unpaved areas on residential
lots, with the exception of approved parking areas.
      (2)   Commercial and recreational vehicle parking in residential
districts shall comply with the standards in §
154.069.
   (C)   Control of off-site parking.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to park, store, or offer for sale any motor
vehicle or recreational vehicle on private property without the expressed or
implied consent of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent, or trustee of
the private property.
      (2)   Where required parking is permitted on land other than on the same
lot as the building or use being served, the land on which the parking is
located shall be under the same ownership and control as the lot occupied by
the building or use or a written agreement or easement which provides for
continued use and maintenance of the shared parking area, as well as cross-
access without limitation, shall be executed by the parties concerned and
submitted to the City for approval before recording with the Wayne County
Register of Deeds. The agreement shall assure the continued availability of the
parking facility for the uses it is intended to serve.
   (D)   Access to parking. Each off-street parking space shall open directly
onto an aisle or driveway of sufficient width and design as to provide safe and
efficient access to or from a public street or alley in a manner that will
least interfere with the smooth flow of traffic. Access to off-street parking
which serves a nonresidential use shall not be permitted across land that is
zone or used for residential purposes.
   (E)   Storage and repair prohibited. The storage of merchandise, sale of
motor vehicles, storage of wrecked, unlicensed, junked, inoperable vehicles, or
repair of vehicles are prohibited in required off-street parking lots or areas.
Emergency services shall be permitted.
   (F)   Duration. Except when land is used as permitted storage space in
direct connection with a legitimate business, a 48-hour time limit for parking
in nonresidential off-street parking areas shall prevail.
   (G)   Parking structures. Parking structures shall be permitted subject to
the following standards.
      (1)   Any parking structure shall comply with the required setbacks for
the district in which it is located.
      (2)   Parking structures shall be designed as integral elements of the
overall site plan, taking into account the relationship to the principal
building and other structures on the site.
      (3)   The facade of the parking structure shall be compatible in design,
color, and type of material to the principal building(s) on the site.
      (4)   Landscaping shall be placed around the parking structure in
accordance with an approved landscape plan. The landscaping shall be compatible
with the overall landscape plan for the entire site.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 10-009, passed 10-5-09; Am. Ord. 20-007,
passed 11-23-20) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.067 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   The following standards shall be used in determining the required number of
parking spaces.
   (A)   Definition of floor area. For the purposes of determining the required
number of parking spaces, floor area shall be measured in accordance with the
definitions provided in §
154.005.
   (B)   Units of measurement.
      (1)   Fractional spaces. When calculations for determining the required
number of parking spaces results in a fractional space, any fraction of less
than one-half may be disregarded, while a fraction of one-half or more shall be
counted as one full space.
      (2)   Employee parking. Parking spaces required for employees shall be
based on the maximum number of employees on the premises at any one time.
   (C)   Uses not cited. For those uses not specifically mentioned, the
requirements for off-street parking for the most similar use stated shall be
determined by the Zoning Administrator.
   (D)   Parking during construction. Temporary off-street parking shall be
provided for workers during construction at a rate of one space per employee.
Temporary gravel surfacing may be permitted for temporary parking. Temporary
parking areas must be abandoned and returned to the original state or improved
in accordance with an approved site plan prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy.
   (E)   Parking for the physically handicapped. Each parking lot that serves a
building, except single- and two-family dwelling units, shall have a number of
level parking spaces, identified by an above-grade sign which indicates the
spaces are reserved for physically handicapped persons. Parking for the
handicapped shall comply with the state Barrier-Free Rules, Public Act 1 of
1966, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 125.1351 et seq., and the adopted city
Building Code. The number of barrier-free spaces required is as follows.
Total Parking In Lot   Required Number of Barrier-Free Spaces
Total Parking In Lot   Required Number of Barrier-Free Spaces
Up to 25                 1
26 to 50                 2
51 to 75                 3
76 to 100                4
101 to 150               5
151 to 200               6
201 to 300               8
301 to 400               12
Over 400                 12 plus 2 for every 250 or fraction thereof over 400
   (F)   Use of loading space. Required loading space shall not be counted or
used for parking requirements.
   (G)   Modification of minimum requirements. In the case of a site plan for
development within the Planned Development District, the Planning Commission
may modify a numerical standard for off-street parking. In other nonresidential
districts, the Zoning Board of Appeals may reduce a standard for a particular
site, based upon evidence that another standard would be more reasonable,
considering the level of current or future employment and/or level of current
or future customer traffic.
   (H)   Shared parking. Off-street parking for two or more uses may be
provided collectively via a shared common parking area. The uses that share a
common parking area may be located within a single building or in separate
buildings. The uses may be located on the same or different property or lot.
The total number of spaces provided collectively shall not be less than the sum
of spaces calculated according to the following procedure.
      (1)   Multiply the minimum parking required for each use, as set forth in
Section 74-6.204 by the appropriate percentage indicated in Table 6, Shared
Parking Factors for each of the six designated time periods.
      (2)   Add together the resulting modified parking figures for each of the
six time period columns. The highest total of the time period columns shall be
the minimum shared parking requirement.
      (3)   If a particular land use proposing to make use of collective
parking facilities (e.g., religious institution, municipal use) does not
conform to the general classifications in the Shared Parking Factors table (as
determined by the Zoning Administrator), the applicant shall submit sufficient
data to indicate the principal operating hours of the proposed use. Based upon
this documentation, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the appropriate
collective parking requirement (if any) for the proposed use.
 
SHARED PARKING FACTORS
Land Use          Weekdays                    Weekends
Classification
               1 AM - 7AM 7 AM - 7PM 7 PM - 1 1 AM - 7AM 7 AM - 7PM 7 PM - 1 AM
                                     AM
Office/Service 5%         95%        5%       0%         10%        0%
Commercial/    0%         95%        75%      0%         90%        75%
Retail
Restaurant     20%        70%        100%     30%        75%        100%
Residential/   95%        25%        95%      95%        75%        95%
Hotel
 
   (I)   Minimum number of spaces for each use. The amount of required off-
street parking spaces shall be determined in accordance with the following
schedule.
SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING
Land Use Required No. of Parking Spaces Per Each Unit of Measure
SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING
Land Use                                             Required No. of Parking Spaces Per Each Unit of Measure
   RESIDENTIAL USES
Single and two-family residential dwellings          2 Dwelling unit (may be in garage)
Multiple-family housing                              2 per dwelling unit PLUS supplemental guest parking of 20% of required dwelling
And attached single-family housing                   unit parking
Senior apartments                                    Same standards as for multiple-family housing.
Housing for elderly; elderly housing complex,        1 per dwelling unit, or 0.5 per bed PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum
congregate housing, dependent housing facilities     employment shift
Mobile homes                                         Parking shall be provided in accordance with MI MHC Rules and MLCA 152.2301, as
                                                    amended
   INSTITUTIONAL OR PUBLIC USES
Churches, temples, and   places of worship     1 per 3 seats OR 6 lineal feet of pews in the main hall, PLUS any required
                                                     spaces for permitted accessory or associated uses (school, day care, etc.)
                                                     1 per teacher, administrator or other employee based on maximum employment
Child care centers                                   shift, PLUS 1 per 400 sq. ft. of usable floor area PLUS sufficient area for
                                                     pick-up/drop-off of children in a safe manner
Fraternities, dormitories                            1 per 5 active resident members or 2 beds, whichever is greater
Hospitals, sanitariums                               1 per 2 beds, PLUS 1 per 150 sq. ft. of usable floor area occupied by outpatient
                                                     services, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum employment shift
Homes for the aged, convalescent homes, children’s 1 per dwelling unit or 0.5 per bed, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum
homes                                                employment shift
Museum, library, cultural center, or similar         1 per 500 sq. ft. of usable floor space, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum
facility                                             employment shift
Public utility use                                   1 per employee based on maximum employment shift
                                                     2 per classroom, PLUS any required space for an auditorium or other public
                                                     meeting space. However, if a place of assembly is provided and the parking for
School, elementary and junior high                   the assembly area is greater or equal to the requirements of classroom parking,
                                                     the classroom parking is waived.
                                                      
                                                     1 per teacher, administrator, or other employee, PLUS 1 per 5 students who may
School, senior high                                  legally occupy the school at one time, PLUS any required space for an auditorium
                                                     or other public meeting space
Stadiums, sports arenas                              The greater of 1 per 4 persons OR 1 per 6 lineal feet of benches PLUS 1 per
                                                     employee based on maximum employment shift
Theaters and auditoriums with fixed seating          The greater of 1 per 3 seats, OR 1 per 6 lienal feet of benches
                                                      
                                                     1 per 3 persons who may be legally admitted at one time based on the occupancy
Theaters and auditoriums, dining halls, exhibition   load established by local code, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum employment
halls, and assembly halls without fixed seating      shift
                                                      
   BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL USES
Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics              1 per 300 sq. ft. of usable floor area, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum
                                                     employment shift
Auto and vehicle repair or service facilities, bump  1 per employee based on maximum employment shift, PLUS 3 per service or repair
shop                                                 bay
                                                     1 per fueling station, PLUS 1 stacking space per 2 fueling stations, PLUS 1 per
Auto or vehicle service/ filling station             employee based on maximum employment shift, PLUS any required spaces for
                                                     permitted accessory uses or associated uses, (restaurants, convenience stores,
                                                     etc.)
Auto wash, automatic operation                       1 per employee based on maximum employment shift, PLUS 5 stacking spaces per
                                                     automatic wash operation or line
Auto wash, self-service or coin operated             3 stacking spaces per washing stall in addition to the washing space stall
                                                     itself, PLUS 1 per drying spaces
Banks, financial institutions                        1 per 200 sq. ft. of usable floor area, PLUS 5 stacking spaces per drive through
                                                     service window or station
Beauty or barber shops                               3 per beauty or barber shop station for the first two stations, PLUS 1.5 per
                                                     each additional station
Furniture and appliance sales household equipment    1 per 600 sq. ft. of usable floor   area
repair shops
Hotel, motel, or other lodging                       1 per occupancy unit, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum employment shift,
                                                     PLUS any required space for associated uses
Laundromats and coin-operated dry cleaners           1 per 250 sq. ft. of usable floor area PLUS 1 per on-duty employee
Lumber yard                                          2.5   per employee based on maximum employment shift, PLUS any required space
                                                     for enclosed retail sales
                                                     1 per 10 storage units, equally distributed throughout the storage area, PLUS 2
Mini-warehouses, self-storage establishments         per manager’s or caretaker’s quarters, PLUS 1 per 250 sq. ft. of usable floor
                                                     area in the office building
Mortuaries, funeral homes                            1 per 150 sq. ft. of usable floor area in the parlor area, viewing rooms,
                                                     chapels, or assembly areas
                                                     1 per 400 sq. ft. of usable floor area exclusive of service areas, PLUS 2 per
Motor vehicle sales (new)                            auto service stall in the service area, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum
                                                     employment shift
Motor vehicle sales (used)                           1 per 400 sq. ft. of usable floor area PLUS 2.5 per employee based on maximum
                                                     employment shift
Open air business                                    1 per 200 sq. ft. of land area being used for display, PLUS any required space
                                                     for enclosed retail sales
Personal service establishments not otherwise        1 per 300 sq. ft. of usable floor area, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum
specified                                            employment shift
                                                      
Radio, cable or television station or studio         1.5   per employee based on maximum employment shift
Restaurant, carry-out                                1 per 100 sq. ft. of usable floor area in customers waiting, PLUS 1 per employee
                                                     based on maximum employment shift
Restaurant, fast-food                                1 per 50 sq. ft. of eating area
Restaurant, drive-in, drive-through                  10 stacking spaces per pay station, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum
                                                     employment shift
Restaurant, delivery                                 1 per delivery vehicle, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum employment shift
Restaurant, standard                                 1 per 3 seats, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum employment shift
Shopping centers                                     1 per 250 sq. ft. of usable floor area
Supermarkets, convenience stores                     1 per 250 sq. ft. of usable floor area
Wholesale stores, of a plumber, electrician, or      1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of usable showroom floor area, sales, PLUS 1 per employee
similar trade                                        based on maximum employment shift
Retail stores not otherwise specified                1 per 150 sq. ft. of usable floor area
   OFFICE USES
Business and professional offices, except as         1 per 300 sq. ft. of usable floor area
otherwise specified
Professional offices, clinics of doctors, dentists,  1 per 300 sq. ft. of usable floor area, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum
and similar professions                              employment shift
Real estate offices                                  1 per 300 sq. ft. of usable floor area
   INDUSTRIAL USES
Contractor or construction use                       1 per employee based on maximum employment shift
Manufacturing establishments, or establishments for
industrial production, processing, assembly,         1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of usable floor area, or 1 per on-duty employee based on
research, compounding, preparation, cleaning,        maximum employment shift, whichever is greater
servicing, testing, repair, plus accessory business
offices and storage facilities
Wholesale and warehouse establishments               1 per 1,500 sq. ft. of gross floor area or 1 per on-duty employee based on
                                                     maximum employment shift, whichever is greater
   RECREATIONAL USES (PUBLIC AND PRIVATE)
Arcades                                              1 per amusement station or video game, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum
                                                     employment shift
Archery facilities                                2 per target
Softball, baseball fields                            25 per playing field
BMX course                                           50 per course
Bowling establishments                               4 per lane PLUS any required space for associated uses
Dance halls, health spas, skating rinks, personal    1 per 3 persons allowed as established by local, county, or state fire,
fitness center and similar indoor recreation uses    building, or health codes, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum employment shift
                                                      
Football and soccer fields                           30 per field
                                                     4 per golf hole, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum employment shift, PLUS any
Golf course, public or private                       required spaces for permitted accessory uses or associates uses (restaurants,
                                                     convenience stores, etc.)
Golf course, miniature or par 3                      3 per golf hole, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum employment shift
Golf driving range                                   1 per tee
Private clubs and lodges                             1 per 3 persons allowed as established by local, county, or state fire,
                                                     building, o health codes, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum employment shift
Stadium sports arena, or similar assembly space with 1 per 3 seats OR 1 per 6 lineal feet of benches, whichever is greater
fixed seating                                         
Swimming pool clubs, swimming pools                  1 per 3 persons who may be legally admitted at one time based on occupancy load
                                                     established by local code, PLUS 1 per employee based on maximum employment shift
                                                     1 per person permitted based on type and capacity of the courts, PLUS 1 per
Tennis clubs and court-recreation uses               employee based on maximum employment shift, PLUS any required space for enclosed
                                                     retail sales
 
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 08-004, passed 11-5-07; Am. Ord. 10-009,
passed 10-5-09; Am. Ord. 20-007, passed 11-23-20) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.068 LAYOUT AND CONSTRUCTION.
   All off-street parking facilities containing four or more spaces, except
those serving single-family residences, shall be designed, constructed, and
maintained in accordance with the following requirements.
   (A)   Review and approval requirements.
      (1)   Except as noted in §
154.403(I), plans for the construction of any parking lot in conjunction with a
new development shall be submitted for review and approval according to the
normal site plan review procedures. Plans for expansion of an existing parking
lot that is not associated with other new development shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator for review and approval prior to the start of
construction. Upon completion of construction, a parking lot must be inspected
and approved by the City DPS Director before a certificate of occupancy can be
issued for the parking lot and for the building or use the parking is intended
to serve.
      (2)   Plans shall be prepared at a scale of not less than 50 feet equal
to one inch. Plans shall include typical pavement cross-sections and indicate
existing and proposed grades, drainage, water mains and sewers, surfacing and
base materials, and the proposed parking layout. The plans shall conform to the
construction and design standards formally established by the City DPS
Director.
      (3)   In the event that required parking cannot be constructed because of
cold or inclement weather, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued
by the Zoning Administrator, provided the applicant first deposits a
performance guarantee in accordance with §
154.036.
   (B)   Dimensions.
      (1)   Off-street parking shall be designed to conform with the following
standards and diagram.
 
Off-Street Parking Space Standards (all dimensions in feet)
                                                    Total width  Total width of
              Maneuvering Parking space Stall depth of one stall two stalls of
Angle         aisle width width         to wall     plus         parking plus
                                                    maneuvering  maneuvering
                                                    lane         aisle
0 degrees     12.0        23.0          8.0         20.0         28.0 (Note 1)
(parallel)
Two-way aisle 24.0        23.0          8.0         31.0         39.0 (Note 1)
up to 53      12.0        9.0           20.0        32.0         52.0 (Note 2)
degrees
54 to 74      15.0        9.0           20.0        36.5         58.0 (Note 2)
degrees
75 to 90      20.0        9.0           20.0        40.0         60.0
degrees
 
Notes:   
   1.   Parallel spaces shall provide a three-foot marked maneuvering area
between stalls.
   2.   Limited to one-way access aisles.
      (2)   Driveways providing access to residential, commercial or industrial
uses shall comply with the following standards
 
Driveway Width Standards
Normal Width Residential Single-Family Multiple-Family Commercial Industrial
One-way      9 feet                    15 feet         15 feet    20 feet
Two-way      N.A.                      24 feet*        24 feet*   31 feet*
 
   * Main access driveways and internal circulation routes used by tractor-
trailers shall be 31 feet in width.
   (C)   Stacking spaces. Stacking spaces shall be provided as required in the
Schedule of Off-street Parking. Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet
wide and 20 feet in length, shall not extend into any public right-of-way or
private access easement, and shall be distinctly separated from on-site parking
so as not to interfere with ingress and egress to parking spaces.
   (D)   Ingress and egress. All spaces shall be provided with adequate access
by means of clearly defined maneuvering lanes and driveways. Spaces backing
directly onto a street shall be prohibited. Entrances and exits from off-street
parking lots shall be located at least 20 feet from the nearest point of any
property zoned for single-family residential use.
   (E)   Surfacing and drainage. 
      (1)   Grading, surfacing, and drainage plans shall comply with City
Engineering Standards and shall be subject to review and approval by the City
DPS Director. All off-street parking areas, access lanes, driveways and other
vehicle maneuvering areas shall be hard-surfaced with concrete or plant- mixed
bituminous material.
      (2)   Off-street parking areas, access lanes, and driveways shall be
graded and drained so as to dispose of surface waters. Surface water shall not
be permitted to drain onto adjoining property, unless in accordance with an
approved drainage plan.
   (F)   Curbs and wheel chocks. A curb of at least six inches in height shall
be installed to prevent motor vehicles from being driven or parked so that any
part of the vehicle extends within two feet of abutting landscaped areas,
sidewalks, streets, buildings, or adjoining property. In lieu of a curb, wheel
chocks may be provided to prevent vehicles from extending over grass areas,
setback lines, or lot lines. A freeway-type guardrail is prohibited from use in
lieu of curbs or wheel chocks.
   (G)   Lighting. All parking areas, driveways, and walkways shall be
illuminated to ensure the security of property and the safety of persons using
those areas, in accordance with the requirements set forth in §
154.030. All lighting shall be confined within and directed onto the parking
area only.
   (H)   Buildings. No building or structure shall be permitted on an off-
street parking lot, except for a maintenance building/attendant shelter, which
shall not be more than 50 square feet in area and not more than 15 feet in
height
   (I)   Signs. Accessory directional signs shall be permitted in parking areas
in accordance with city sign regulations. The Planning Commission, upon review
and recommendation of the Public Safety Official, may require the Posting of
traffic control signs as it deems necessary to promote vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.
   (J)   Screening and landscaping. All off-street parking areas, except these
serving single and two- family residences, shall be screened and landscaped in
accordance with the provisions set forth in §§
154.080 through
154.086.
   (K)   Striping. To facilitate movement and to help maintain an orderly
parking arrangement, all parking spaces shall be clearly striped with four-inch
wide lines.
   (L)   Maintenance. All parking areas shall be maintained free of dust,
trash, and debris. Surfacing, curbing, lighting fixtures, signage, lane
marking, space striping, and related appurtenances shall be maintained in good
condition.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 10-009, passed 10-5-09; Am. Ord. 14-006,
passed 12-8-14) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.069 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS PARKING AND DRIVEWAY STANDARDS.
   (A)   Driveways. For lots with single family residences no portion of the
front yard shall be paved or used for a vehicle access driveway except in
compliance with the following standards:
      (1)   Required paving. Driveways in the front and side yards shall be
paved with concrete, asphalt or masonry paver blocks and shall be prohibited
from using gravel, mulch or any other surface except that pervious concrete,
asphalt and masonry pavers may be permitted in the front and side yard.
      (2)   Driveway approaches. The approach located in the right-of-way
connecting the road travel lane to the private driveway shall not be greater
than 20 feet in width at the front lot line. Driveways on the residential lot
shall match the width of the approach within the first ten feet from the front
lot line.
      (3)   Residences with no garage or detached garages. Lots with no garage
or a detached garage shall be permitted one driveway that shall not exceed 20
feet in width. Lots with no garage or a detached garage may also be permitted
to have one circular driveway.
      (4)   Residences with an attached garage. Lots with attached garages
shall be permitted one driveway located between the attached garage, the
closest side lot line and the front lot line. Lots with attached garages may
also be permitted to have a circular driveway.
      (5)   Circular driveways. Circular driveways may be permitted in the
front yard and shall be no greater than 12 feet in width. A circular driveway
shall be setback at least five feet from the closest point of the circular
drive and the residential portion of the principal building. The required
setback area between the circular driveway and the residential portion of the
principal building shall be a green space planted with a grass lawn and other
living material. A minimum of 300 square feet of green space shall be required
between the circular driveway and the front lot line.
      (6)   Residences on principal arterials. Single family residences located
on Warren Road, Ford Road, Cherry Hill Road, Inkster Road, Middlebelt Road,
Merriman Road and Venoy Road may be allowed one ten foot by 15 foot t-turn
around driveway stub located perpendicular to a permitted driveway. The t-turn
around shall be for the express purpose of allowing vehicles leaving the
property to turn around and exit in a forward direction. The t-turn around may
be located in front of the residential portion of the principal structure and
shall comply with the pavement requirement of this section.
   (B)   Permitted parking areas. Vehicle parking shall only be permitted on
hard surface driveways in the front and side yards. Parking may be located on
any durable surface in the rear yard.
   (C)   Commercial vehicle parking. One commercial vehicle only, with a rated
capacity not to exceed three-quarter of a ton, may be parked on a residential
lot, provided that the vehicle in not a utility truck, such as a wrecker,
septic tank pumper, or a vehicle that carries flammable or toxic materials.
Commercial vehicles not parked in a garage shall be parked in a rear yard.
   (D)   Recreational vehicle parking.  Recreational vehicles as defined in §
154.005, including campers and other recreational equipment, may be parked or
stored on the recreational vehicle owner's single family residential property
subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   Connection to utilities. Recreational vehicles parked or stored
shall not be connected to electricity, water, gas, or sanitary sewer
facilities.
      (2)   Use as living quarters. At no time shall recreational vehicles
parked or stored in residential districts be used for living or housekeeping
purposes.
      (3)   Location. Recreational vehicles not parked in a garage shall be
parked or stored entirely in the rear or side yard, but not less than five feet
to a side or rear property line which abuts a residential use. On a corner lot,
recreational vehicles must be parked and/or stored not less than 20 feet from
an adjoining street.
      (4)   Temporary parking.  Notwithstanding the above provisions concerning
location, recreational vehicles may be parked on a driveway within a front yard
for loading or unloading purposes for a period of not more than 48 hours prior
to and 48 hours after use of the vehicle within a seven-day period.
      (5)   Lot coverage. Recreational vehicles may occupy no more than 20%
(existing standards) of the required rear yard.
      (6)   Sole transportation. A recreational vehicle designed for use on
streets and highways may be parked in a driveway of a residence if it is the
sole means of transportation to and from work for one or more of the permanent
residents.
      (7)   Condition. Parked or stored recreational vehicles must be kept in
good repair. Vehicles capable of being moved from place to place under their
own power must be maintained in good running condition. All vehicles must be
properly registered in the name of the occupant of the dwelling unit, and, if
required, have a current State of Michigan license attached.
      (8)   Storage of mobile homes. The parking or storage of an unoccupied
mobile home as defined in §
154.005, being designed as a permanent structure for residential occupancy, is
prohibited, except as may be permitted in an approved mobile home park.
      (9)   Waiver of regulations.  The provisions concerning connection to
utilities, use as living quarters, and location may be waived for a single
period of up to two weeks to permit repair of the occupant's or owner's
equipment, or to permit the parking of a recreational vehicle of a guest. Any
waiver shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator.
      (10)   Multiple-family complexes and mobile home parks.  The Planning
Commission may require that a screened storage area be provided on the site of
a multiple-family complex or mobile home park for parking and storage of
recreational vehicles.
   (E)   Vehicle storage and repair prohibited.  The following is prohibited in
all residential districts.
      (1)   The storage of an inoperable or unlicensed motor vehicle as defined
in the State Motor Vehicle Code, unless stored in compliance with division (D)
(3) of this section.
      (2)   The storage of any recreational vehicle as defined in this chapter,
except in compliance with division (C) of this section.
      (3)   The repair or maintenance of any vehicle which renders the vehicle
inoperable for a period in excess of 72 hours, unless the vehicle under repair
is registered to the owner of the property and the repair or maintenance
activities are conducted entirely within an enclosed garage or other enclosed
structure approved for that purpose by the city.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 24-008, passed 8-26-24) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.070 OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Scope of loading space requirements. Compliance with the leading space
regulations set forth herein shall be required in order to avoid interference
with the public use of streets, alleys, parking areas, driveways, sidewalks,
and other public areas.
      (1)   General applicability. On the same premises with every building, or
part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehousing,
display and sale of goods, including department stores, wholesale stores,
markets, hotels, hospitals, mortuaries, laundries, dry cleaning establishments,
and other uses involving the receipt or distribution of materials, merchandise,
or vehicles, there shall be provided and maintained adequate space for loading
and unloading as required in this section.
      (2)   Change in use or intensity. Whenever use of a building, structure,
or lot is changed, loading space shall be provided as required by this chapter
for the new use, regardless of any variance which may have been in effect prior
to change of use.
   (B)   General requirements.  
      (1)   Location. Required loading space shall be located to the rear or
side of the building being served to the maximum extent possible such that it
is screened from view from adjoining roads. Loading/unloading operations shall
not interfere with vehicular traffic circulation on streets, alleys, or within
off-street parking areas. Loading/unloading areas shall not be placed in
required fire lanes.
      (2)   Dimensions. Unless otherwise specified, each required loading space
shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and 50 feet in length, with a minimum
vertical clearance of 15 feet.
      (3)   Surfacing and drainage. Loading areas shall be hard-surfaced with
concrete or plant-mixed bituminous material. Leading areas shall be graded and
drained so as to dispose of surface waters. Grading, surfacing, and drainage
plans shall be subject to review and approval by the City DPS Director. Surface
water shall not be permitted to drain onto adjoining property, a public
easement, a public right- of-way, or into the city sanitary sewer system,
except in accordance with a city-approved drainage plan.
      (4)   Storage and repair prohibited. The storage of merchandise, sale of
motor vehicles, storage of inoperable vehicles, or repair of vehicles is
prohibited in required loading space.
      (5)   Use of loading space. A required loading space shall be dedicated
to loading and unloading purposes and shall not be counted or used for required
parking.
      (6)   Central loading. Central loading facilities may be substituted for
individual loading spaces serving businesses on separate lots provided that all
of the following conditions are fulfilled.
         (a)   Each business served shall have direct access to the central
loading area without crossing a public street or alley.
         (b)   Total loading space provided shall meet the minimum requirements
specified herein, in consideration of total floor area of all businesses served
by the central loading space.
         (c)   No building served shall be more than 300 feet from the central
loading area.
      (7)   Minimum loading space. The amount of required loading space shall
be determined in accordance with the schedule which follows. In a Planned
Development District, the Planning Commission may modify the minimum
requirements. In other districts, the Zoning Board of Appeals may reduce or
modify the standards upon making the determination that another standard would
be more appropriate in consideration of the number or type of deliveries
expected or experienced for a particular use or site.
      (8)   Schedule of loading space requirements.
 
Gross Floor Area         Number of Loading Spaces
0 - 5,000 sq. ft.        See footnote
5,001 - 20,000 sq. ft.   1 space
20,001 - 100,000 sq. ft. 1 space, plus 1 space for each 20,000 sq. ft. in
                         excess of 20,001 sq. ft.
100,001 and over         5 spaces, plus 1 space for each 50,000 sq. ft. in
                         excess of 100,000 sq. ft.
 
Footnote to schedule of loading space requirements:
   Establishments containing less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area
shall provide adequate dedicated off-street loading space that is accessible by
motor vehicles but which does not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular
traffic. The size of any loading space shall be based on the types of delivery
vehicles typically utilized by the establishment
   (C)   Modification of loading space requirements.
      (1)   In a Planned Development District, the Planning Commission may
modify the minimum requirements.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may modify or waive the requirements for
off-street loading areas, upon determining that adequate loading space is
available to serve the building or use, or that provision of such loading space
is unnecessary or impractical to provide.
      (3)   The Planning Commission upon determination that the modified size
and/or number of spaces are appropriate for the use may modify the size of
loading spaces and the number of spaces for a use.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am .Ord. 10-009, passed 10-5-09) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.071 ACCESS MANAGEMENT.
   The purpose of this section is to protect the substantial public investment
in the city's street system by preserving the traffic capacity of existing
streets. It is the further intent of this section to promote safe and efficient
travel within the city; minimize disruptive and potentially hazardous traffic
conflicts; establish efficient standards for driveway spacing and the number of
driveways; and ensure reasonable vehicular access to properties, though not
always the most direct access.
   (A)   Zoning districts. The standards of this section shall apply to land in
Garden City's nonresidential zoning districts only.
   (B)   County or state access management standards. Where Wayne County or the
Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) have adopted access management
standards which are more restrictive than the standards of this section, the
adopted county or MDOT standards shall supersede the standards of this section.
   (C)   Driveway spacing standards. Each parcel or part thereof subject to the
standards of this section shall have no more than one driveway entrance and
exit opening to a public street for each 75 feet of frontage or fraction
thereof.
      (1)   Where more than one driveway is allowed, the driveways shall be
located at least 30 feet apart.
      (2)   No driveway shall be located within 25 feet of a side lot boundary,
or within 25 feet of an intersection of two or more street rights-of-way.
   (D)   Shared access standards. Vehicle access to parcels or parts thereof
subject to the standards of this section may be provided by the development and
use of shared driveways, cross-access drives, and similar means of shared
access, subject to the following:
      (1)   Location. New shared driveways and cross-access drives shall be
aligned with existing or proposed drives on adjacent lots where feasible, and
shall be located parallel or perpendicular to the street right-of-way, as
appropriate.
      (2)   Cross-access easement. Shared driveways and cross-access drives
shall be located within a dedicated access easement that permits traffic
circulation between lots. Such access easement shall be recorded with the
County Register of Deeds.
      (3)   Maintenance. The easement area shall remain clear of obstructions
and shall not be used for parking unless otherwise approved by the Planning
Commission. Each property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of the
shared access easement area.
   (E)   Allowed modification. The Planning Commission may waive certain
requirements of this section if practical difficulties exist on the site that
make compliance unreasonable (i.e., sight distance limitations, existing
development, topography, unique site configuration or shape) or existing off-
site driveways make it impractical to comply with the standards of this
section. The modification shall be the minimum necessary.
(Ord. 11-004, passed 4-11-11) Penalty, see §
154.999
LANDSCAPING
§ 154.080 INTENT AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Intent. Landscaping enhances the visual image of the city, improving
property values and alleviating the impact of noise, traffic, and visual
d1straction associated with certain uses. Screening is important to protect
less intensive uses from the noise, light, traffic, litter and other impacts of
more intensive, nonresidential uses. Accordingly, these provisions are intended
to set minimum standards for the design and use of landscaping, greenbelts, and
screening, and for the protection and enhancement of the city's environment.
More specifically, the intent of these provisions is to do the following.
      (1)   Improve the appearance of off-street parking areas, vehicular use
areas, and property abutting public rights-of-way.
      (2)   Protect and preserve the appearance, character, and value of the
neighborhoods which abut nonresidential areas, parking areas, and other
intensive use areas, thereby protecting the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Scope of application. No site plan shall be approved unless it shows
landscaping consistent with the requirements of this subchapter. A building
permit shall not be issued until the required landscape plan is submitted and
approved, and a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless provisions
set forth in this section have been met or a performance guarantee has been
posted in accordance with the provisions set forth in §
154.036.
   (C)   Minimum requirements. The requirements in this subchapter are minimum
requirements, and under no circumstances shall they preclude the developer from
agreeing to more extensive landscaping.
   (D)   Design creativity. Creativity in landscape design is encouraged.
Accordingly, required trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform distances, at
random, or in groupings, depending on the designer’s desired visual effect and,
equally important, the intent of the city to coordinate landscaping on
adjoining properties.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.081 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General site requirements. All developed portions of the site shall
conform to the following general landscaping standards, except where specific
landscape elements, such as a greenbelt, berms, or screening are required.
      (1)   All unpaved portions of the site shall be planted with grass,
ground cover, shrubbery, or other suitable live plant material, which shall
extend to any abutting street pavement edge. Grass areas in the front yard of
all nonresidential uses shall be planted with sod.
      (2)   A mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees shall be planted on the
unpaved open portions of nonresidential parcels where specific landscaping
requirements do not appear later in this subchapter. The total number of trees
required shall be determined at the time of site plan review, based on the
overall appearance of the site and the amount of landscaping provided elsewhere
on the site. Required trees may be planted at uniform distances, at random, or
in groupings.
   (B)   Landscaping adjacent to roads and road rights-of-way. Where required,
landscaping adjacent to roads and road rights-of-way shall comply with the
following planting requirements.
      (1)   Minimum requirements. 
         (a)   Where required, landscaping adjacent to a road or road right-of-
way shall consist of a landscaped area with a minimum depth of ten feet, which
shall be located on private property contiguous to the road right-of-way,
excluding openings for driveways and sidewalks. Through lots and corner lots
shall provide such landscaping along all adjacent road rights-of-way.
         (b)   The Planning Commission may permit all or a portion of the
landscaped area to be located within the road right-of-way or elsewhere within
the front setback area, provided that the Planning Commission finds that the
following conditions exist.
            1.   Relocation of the landscaped area is consistent with the
intent of this section.
            2.   Relocation of the landscaped area is justified because of the
physical characteristics of the site, the location of existing easements,
sidewalks, or landscaping, the configuration of existing parking, the need to
maintain emergency vehicle access, or because of other public health or safety
concerns.
            3.   Relocation of the landscaped area will not result in less
landscaped area than would be required if the landscaped area had been located
on private property contiguous to the road right-of- way.
            4.   Relocation of the landscaped area will not jeopardize traffic
safety or the general planning of the city.
      (2)   Required plantings. For the purposes of computing length of road
frontage, openings for driveways and sidewalks shall not be counted. Trees and
shrubs may be planted at uniform distances, at random, or in groupings.
      Type      Requirements
   Deciduous tree    2 per 40 lineal ft. of road frontage
   Shrubs    6 per 40 lineal ft. of road frontage
      (3)   Location.
         (a)   Where planted, trees shall comply with the following minimum
setbacks, as measured from the center of the tree.
            1.   Setback from edge of road: 10 feet.
            2.   Setback from fire hydrant: 5 feet.
            3.   Setback from vehicular accessway or sidewalk: 5 feet.
         (b)   When planted, shrubs shall comply with the following minimum
setbacks, as measured from the edge of the shrub.
            1.   Setback from edge of road: 5 feet.
            2.   Setback from fire hydrant: 5 feet.
   (C)   Berms. Where required, berms shall conform to the following standards.
      (1)   Dimensions. Unless otherwise indicated or appropriate, required
berms shall be measured from the grade of the parking lot or first ground
adjacent to the berm, and shall be constructed with slopes no steeper than one
foot vertical for each three feet horizontal (33% slope), with at least a two-
foot flat area on top. Berms may undulate in height, subject to review and
approval of berm design as shown on the site plan. Unless otherwise indicated,
the maximum height of required berms shall be three feet.
      (2)   Protection from erosion. Any required berm shall be planted with
sod, ground cover, or other suitable live plant material to protect it from
erosion so that it retains its height and shape. The use of railroad ties,
cement blocks, and other types of construction materials to retain the shape
and height of a berm shall be prohibited unless specifically reviewed and
approved by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   Required plantings.  
         (a)   Berms located in the front yard of nonresidential parcels. Berms
located in the front yard of nonresidential parcels shall be landscaped in
accordance with the requirements for landscaping adjacent to roads, as set
forth in division (B) of this section.
         (b)   Berms used for screening other than in the front yard. Berms
used for screening other than in the front yard shall be landscaped in
accordance with the requirements for screening, as set forth in division (E) of
this section.
      (4)   Measurement of berm length. For the purpose of calculating required
plant material, berm length shall be measured along the exterior edge of the
berm.
   (D)   Greenbelts. Where required, greenbelts shall conform to the following
standards.
      (1)   Measurement of greenbelt length. For the purposes of calculating
required plant material, greenbelt length shall be measured along the exterior
edge of the greenbelt.
      (2)   General planting requirements.
         (a)   Grass or ground cover requirements. Grass, ground cover, or
other suitable live plant materials shall be planted over the entire greenbelt
area, except where paved walkways are used.
         (b)   Tree and shrub requirements. Except where the greenbelt is used
for screening, a minimum of one deciduous or evergreen tree shall be planted
for each 40 lineal feet or portion thereof of required greenbelt, or,
alternatively, eight shrubs may be substituted for each required tree. Trees
and shrubs may be planted at uniform distances, at random, or in groupings.
         (c)   Distance from sidewalk. Plant materials shall not be placed
closer than four feet from the right-of-way line where the greenbelt abuts a
public sidewalk.
         (d)   Setback from property line. Plant materials shall be placed no
closer than four feet from the property line or fence line.
      (3)   Greenbelts used for screening. Greenbelts used for screening shall
be landscaped in accordance with the requirements for screening, as set forth
in division (E) of this section.
   (E)   Screening.
      (1)   General screening regulations. Unless otherwise specified, wherever
an evergreen or landscaped screen is required, screening shall consist of
closely-spaced evergreen plantings (i.e., no farther than 15 feet apart) which
can be reasonably expected to form a complete visual barrier that is at least
six feet above ground level within three years of planting. Deciduous plant
materials may be used, provided that a complete visual barrier is maintained
throughout the year.
      (2)   Screening of equipment. Mechanical equipment, such as air
compressors, pool pumps, transformers, sprinkler pumps, satellite dish
antennas, and similar equipment shall be screened on at least three sides.
Insofar as is practical, the screening shall exceed the vertical height of the
equipment being screened by at least six inches within two years of planting.
   (F)   Parking lot landscaping. In addition to required screening, all off-
street parking areas shall also provide landscaping as follows.
      (1)   Landscaping ratio. Off-street parking areas containing greater than
15 spaces shall be provided with at least ten square feet of interior
landscaping per parking space. The amount of parking lot landscaping may be
decreased to seven square feet per parking space where a berm is constructed to
screen the parking from the road in accordance with §
154.082(A)(3), (B)(3) or (C)(3). Whenever possible, parking lot landscaping
shall be designed to improve the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic,
guide traffic movement, and improve the appearance of the parking area.
      (2)   Minimum area. Landscaped areas in parking lots shall be no less
than five feet in any single dimension and no less than 150 square feet in
area. Landscaped areas in or adjacent to parking lots shall be protected with
curbing or other means to prevent encroachment of vehicles.
      (3)   Other landscaping. Required landscaping elsewhere on the parcel
shall not be counted in meeting the parking lot landscaping requirements.
      (4)   Required plantings. Requirements for plant material shall be based
on the location, size and shape of the parking lot landscaped area. A minimum
of one tree shall be planted per 300 square feet or fraction thereof of
interior landscaped area. At least 50% of each interior landscaped area shall
be covered by living plant material, such as sod, shrubs, ground cover, or
trees. Plantings within parking lots shall comply with the requirements for
unobstructed site distance set forth in §
154.027. The landscape plan shall indicate the types, sizes, and quantities of
plant material proposed for the area.
   (G)   Landscaping of rights-of-way. 
      (1)   Public rights-of-way, located adjacent to required landscaped areas
and greenbelts, shall be planted with grass or other suitable live ground
cover, and shall be maintained by the owner or occupant of the adjacent
property as if the rights-of-way were part of the required landscaped areas or
greenbelts.
      (2)   Trees and shrubs shall not be planted in the road right-of-way
without first obtaining approval from the agency which has jurisdiction over
the road.
      (3)   Trees and shrubs shall be planted no closer to the edge of the road
pavement than the distances specified as follows.
      Setback
   Trees      10 feet, as measured from the center of the tree
   Shrubs      5 feet, as measure from the perimeter of the shrub
   (H)   Maintenance of unobstructed visibility for drivers. No landscaping
shall be established or maintained on any parcel or in any parking lot which
will obstruct the view of drivers. Accordingly, all landscaping shall comply
with the provisions concerning unobstructed sight distance set forth in §
154.027.
   (I)   Potential damage to utilities and public facilities. In no case shall
landscaping material be planted in a way which will interfere with or cause
damage to underground utility lines, public roads, or other public facilities.
Species of trees whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways,
sewers, or other utilities shall not be planted closer than 15 feet from any
roadways, sewers, or utilities. Trees shall be setback from overhead utility
lines as indicated in the following.
 
Minimum Distance from Center of Trunk to Nearest Utility Line Tree Height
Up to 15 feet                                                 10 feet
15 to 25 feet                                                 20 feet
over 25 feet                                                  30 feet
 
   (J)   Landscaping of divider medians. Where traffic on driveways,
maneuvering lanes, private roads, or similar vehicle accessways are separated
by a divider median, the median shall be curbed and have a minimum width of ten
feet. A minimum of one deciduous or evergreen tree shall be planted for each 30
lineal feet or portion thereof of median. Trees may be planted at uniform
distances, at random, or in groupings, but in no instance shall the center-to-
center distance between trees exceed 60 feet.
   (K)   Irrigation. The site plan shall indicate the proposed method of
watering landscaped areas. Although not required, installation of an in-ground
irrigation/sprinkler system is encouraged, particularly in front yards.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.082 REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Requirements for commercial, office, and industrial districts. All
lots or parcels of land located in office, commercial, or industrial zoning
districts shall comply with the following landscaping requirements.
      (1)   General site landscaping. At least 6% of the site shall be
maintained as landscaped open area. All such open areas shall conform to the
general site requirements set forth in §
154.081(A), except where specific landscape elements are required.
      (2)   Landscaping adjacent to road or road right-of-way. All commercial,
office, and industrial developments shall provide landscaping adjacent to the
road or road right-of-way in accordance with §
154.081(B)
      (3)   Berm requirements. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking
from view of the road, in which case the berm shall be a maximum of three feet
in height, and shall be planted in accordance with §
154.081(B). The berm shall be located totally on private property, adjacent to
the road right-of-way. Parking lot landscaping may be reduced if a berm is
constructed to screen off-street parking, in accordance with §
154.081(F).
      (4)   Screening. Landscaped screening or a wall shall be required
wherever a nonresidential use in a commercial, office, or industrial district
abuts directly upon land zoned for residential purposes. Landscaped screening
shall comply with the requirements set forth in §
154.081(E). If a wall is used instead of landscaping, the requirements set
forth in §§
154.100 and
154.101 shall be complied with.
      (5)   Parking lot landscaping. Off-street parking areas containing
greater than 15 spaces shall comply with the requirements for parking lot
landscaping as set forth in §
154.081(F).
   (B)   Requirements for multiple-family districts. All lots or parcels of
land located in the R-3 zoning district shall comply with the following
landscaping requirements.
      (1)   General site landscaping. A minimum of two deciduous or evergreen
trees, plus four shrubs shall be planted per dwelling unit. Unless otherwise
specified, required landscaping elsewhere in the multiple-family development
shall not be counted in meeting these requirements for trees.
      (2)   Landscaping adjacent to road or road right-of-way. All multiple
family developments shall provide landscaping adjacent to the road or road
right-of-way in accordance with §
154.081(B).
      (3)   Berm requirements. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking
from view of the road, in which case the berm shall be a maximum of three feet
in height, and shall be planted in accordance with §
154.081(B). The berm shall be located totally on private property, adjacent to
the road right-of-way. Parking lot landscaping may be reduced if a berm is
constructed to screen off-street parking, in accordance with §
154.081(F).
      (4)   Screening. Landscaped screening or a wall shall be required on all
sides of a multiple- family development, except on sides facing a road.
Landscaped screening shall comply with the requirements set forth in §
154.081(E). A wall may be used instead of landscaping adjacent to
nonresidential districts, subject to the requirements set forth in §§
154.100 and
154.101.
      (5)   Parking lot landscaping. Off-street parking areas containing
greater than 15 spaces shall comply with the requirements for parking lot
landscaping as set forth in §
154.081(F).
      (6)   Privacy screen. Where multiple-family dwellings are designed so
that rear open areas or patio areas front onto a public street, a landscaped
privacy screen shall be provided (see Appendix B, Illustration 12, Privacy
Screen). The screen may consist of a combination of trees, shrubs, and berming,
subject to review by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Requirements for nonresidential uses in residential districts. All
nonresidential uses developed in residential zoning districts shall comply with
the following landscaping requirements.
      (1)   General site landscaping. At least 10% of the site shall be
maintained as landscaped open area. All open areas shall conform to the general
site requirements set forth in §
154.081(A), except where specific landscape elements are required.
      (2)   Landscaping adjacent to road or road right-of-way. All
nonresidential developments located in residential districts shall provide
landscaping adjacent to the road or road right-of-way in accordance with §
154.081(B).
      (3)   Berm requirements. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking
from view of the road, in which case the berm shall be a maximum of three feet
in height, and shall be planted in accordance with §
154.081(B). The berm shall be located totally on private property, adjacent to
the road right-of-way. Parking lot landscaping may be reduced if a berm is
constructed to screen off-street parking, in accordance with §
154.081(F).
      (4)   Screening. Landscaped screening or a wall shall be required
wherever a nonresidential use abuts directly upon land zoned for residential
purposes. Landscaped screening shall comply with the requirements set forth in
§
154.081(E).
      (5)   Parking lot landscaping. Off-street parking areas containing
greater than 15 spaces shall comply with the requirements for parking lot
landscaping as set forth in §
154.081(F).
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.083 STANDARDS FOR LANDSCAPE MATERIALS.
   Unless otherwise specified, all landscape materials shall comply with the
following standards.
   (A)   Plant quality. Plant materials used in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter shall be nursery grown, free of pests and diseases, hardy in
Wayne County, in conformance with the standards
of the American Association of Nurserymen, and shall have passed inspections
required under state regulations.
   (B)   Non-living plant material. Plastic and other non-living plant
materials shall not be considered acceptable to meet the landscaping
requirements of this chapter. Bodies of water, boulder groupings, landscape
furniture, and man-made landscape ornaments, singly or in combination, shall
not account for more than 30% of the ground area to be landscaped.
   (C)   Plant material specifications. The following specifications shall
apply to all plant material proposed in accordance with the landscaping
requirements of this chapter.
      (1)   Deciduous shade trees. Deciduous shade trees shall be a minimum of
2½ inches in caliper measured 12 inches above grade with the first branch a
minimum of four feet above grade when planted.
      (2)   Deciduous ornamental trees. Deciduous ornamental trees shall be a
minimum of 1½ inches in caliper measured six inches above grade with a minimum
of height of four feet above grade when planted.
      (3)   Evergreen trees. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five feet in
height when planted. Furthermore, evergreen trees shall have a minimum spread
of 2½ feet, and the size of the burlapped root ball shall be at least ten times
the caliper measured six inches above grade.
      (4)   Shrubs. Shrubs shall be a minimum of two feet in height when
planted. Low-growing shrubs shall have a minimum spread of 24 inches when
planted.
      (5)   Hedges. Hedges shall be planted and maintained so as to form a
continuous, unbroken, visual screen within two years after planting, barring
unusual growing conditions, such as drought or disease. Hedges shall be a
minimum of two feet in height when planted.
      (6)   Vines. Vines shall be a minimum of 30 inches in length after one
growing season.
      (7)   Ground cover. Ground cover used in lieu of turf grasses in whole or
in part shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance
and reasonably complete coverage after one complete growing season.
      (8)   Grass. Grass area shall be planted using species normally grown as
permanent lawns in the county. Grass, sod, and seed shall be clean and free of
weeds, pests, and diseases. Grass may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded.
When grass is to be established by a method other than complete sodding or
seeding, nurse grass seed shall be sown for immediate effect and protection
until complete coverage is otherwise achieved. Straw or other mulch shall be
used to protect newly seeded areas.
      (9)   Mulch. Mulch used around trees, shrubs, and vines shall be a
minimum of three inches deep, and installed in a manner as to present a
finished appearance.
      (10) Undesirable plant material. Use of the following plant materials (or
their clones or cultivars) is not encouraged because of susceptibility to storm
drainage, disease, and other undesirable characteristics. Additional
undesirable plant materials may be identified, a list of which shall be
maintained by the Zoning Administrator.
 
Box Elder                    American Elm
Tree of Heaven               European Barberry
Northern Catalpa             Poplar
Willow                       Silver Maple
Horse Chestnut (nut bearing)
 
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.084 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   The following standards shall be observed where installation and maintenance
of landscape materials are required.
   (A)   Installation. Landscaping shall be installed in a sound, workmanlike
manner to ensure the continued growth of healthy plant material. Trees, shrubs,
hedges and vines shall be generously mulched at the time of planting.
Summary of Plant Material Specifications1
                 Minimum Caliper Minimum Height Minimum Spread Minimum Length
Deciduous Trees  2½ in.2        4 ft. first    N.A.           N.A.
                                 branch
Ornamental Trees 1½ in.3        4 ft. first    N.A.           N.A.
                                 branch
Evergreen Trees  N.A.              5 ft.       2½ ft.        N.A.
Shrubs           N.A.            2 ft.          2 ft.          N.A.
Hedges           N.A.            2 ft.          N.A.           N.A.
Vines            N.A.            N.A.           N.A.           30 inches after
                                                               one season
 
Notes:
   1.   See §
154.083 for detailed requirements.
   2.   Measured 12 inches above grade.
   3.   Measured six inches above grade.
   (B)   Protection from vehicles. Landscaping shall be protected from vehicles
through use of curbs. Landscape areas shall be elevated above the pavement to a
height adequate to protect the plants from snow removal, salt, and other
hazards.
   (C)   Off-season planting requirements. If development is completed during
the off-season when plants cannot be installed, the owner shall provide a
performance guarantee to ensure installation of required landscaping in the
next planting season, in accordance with §
154.036.
   (D)   Maintenance.  
      (1)   Landscaping required by this chapter shall be maintained in a
healthy, neat, and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris. All
unhealthy and dead plant material shall be replaced immediately upon notice
from the Building Official, unless the season is not appropriate for planting,
in which case the plant material shall be replaced at the beginning of the next
planting season.
      (2)   All landscaped areas shall be provided with a readily available and
acceptable supply of water, with at least one spigot located within 300 feet of
all plant material to be established and maintained. Trees, shrubs, and other
plantings and lawn areas shall be watered regularly throughout the growing
season.
      (3)   All constructed or manufactured landscape elements, such as but not
limited to benches, retaining walls, edging, and so forth, shall be maintained
in good condition and neat appearance. Rotted, deteriorated or damaged
landscape elements shall be repaired, replaced, or removed upon notice from the
Building Official.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.085 TREATMENT OF EXISTING PLANT MATERIAL.
   The following regulations shall apply to existing plant material.
   (A)   Consideration of existing elements in the landscape design. 
      (1)   In instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to
its development, the Planning Commission may permit substitution of the plant
material in place of the requirements set forth previously in this section,
provided the substitution is in keeping with the spirit and intent of this
subchapter and this chapter in general.
      (2)   Existing hedges, berms, walls, or other landscape elements may be
used to satisfy the requirements set forth previously, provided that the
existing elements are in conformance with the requirements of this section.
   (B)   Preservation of existing plant material.
      (1)   Site plans shall show all existing trees which are located in the
portions of the site that will be built upon or otherwise altered, and are five
inches or greater in caliper, measured 12 inches above grade.
      (2)   Trees shall be labeled “To Be Removed” or “To Be Saved” on the site
plan. If existing plant material is labeled “To Be Saved” on the site plan,
protective measures should be implemented, such as the placement of fencing or
stakes at the dripline around each tree. No vehicle or other construction
equipment shall be parked or stored within the dripline of any tree or other
plant material intended to be saved.
      (3)   In the event that healthy plant materials which are intended to
meet the requirements of this chapter are cut down, damaged or destroyed during
construction, the plant material shall be replaced with the same species as the
damaged or removed tree, in accordance with the following schedule, unless
otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator, based on consideration of the
site and building configuration, available planting space, and similar
considerations.
 
Caliper Measured 12 Inches Above Grade
Damaged Tree       Replacement Tree Replacement Ratio
Less than 6 inches 2½ to 3 inches  1 for 1
                                    One replacement tree for each 6 inches in
More than 6 inches 2½ to 3 inches  caliper or fraction thereof of damaged
                                    tree.
 
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.086 MODIFICATIONS.
   In consideration of the overall design and impact of a specific landscape
plan, and in consideration of the amount of existing plant material to be
retained on the site, the Planning Commission may modify the specific
requirements outlined herein, provided that any adjustment is in keeping with
the intent of this subchapter and this chapter in general. In determining
whether a modification is appropriate, the Planning Commission shall consider
whether the following conditions exist.
   (A)   The public benefit intended by the landscape regulations could be
better achieved with a plan that varies from the strict requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Topographic features or other unique features of the site create
conditions such that strict application of the landscape regulations would
result in a less effective screen than an alternative landscape design.
      (2)   Parking, vehicular circulation, or land use are such that required
landscaping would not enhance the site or result in the desired screening
effect.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
WALLS
§ 154.100 OBSCURING WALL STANDARDS.
   Where permitted or required by this chapter, obscuring walls shall be
subject to the following requirements.
   (A)   Location. Required obscuring walls shall be placed inside and adjacent
to the lot 1ine except in the following instances.
      (1)   Where underground utilities interfere with placement of the wall at
the property line, the wall shall be placed on the utility easement line
located nearest the property line.
      (2)   Subject to Planning Commission approval, required walls in a
nonresidential district may be located on the side of an alley right-of-way
closest to the adjacent residential zone when mutually agreed upon by affected
property owners and residents. The continuity of the required wall shall be
considered by the Planning Commission in reviewing such requests.
      (3)   Walls shall not extend closer to the front lot line than the
required front setback.
   (B)   Corner clearance. Obscuring walls shall comply with the specifications
for maintenance of unobstructed sight distance for drivers as set forth in §
154.027.
   (C)   Substitution or waiver.  
      (1)   As a substitute for a required obscuring wall, the Planning
Commission may, in its review of the site plan, approve the use of other
existing or proposed living or man-made landscape features (such as closely
spaced evergreens) that would produce substantially the same results in terms
of screening, durability, and permanence. Any substitute screening shall comply
with the applicable requirements set forth in §§
154.027 and
154.081.
      (2)   If a fence is approved by the Planning Commission as a suitable
substitute for a required obscuring wall, the fence shall be constructed of
redwood, cedar, or No. 1 pressure-treated wood. Chain- link fences shall not be
permitted for screening purposes.
      (3)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may waive the requirements for an
obscuring wall upon making the determination that either of the following
apply.
         (a)   The adjoining residential district is in transition and will
become nonresidential in the future.
         (b)   Existing physical features provide adequate screening.
   (D)   Wall specifications. Required walls shall be constructed of masonry
material that is architecturally compatible with the materials used on the
facade of the principal structure on the site, such as face brick, decorative
block, or poured concrete with simulated brick or stone patterns. Alternately,
walls may be constructed of precast steel-reinforced panels, anchored in place
by steel I- beam columns, provided that the precast panels have a simulated
brick or stone pattern that is compatible with the architecture of the
principal structure.
   (E)   Wall requirements. For the uses and districts listed below, an
obscuring wall shall be provided as specified along property lines that abut a
residential district, except where landscaped screening is permitted by the
Planning Commission in lieu of a wall (see § 154.081(E).
Proposed Use or District Wall Height Requirements
Proposed Use or District            Wall Height Requirements
VP, Vehicular Parking District      4½ feet
Off-street Parking (other than VP   4½ feet
District)
Office uses or Districts            4½ feet
Multiple-Family uses or Districts   4½ feet
adjacent to Single-Family Districts
Commercial uses or Districts        6 feet
Industrial uses or Districts        6-foot minimum, up to 8 feet to completely
                                    screen storage, loading and service areas
Utility-Buildings, Substations      6 feet
Service and Delivery Areas          6 feet
 
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.101 WALLS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General standards. Walls shall be permitted in residential districts,
subject to the standards for location and height set forth in §
154.037. Walls in residential districts shall be constructed of masonry
material that is architecturally compatible with the materials on the facade of
the principal structure, such as face brick or decorative block, based upon the
determination of the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Entranceway structures. Residential subdivision entranceway
structures, such as walls, columns or gates which mark the entrance to a
single-family subdivision or multiple-family development, shall be permitted in
the required setback area, provided that the following are observed.
      (1)   The entranceway structure shall comply with the requirements for
unobstructed sight distance as set forth in §
154.027.
      (2)   Entranceway structures shall not exceed 4½ feet in height.
      (3)   Entranceway structures shall not be located in the existing or
planned right-of-way.
      (4)   Approval of the Building Official and issuance of a building permit
shall be required prior to construction.
      (5)   Signage on the entranceway structure shall comply with the Sign
Regulations in Chapter 153 of this Code.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
§ 154.115 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the Wireless Telecommunications
section of this chapter.
(Ord. 97-002, passed 6-16-97)
§ 154.116 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   It is the general purpose and intent of the city to carry out the will
of the United States Congress by authorizing communication facilities needed to
operate wireless telecommunication systems. However, it is the further purpose
and intent of the city to provide for that authorization in a manner which
retains the character, property values, public view, and aesthetic quality of
neighborhoods and the community at large. In fashioning and administering the
provisions in this subchapter, it is the intent to balance these potentially
competing interests.
   (B)   In adopting these amendments to the Zoning Ordinance, and in
recognition of the number of providers who have been authorized by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) to provide wireless telecommunication services
and coverage, it is the intent of the city to fully exercise the authority
granted by law relative to the placement, construction and modification of
wireless telecommunication facilities.
   (C)   It is further the purpose and intent of this subchapter to do the
following.
      (1)   Require the City Council and the Planning Commission to regulate
the location and efficient provision of sites for wireless communication
facilities and services.
      (2)   Require the City Council and the Planning Commission to establish
the zoning districts in which the number, shape, and area considered for the
location of wireless telecommunication facilities and services be permitted by
special land use, subject to conformance with applicable standards and
conditions.
      (3)   Provide for regulations within those established districts which
shall be imposed designating the uses for which wireless telecommunication
facilities and services shall or shall not be erected or altered, permitted or
excluded, or subjected to special regulations.
      (4)   Ensure that wireless telecommunication facilities and services are
situated in appropriate locations and have appropriate relationships to other
land uses, structures, and buildings.
      (5)   Limit inappropriate physical and aesthetic overcrowding of land
activities and avoid adverse impacts upon the existing population,
transportation systems, and other public service and facility needs.
      (6)   Facilitate adequate and efficient provision of sites for wireless
telecommunication facilities and services.
      (7)   Promote the public health, safety, and welfare.
      (8)   Require adequate information about plans for wireless
telecommunication facilities and services to allow the city to efficiently plan
and zone their location.
      (9)   Minimize the overall number of new wireless telecommunication
facilities in the city in the future by encouraging the use of existing
structures for attached wireless telecommunication facilities where technically
feasible through the use of colocation. The city recognizes that each licensed
provider of a wireless communication facility must, by law, be permitted to
locate sufficient facilities in order to achieve the objectives promulgated by
the United States Congress. However, in light of the anticipated dramatic
increase in the number of wireless communication facilities to occur as a
result of the recent change of federal law and policy relating to the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, it is the intent of the city that all users
should colocate on attached wireless telecommunication facilities and wireless
telecommunication support structures in the interest of achieving the purposes
and intent of this subchapter.
      (10)   Minimize the adverse impacts of technological obsolescence of
wireless telecommunication facilities and services to include timely removal
and/or conversion.
      (11)   Minimize the adverse impacts from the presence of relatively tall
towers that have a low architectural and aesthetic appeal to most persons,
recognizing that the absence of regulation would result in a material
impediment to the maintenance and promotion of property values, and further
recognizing that this economic component is an important part of the public
health, safety and welfare. The city finds that the presence of numerous tower
structures, particularly if located within residential areas, would decrease
the attractiveness and destroy the character and integrity of the community,
which would in turn have a negative impact upon property values.
      (12)   Minimize the negative visual impacts of wireless telecommunication
facilities and services on the public view of the neighborhoods, community
landmarks, historic sites and buildings, natural beauty areas, and public
rights-of-way by establishing and using as few structures as reasonably
feasible, and using structures which are designed for compatibility, including
the avoidance of lattice structures that are unnecessary, taking into
consideration the purposes and intent of this subchapter.
      (13)   Recognize that the public view and the view from sites and
buildings is a major economic component of a property's value.
      (14)   Recognize that operation of a wireless communication system may
require the establishment of facilities in locations not within the
predetermined zoning districts. In such cases, it is likely that there will be
greater adverse impact upon neighborhoods and areas within the city.
Consequently, more stringent standards and conditions shall apply to the
review, approval and use of such facilities.
      (15)   Provide for the submission of as-built drawings and photographs of
at least three similar existing structures to the city with clearly identified
and certified capacity for colocation and addition of equipment to facilitate
the planning and administration of wireless telecommunication facilities and
services.
      (16)   Provide for the submission of adequate cost, price and market
information to permit administration of colocation.
      (17)   Permit the city to develop community-wide plans for wireless
telecommunication facilities and services.
(Ord. 97-002, passed 6-16-97)
§ 154.117 FACILITIES AND SERVICES.
      Wireless telecommunication support structures (towers) and wireless
telecommunication facilities (antennas) are permitted upon special land use
approval, site plan review and approval, subject to the requirements of the
adopted Master Plan, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed in §§
154.118 through
154.121, and subject further to the special land use procedures of §§
154.415 through
154.417, Special Use Regulations, in all districts and if approved, constructed
and maintained in accordance with the standards and conditions of this
subchapter, and also subject to the following criteria and standards.
   (A)   Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be of a design such as a
steeple, bell tower, flagpole, or other form which is compatible with the
existing character of the proposed site, neighborhood, and general area, as
approved by the Planning Commission, and shall comply with the colocation
requirements of §
154.120 in all districts.
   (B)   Site locations shall be permitted on a priority basis on the following
sites, subject to application of all other standards contained within this
subchapter.
      (1)   Municipally owned sites.
      (2)   Other governmentally owned sites.
      (3)   Religious or other institutional sites.
      (4)   Public or private school sites.
   (C)   Monopole towers shall be permitted in lieu of an alternative design
within the M-1 district and PR district, provided that the towers are set back
at least 300 feet from public right of way and shall comply with the co-
location requirements of §
154.120.
   (D)   No wireless telecommunication facilities shall be permitted on a
privately-owned residential lot of record.
(Ord. 97-002, passed 6-16-97; Am. Ord. 06-002, passed 12-19-05) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.118 APPLICATION; REQUIRED SERVICES.
   All applications for wireless telecommunication facilities shall be reviewed
in accordance with the following standards and conditions and, if approved,
shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with these standards and
conditions. In addition, if the facility is approved, it shall be constructed
and maintained with any additional conditions imposed by the Planning
Commission at its discretion within the intent and purpose of this subchapter.
   (A)   All applications for the required permit to place, construct or modify
any part or component of a wireless telecommunication facility shall include
the following information.
      (1)   A site plan prepared in accordance with §§
154.400 through
154.405, showing the location, size, screening and design of all buildings and
structures, including fences; and the location and size of outdoor equipment;
and the location, number, and species of proposed landscaping; and as-built
drawings for all proposed attached wireless telecommunication facilities and/or
wireless telecommunication support structures; and photographs of at least
three similar existing structures
      (2)   A disclosure of what is proposed, demonstrating the need for the
proposed wireless telecommunication support structure to be located as
proposed, based upon the presence of one or more of the following factors.
         (a)   Proximity to an interstate highway or major thoroughfare.
         (b)   Areas of population concentration.
         (c)   Concentration of commercial, industrial, and/or other business
centers.
         (d)   Areas where signal interference has occurred due to tall
buildings, masses of trees, or other obstruction.
         (e)   Topography of the proposed facility location in relation to
other facilities with which the proposed facility is to operate.
         (f)   Other specifically identified reasons creating need for the
facility.
      (3)   The reason or purpose for the placement, construction or
modification with specific reference to the provider's coverage, capacity and/
or quality needs, goals and objectives.
      (4)   The existing form of technology being used and any changes proposed
to that technology.
      (5)   As applicable, the planned or proposed and existing service area of
the facility and the attached wireless telecommunication facility, and wireless
telecommunication support structure height and type, and signal power expressed
in effective radiated power (ERP) upon which the service area has been planned.
      (6)   The nature and extent of the provider/applicant's ownership or
lease interest in the property, building or structure upon which facilities are
proposed for placement, construction or modification.
      (7)   The identity and address of all owners and other persons with a
real property interest in the property, buildings, or structure upon which
facilities are proposed for placement, construction or modification.
      (8)   A map showing existing and known proposed wireless
telecommunication facilities within the city, and further showing existing and
known proposed wireless telecommunication facilities within areas surrounding
the borders of the city in the location, and in the area, which are relevant in
terms of potential colocation or in demonstrating the need for the proposed
facility. If and to the extent the information in question is on file with the
community, the applicant shall be required only to update as needed. Any
proprietary information may be submitted with a request for confidentiality in
connection with the development of governmental policy M.C.L.A. § 15.243(1)(g).
This subchapter shall serve as the promise to maintain confidentiality to the
extent permitted by law. The request for confidentiality must be prominently
stated in order to bring it to the attention of the city.
      (9)   For each location identified on the applicant/provider's survey
maps and drawings, the application shall include the following information, if
known, with the applicant/provider expected to exercise reasonable due
diligence in attempting to obtain information through lawful means prior to
application.
         (a)   The structural capacity and whether it can accommodate the
applicant's facility, as proposed or modified.
         (b)   Whether property owner approvals exist or have been requested
and obtained.
         (c)   Whether the location could be used by the applicant/provider for
placement of its attached wireless telecommunication facility; if the location
cannot be used, a disclosure of the technological considerations involved, with
specific reference to how use of the location would prohibit the applicant/
provider from providing wireless telecommunication services.
      (10)   A certification by a State of Michigan licensed and registered
professional engineer regarding the ability of the structure to support the
antennas and the manner in which the proposed structure will fall. The
certification will be utilized, along with other criteria such as applicable
regulations for the district in question, in determining appropriate setbacks
to be required for the structure and other facilities.
      (11)   A description of the security to be posted at the time of
receiving a building permit for the wireless telecommunication support
structure to ensure removal of the structure when it has been abandoned or is
no longer needed, as provided in §
154.121. The security shall, at the election of the city, be in the form of
cash, surety bond, letter of credit, or an agreement in a form approved by the
City Attorney and recordable at the office of the County Register of Deeds, a
promise of the applicant and owner of the property to timely remove the
facility as required under this subchapter, with the further provision that the
applicant and owner shall be responsible for the payment of any costs and
attorney's fees incurred by the city in securing removal, and the property
shall provide security for the costs and fees.
      (12)   The site plan shall include a landscape plan where the wireless
telecommunication support structure is being placed at a location which is not
otherwise part of another site plan with landscaping requirements. The purpose
of landscaping is to provide screening for the wireless telecommunication
support structure base, accessory buildings and enclosure. In all cases there
shall be fencing of at least eight feet in height which is required for the
protection of the tower.
      (13)   Evidence of site plan approval from the Federal Aviation
Administration, if required due to a site's proximity to the Detroit
Metropolitan Wayne County Airport, or evidence that approval is not required.
      (14)   The name, address and telephone number of the person to contact
for engineering, maintenance and other noticed purposes. This information shall
be continuously updated during all times the facility is on the premises.
(Ord. 97-002, passed 6-16-97) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.119 SUPPORT STRUCTURES.
   (A)   The wireless telecommunication support structure shall not be
injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public safety and
welfare. The wireless telecommunication support structure shall be located and
designed to be harmonious with the surrounding areas, and to be aesthetically
and architecturally compatible with the natural environment, as well as the
environment as altered by development.
   (B)   The maximum height of all new or modified attached wireless
telecommunication facilities and wireless telecommunication support structures
shall be 60 feet within 300 feet of Ford and Middlebelt Road right-of-way and
120 feet anywhere else in the city, or the minimum height demonstrated to be
necessary for reasonable communication by the applicant (and by other entities
to colocate on the structure), whichever is less, to the satisfaction of the
Planning Commission, or lower heights as approved by the Federal Aviation
Administration. The applicant shall demonstrate a justification for the
proposed height of the structures and an evaluation of alternative designs
which might result in lower heights. The accessory building contemplated to
enclose such items as switching equipment shall be limited to the maximum
height for accessory structures within the respective district.
   (C)   Where the wireless telecommunication support structure abuts a parcel
of land zoned for other than residential purposes, the minimum setback of the
wireless telecommunication support structure and accessory structures shall be
in accordance with the required setbacks for the main or principal buildings as
provided in the schedule of regulations for the zoning district in which the
wireless telecommunication support structure is located.
   (D)   There shall be an unobstructed access to the wireless
telecommunication support structure for operation, maintenance, repair and
inspection purposes, which may be provided through an easement. This access
shall have a width and location determined by such factors as the location of
adjacent thoroughfares and traffic circulation within the site; utilities
needed to service the wireless telecommunication support structure and any
attendant facilities; the location of buildings and parking facilities;
proximity to residential districts and minimizing disturbance to the natural
landscape; and the type of equipment which will need to access the site.
   (E)   The division of property for the purposes of locating a wireless
telecommunication support structure is prohibited unless all zoning
requirements and conditions are met.
   (F)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant variances only for the setback
requirements of a wireless telecommunication support structure, provided that
the proposed location will reduce its visual impact on the surrounding area, or
for the colocation requirements of §
154.120.
   (G)   Where a wireless telecommunication facility is proposed on the roof of
a building with the equipment enclosure proposed as a roof appliance or
penthouse on the building, it shall be designed, constructed and maintained to
be architecturally compatible with the principal building. The equipment
enclosure may be located within the principal building or may be an accessory
building, provided that the accessory building conforms with all district
requirements for principal buildings, including yard setbacks and building
height.
   (H)   The Planning Commission shall, with respect to the color of the
wireless telecommunication support structure and all accessory buildings,
review and approve so as to minimize distraction, reduce visibility, maximize
aesthetic appearance, and ensure compatibility with surroundings. It shall be
the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the wireless telecommunication
facility in a neat and orderly condition, recognizing its highly visible
nature.
   (I)   Wireless telecommunication support structures shall be constructed in
accordance with all applicable building codes and shall include the submission
of a professional soils report from a geotechnical engineer licensed in the
State of Michigan. This soils report shall include soil borings and
statements indicating the suitability of soil conditions for the proposed use.
The requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communication
Commission, and Michigan Aeronautics Commission shall be noted.
   (J)   A maintenance plan, and any applicable maintenance agreement, shall be
presented as part of the site plan for the proposed facility. The plan shall be
designed to ensure the long term, continuous maintenance to a reasonably
prudent standard.
   (K)   Wireless telecommunication facilities shall comply with applicable
federal and state standards relative to electromagnetic fields.
(Ord. 97-002, passed 6-16-97) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.120 COLOCATION; NEW SUPPORT STRUCTURES.
   If a provider fails or refuses to permit colocation on a facility owned or
otherwise controlled by the provider, where colocation is feasible, the result
will be that a new and unnecessary additional structure will be compelled, in
direct violation of and in direct contradiction to the basic policy, intent and
purpose of the city. The provisions of this section are designed to carry out
and encourage conformity with the policy of the city.
   (A)   Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication support structures
shall be designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to
accommodate both the applicant's attached wireless telecommunication facility
and comparable attached wireless telecommunication facilities of additional
users. Wireless telecommunication support structures must be designed to allow
for future rearrangement of attached wireless telecommunication facilities upon
the wireless telecommunication support structure and to accept attached
wireless telecommunication facilities mounted at varying heights.
   (B)   A proposal for a new wireless telecommunication support structure
shall not be approved unless and until it can be documented by the applicant
that the telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed wireless
telecommunication support structure cannot be feasibly colocated and
accommodated on an existing or approved wireless telecommunication support
structure or other existing structure due to one or more of the following
reasons.
      (1)   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved wireless telecommunication support structure or building,
as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the
existing or approved wireless telecommunication support structure cannot be
reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent
equipment at a reasonable cost.
      (2)   The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting
the usability of other existing or planned equipment on the wireless
telecommunication support structure or other existing structure as documented
by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the interference cannot
be prevented at a reasonable cost.
      (3)   Existing or approved wireless telecommunication support structures
and buildings within the search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment
at a height necessary for the coverage area and capacity needs to reasonably
function as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer.
      (4)   Other unforseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the
planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing wireless
telecommunication support structure or building.
   (C)   Colocation shall be deemed to be feasible for purposes of this section
where all of the following are met.
      (1)   The provider entity being considered for colocation will undertake
to pay market rent or other market compensation for colocation.
      (2)   The site on which colocation is being considered, taking into
consideration reasonable modification or replacement of a facility, is able to
provide structural support.
      (3)   The colocation being considered is technologically reasonable,
e.g., the colocation will not result in unreasonable interference, given
appropriate physical and other adjustment in relation to the structure,
antennas, and the like.
      (4)   The height of the structure necessary for colocation will not be
increased beyond a point deemed to be permissible by the city, taking into
consideration the several standards contained within this section.
   (D)   If a party who owns or otherwise controls a wireless telecommunication
support structure shall fail or refuse to alter a structure so as to
accommodate a proposed and otherwise feasible colocation, the facility shall
thereupon and thereafter be deemed to be a nonconforming structure and use, and
shall not be altered, expanded or extended in any respect.
   (E)   If a party who owns or otherwise controls a facility shall fail or
refuse to permit a feasible colocation, and this requires the construction and/
or use of a new wireless telecommunication support structure, the party failing
or refusing to permit a feasible colocation shall be deemed to be in direct
violation and contradiction of the policy, intent and purpose of this
subchapter, and, consequently that party shall take responsibility for the
violation, and shall be prohibited from receiving approval for a new wireless
telecommunication support structure within the city for a period of five years
from the date of the failure or refusal to permit the colocation.
(Ord. 97-002, passed 6-16-97) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.121 REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.
   When a wireless telecommunications facility has not been used for 180 days
or more, or six months after new technology is available which permits the
operation of a wireless telecommunications facility without the requirement of
a wireless telecommunication support structure, all and/or part of the wireless
telecommunications facility shall be removed by the users, owners of the
wireless telecommunications facility. For the purposes of this section, the
removal of antennas or other equipment from the facility, or the cessation of
operations (transmission and/or reception of radio signals) shall be considered
as the beginning of a period of non-use. The situation(s) in which removal of a
wireless telecommunications facility is required may be applied and limited to
a portion of the facility.
   (A)   Upon the occurrence of one or more of the events requiring removal,
persons who had used the wireless telecommunications facility shall immediately
apply for and secure the application for any required demolition or removal
permits, and immediately proceed with and complete the demolition/removal,
restoring the condition which existed prior to the construction of the wireless
telecommunications facility.
   (B)   If the required removal of the wireless telecommunications facility or
a portion thereof has not been lawfully completed within 60 days of the
applicable deadline, and after at least 30 days written notice, the city may
enter upon the premises and remove or secure the removal of the facility or
required portions thereof, with its actual costs and reasonable administrative
charges to be drawn or collected from the security posted at the time
application was made for establishing the wireless telecommunications facility.
(Ord. 97-002, passed 6-16-97) Penalty, see §
154.999
SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO SPECIFIC USES
§ 154.135 INTENT AND SCOPE.
   Each use listed in this subchapter, whether permitted by right or subject to
approval as a special land use, shall be subject to the site development
standards specified, in addition to applicable standards and requirements for
the district in which the use is located. These standards are intended to
alleviate the impact from a use that is of an area, intensity or type, or that
possesses characteristics that are unique or atypical for the district in which
the use is allowed. These standards are intended to assure that the uses will
be compatible with surrounding land uses and insure the orderly development of
the district. Conformance with these standards shall be subject to site plan
review. Unless otherwise specified, each use listed in this subchapter shall be
subject to all applicable yard, bulk and other standards for the district in
which the use is located.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.136 AUTOMOBILE OR VEHICLE SALES.
   Automobile and/or vehicle sales operations with repair facilities or outdoor
sales space shall be subject to the requirements that follow. These
requirements shall apply to any operation involving the sale, lease or rental
of new or used vehicles, house trailers, recreational vehicles, trucks, and
other vehicles.
   (A)   Grading, surfacing, and drainage. Outdoor sales lots, parking areas,
and other vehicle maneuvering areas shall be hard-surfaced with concrete or
bituminous material, and shall be graded and drained so as to effectively
dispose of or retain. surface waters. Grading, surfacing, and drainage plans
shall be subject to review and approval by the Director of the City DPS and/or
City Engineer.
   (B)   Driveway location. The nearest edge of any driveway serving an outdoor
vehicle sales area shall be located at least 60 feet from any street or road
intersection, as measured from the nearest intersection right-of-way line.
   (C)   Servicing of vehicles. All servicing of vehicles shall be subject to
the following requirements.
      (1)   Service activities shall be clearly incidental to the vehicle sales
operation.
      (2)   Vehicle service activities shall occur within a completely enclosed
building.
      (3)   Partially dismantled vehicles, damaged vehicles, new and used
parts, and discarded parts shall be stored within a completely enclosed
building.
      (4)   Buildings containing the service operations shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from any abutting residential property line.
      (5)   There shall be no external evidence of the service operations, in
the form of dust, odors, or noise, beyond the interior of the service building.
      (6)   Buildings should be oriented so that open bays, particularly for
self-serve automobile washes, do not face onto adjacent thoroughfares unless
screened by an adjoining lot, building or obscuring wall per §§
154.100 and
154.101.
   (D)   Broadcasting devices prohibited. Devices for the outdoor broadcasting
of voice, telephone monitoring, music or any other amplified sound shall be
prohibited outside of any building.
   (E)   Setbacks. Outdoor sales lots, parking areas, and other vehicle
maneuvering areas shall comply with the requirements for parking lots, as
specified in §
154.066(A).
   (F)   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area required for such uses shall be
two acres.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 08-004, passed 11-5-07) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.137 AUTOMOBILE REPAIR AND FILLING STATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply to automobile filling stations and
automobile or vehicle service stations, including tire, battery, muffler and
undercoating shops.
   (A)   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area required for such uses shall be
20,000 square feet.
   (B)   Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width required for such uses shall
be 150 feet.
   (C)   Minimum setbacks. Repair garages or other buildings shall comply with
the setback requirements for the district in which the use is located. However,
a minimum setback of 40 feet shall be maintained on all sides that abut
property that is zoned or used for residential purposes. Pump islands and
canopies shall comply with the following requirements
 
Minimum Setback From Right-of-Way Line
Nearest edge of pump island       25 feet
Nearest edge of unenclosed canopy 20 feet
   (D)   Ingress and egress. Ingress and egress drives shall be a minimum of 31
feet and a maximum of 40 feet in width. No more than one drive or curb opening
shall be permitted for every 75 feet of frontage (or fraction thereof) along
any street. The nearest edge of any such drive shall be located at least 25
feet from the nearest point of any property zoned or used for residential
purposes. Curb openings for drives shall not be permitted where the drive would
create a safety hazard or traffic nuisance because of its location in relation
to other ingress and egress drives, its location in relation to the traffic
generated by other buildings or uses or location near a vehicular or pedestrian
entrances or crossings.
   (E)   Curbs. A curb of at least six inches in height shall be installed to
prevent vehicles from being driven onto or parked with any part of the vehicle
extending within two feet of abutting landscaped areas, sidewalks, streets,
buildings, or adjoining property.
   (F)   Layout. All lubrication equipment, automobile wash equipment, hoists,
and pits shall be enclosed entirely within a building. Gasoline pumps shall be
located so that motor vehicles do not park on or extend over abutting
landscaped areas, sidewalks, streets, buildings, or adjoining property while
being served. Adequate vehicle parking and stacking spaces shall be provided as
required in §§
154.065 through
154.070.
   (G)   Orientation of open bays. Buildings should be oriented so that open
service bays do not face onto adjacent major thoroughfares or arterial roads
unless screened by an adjoining lot, building, or obscuring wall per §§
154.100 and
154.101.
   (H)   Outside storage. Inoperable, wrecked or partially dismantled vehicles
shall not be stored or parked outside for a period exceeding 48 hours, provided
the vehicles are stored in the rear yard within a masonry screening wall that
is not less than six feet in height.
   (I)   Vehicle sales and storage. The storage, sale, or rental of new or used
cars, trucks, trailers, and any other vehicles on the premises is prohibited
except in conformance with this chapter.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.138 CAR WASH ESTABLISHMENTS.
   The following regulations shall apply to automobile wash or car wash
establishments.
   (A)   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area required for automobile or car
wash establishment shall be 10,000 square feet.
   (B)   Layout. All washing activities shall be carried on within a fully
enclosed building. Vacuum activities shall be permitted in the rear yard only,
provided the activities are located at least 25 feet from adjacent
residentially zoned or used property. Entrances and exists shall not face
abutting residentially zoned or used property. Adequate vehicle parking and
stacking spaces shall be provided as required in §§
154.065 through
154.070.
   (C)   Entrances and exits. Sufficient space shall be provided on the lot so
that vehicles do not enter or exit the wash building directly from an adjacent
street or alley. All maneuvering areas, stacking lanes, and exit aprons shall
be located within the car wash property. Streets and alleys shall not be used
for maneuvering or parking by vehicles to be serviced by the automobile wash.
   (D)   Orientation of open bays. Buildings should be oriented so that open
bays, particularly for self- serve automobile washes, do not face onto adjacent
thoroughfares unless screened by an adjoining lot, building or obscuring wall
per §§
154.100 and
154.101.
   (E)   Exit lane drainage. Exit lanes shall be sloped to drain water back to
the wash building to drainage gates.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.139 DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Setbacks. Buildings or other structures used for the purpose of a
drive-in establishment shall be set back a minimum of 60 feet from any street
right-of-way line.
   (B)   Location of driveways. Driveways serving drive-in establishments shall
provide direct access from a major thoroughfare or arterial road. The nearest
edge of any entrance or exit drive shall be located no closer than 25 feet from
any street or road intersection, as measured from the nearest intersection
right-of-way line.
   (C)   Screening. An obscuring wall shall be provided along all property
lines abutting property that is zoned for residential, commercial, or office
use, subject to the requirements in §§
154.100 and
154.101.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.140 FAST-FOOD/DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANTS.
   The following regulations shall apply to fast-food and drive-through
restaurants.
   (A)   Minimum frontage. The site shall have a minimum of 150 feet of
frontage on a major thoroughfare.
   (B)   Location of driveways. Ingress and egress points shall be located no
closer than 25 feet from the intersection of any two streets, as measured from
the nearest right-of-way line. Points of vehicular ingress and egress shall be
limited to the thoroughfare having business-zoned frontage only. The minimum
distance between driveways providing off-site ingress or egress shall be at
least 65 feet measured from the two closest driveway curbs.
   (C)   Screening. An obscuring wall shall be provided along all property
lines abutting property that is zoned for residential, commercial, or office
use, subject to the requirements in §§
154.100 and
154.101.
   (D)   Control of sound level. Devices for the transmission of voices shall
be so directed or muffled as to prevent sound from being audible beyond the
boundaries of the site.
   (E)   Stacking spaces. A restaurant with a drive-through window shall
provide stacking spaces for each drive-through window, as required in the
Schedule of Off-Street Parking, §
154.067(I).
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.141 FUNERAL HOMES.
   The following regulations shall apply to funeral homes and mortuaries.
   (A)   Assembly area. An adequate assembly area shall be provided off-street
for vehicles to be used in funeral processions. All maneuvering areas and exit
aprons shall be located within the site. Streets and alleys shall not be used
for maneuvering or parking of vehicles.
   (B)   Screening. The service and loading area shall be obscured from
adjacent residential areas in accordance with §§
154.100 and
154.101.
   (C)   Caretaker’s residence. A caretaker's residence may be provided within
the main building of the funeral home or as an approved accessory building on
the site, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.142 CHILD CARE CENTERS.
   The following regulations shall apply to Group Day Care Homes, Child Care
Centers, Nursery schools, Day Nurseries, and Pre-Schools.
   (A)   Licensing. In accordance with applicable state laws, all child care
facilities shall be registered with or licensed by the Department of Social
Services and shall comply with the minimum standards outlined for those
facilities.
   (B)   Outdoor play area. A minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor play area
shall be provided, and maintained per child, provided that the overall area of
the play area shall not be less than 5,000 square feet. The outdoor play area
shall be suitably fenced and screened from abutting residentially zoned or used
land by a greenbelt, which shall be landscaped in accordance with §§
154.080 through
154.086.
   (C)   Frontage. Child care centers shall front onto a thoroughfare or
collector road that is constructed to city standards.
   (D)   Setbacks. Child care centers shall have a minimum side yard setback of
at least 25 feet.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.143 HOSPITALS.
   The following regulations shall apply to hospitals.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area for a hospital site shall be ten acres.
   (B)   Frontage and access. Hospitals shall front onto a major thoroughfare
and the main means of access to the hospital for patients, visitors, and
employees shall be via the thoroughfare. Secondary access to a hospital site
may be off of a residential street.
   (C)   Setbacks. The principal building and all accessory buildings shall be
set back a minimum distance of 50 feet from any property line. The Planning
Commission may allow the placement of an eight-foot high obscuring masonry wall
at the property line in lieu of the setback requirement.
   (D)   Screening. Ambulance, emergency entrance areas and loading areas shall
be effectively screened from view from all adjacent residential uses by the
building design, landscaping, or a masonry wall.
   (E)   State and federal regulations. Hospitals shall be constructed,
maintained, and operated in conformance with applicable state and federal laws,
including provisions of the Michigan Hospital Survey and Construction Act,
Public Act 299 of 1947, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 331.501 et seq.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.144 JUNK YARDS.
   The following regulations shall apply to junk yards.
   (A)   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area for a junk yard shall be five
acres.
   (B)   Location. A parcel of land used for a junk yard shall abut only
nonresidential or noncommercial land uses or zoning districts.
   (C)   Setbacks. A minimum setback of 100 feet shall be maintained between
the front property line and the portion of the lot on which junk materials are
placed or stored. All buildings, fencing, and junk materials shall be set back
at least 100 feet from any road or highway right-of-way line, and at least 300
feet from any property line that abuts a residentially zoned or used district.
   (D)   Screening. The entire junk yard site shall be screened with an eight-
foot obscuring masonry wall, constructed in accordance with §§
154.100 and
154.101. The wall shall be uniformly painted and maintained in neat appearance,
and shall not have any signs or symbols painted on it.
   (E)   Surfacing. All roads, driveways, parking lots, and loading and
unloading areas shall be paved and provide adequate drainage.
   (F)   Regulated activities. All fluids shall be drained from vehicles and
disposed of in a proper manner prior to the vehicles being stored on the site.
   (G)   Permits. All required city, county, and state permits shall be
obtained prior to establishing a junkyard.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.145 KENNELS.
   The following regulations shall apply to kennels.
   (A)   Private kennels. Private kennels to house only the animals owned by
the occupant of the dwelling unit shall be permitted subject to the following.
      (1)   The lot on which any private kennel is located shall have a minimum
lot area of 19,000 square feet.
      (2)   No more than six animals over the age of six months shall be housed
in a private kennel.
      (3)   Buildings in which animals are kept, animal runs, and exercise
areas shall not be 1ocated in any required front, side, or rear yard setback
area, and shall be located at least 100 feet from any dwellings or buildings
used by the public on adjacent property.
   (B)   Commercial kennels. Commercial kennels shall be subject to the
following standards.
      (1)   Any commercial kennel shall be subject to all permit and
operational requirements established by county and state regulatory agencies.
      (2)   The lot on which any commercial kennel is located shall have a
minimum lot area of one acre. If more than four animals are housed in an
outdoor kennel, an additional one acre shall be required for every additional
ten animals (or fraction thereof).
      (3)   Buildings in which animals are kept, animal runs, and exercise
areas shall not be located in any required front, side, or rear yard setback
area, and shall be located at least 100 feet from any dwellings or buildings
used by the public on adjacent property.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 13-004, passed 5-20-13)  Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.146 MINI-WAREHOUSES.
   The following regulations shall apply to mini-warehouses.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area for mini-warehouses shall be two acres.
   (B)   Permitted use. Mini-warehouse establishments shall provide for storage
only. All storage must be completely contained within an enclosed building.
   (C)   Site enclosure. The entire site, exclusive of access drives, shall be
enclosed with a six-foot high masonry wall, constructed in accordance with §§
154.100 and
154.101. A six-foot chain link fence may be permitted along property lines that
do not abut a residentially-zoned district or residential use.
   (D)   Orientation of open bays. Buildings must be oriented so that open
service bays do not face adjacent major thoroughfares or arterial roads unless
screened by an adjoining lot, building, or obscuring wall in compliance with §§
154.100 and
154.101.
   (E)   Exterior appearance. The exterior of any mini-warehouse shall be of
finished quality and design, compatible with the design of structures on
surrounding property.
   (F)   Resident manager. A resident manager may be permitted on-site with the
responsibility of maintaining the operation of the facility in conformance with
the conditions of the approval. The manager's residence shall conform with the
provision of this chapter.
   (G)   On-site circulation and parking.  
      (1)   All one-way driveways shall be designed with one 10-foot wide
loading/unloading lane and one 15-foot travel lane.
      (2)   All two-way driveways shall be designed with one 10-foot wide
loading/unloading lane and two 12-foot travel lanes.
      (3)   The parking lanes may be eliminated if the driveway does not serve
storage units. Signs and painted lines shall be used to indicate parking and
traffic direction throughout the site.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.147 MOTELS AND HOTELS.
   The following regulations shall apply to motels or hotels.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area for a motel or hotel shall be three
acres.
   (B)   Accessory facilities. A motel or hotel must include at least one of
the following amenities.
      (1)   An attached dining room with seating capacity for at least 20
occupants at the same time, serviced by a full service kitchen.
      (2)   An unattached standard restaurant, as defined in §
154.005, with a seating capacity for not less than 50 occupants, located on the
same site as the motel or on a site contiguous with the motel and developed
simultaneously or in advance of the motel site.
   (C)   Design. Each unit available for rental within a motel or hotel shall
contain a bath and at least one bedroom and encompass a minimum gross floor
area of 350 square feet.
   (D)   Service. A motel or hotel shall provide customary motel services, such
as maid service, linen service, telephone and/or desk service, and the use of
furniture.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.148 NURSING HOMES AND OTHER GROUP HOMES.
   The following regulations shall apply to nursing homes, convalescent homes,
rest homes, orphanages, and half-way houses.
   (A)   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area for such facilities shall be
one acre.
   (B)   Frontage and access. Such uses shall front onto a major thoroughfare
and the main means of access to the site for residents or patients, visitors,
and employees shall be via the thoroughfare. In no case shall primary access to
a nursing home, convalescent home, or rest home be limited to a residential
street.
   (C)   Setback. The principal building and all accessary buildings shall be
set back a minimum distance of 25 feet from any property lines.
   (D)   Open space. Any such facility shall provide a minimum of 500 square
feet of outdoor open space for every bed used or intended to be used. The open
space shall be landscaped and shall include places for walking and sitting.
Off-street parking areas, driveways, and accessory uses or areas shall not be
counted as required open space.
   (E)   State and federal regulations. Nursing homes, convalescent homes, rest
homes, orphanages and halfway houses shall be constructed, maintained, and
operated in conformance with applicable state and federal laws.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.149 OPEN-AIR BUSINESSES.
   The following regulations shall apply to permanent open-air businesses.
   (A)   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area for open-air businesses shall
be 10,000 square feet.
   (B)   Driveway location. The nearest edge of any driveway serving an open-
air business shall be located at least 60 feet from any street or road
intersection, as measured from the nearest intersection right-of-way, and at
least 20 feet from any side property line.
   (C)   Parking setback. Parking shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from
any road right-of-way line.
   (D)   Lot width. The minimum lot width for open-air businesses shall be 100
feet.
   (E)   Loading and parking. All loading and parking areas for open-air
businesses shall be confined within the boundaries of the site, and shall not
be permitted to spill over onto adjacent roads or alloys.
   (F)   Outdoor display of vehicles. The outdoor display of new or used
automobiles, boats, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, trailers, trucks, or
tractors that are for sale, rent, or lease shall comply with the requirements
in §
154.136.
   (G)   Plant material nursery. Nurseries that deal with plant materials shall
comply with the following.
      (1)   Plant storage and display areas shall comply with the minimum
setback requirements for the district in which the nursery is located.
      (2)   The storage of soil, weed chips, fertilizer, and similar loosely
packaged materials shall be contained and covered to prevent it from blowing
onto adjacent properties.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.150 RESTAURANT SITE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Access. Points of vehicular ingress and egress shall be limited to the
thoroughfare having business-zoned frontage only.
   (B)   Screening. A restaurant with a rear or side yard abutting a
noncommercial district shall provide a permanent obscuring wall, per the
requirements of §§
154.100 and
154.101, along the full length of each abutting property line.
   (C)   Vehicular storage. Parking and vehicular storage in excess of 24
consecutive hours shall be prohibited at all times on the premises, and the
owner, franchise holder or lessee shall post a sign or signs giving notice that
all parked or stored vehicles are subject to ticketing and removal at the
owner's expense.
   (D)   Rubbish and debris. Each restaurant site shall be kept free of rubbish
and debris and the grass and other landscaping shall be well maintained so as
to present a neat and attractive appearance at all times.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.151 RADIO AND TV TOWERS.
   The following regulations shall apply to commercial and public radio and
television towers, microwave towers, and other communication antennas/towers.
   (A)   Setbacks. Each tower shall be set back from all property lines a
minimum distance equal to the height of the tower.
   (B)   Fencing. An open weave, six-foot high chain link fence shall be
constructed around the entire perimeter, in accordance with §
154.037.
   (C)   State and federal regulations. Radio, television, and other types of
communication towers shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in
conformance with applicable state and federal laws.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.152 RECREATION FACILITIES.
   (A)   Outdoor recreation facilities. Outdoor recreation facilities, such as,
but not limited to, ski facilities, courses for off-road vehicles and
snowmobiles, campgrounds, baseball facilities and swimming pools, shall comply
with the following regulations.
      (1)   Principal and accessory buildings shall be set back at least 25
feet from all property lines, unless otherwise specified herein.
      (2)   The location, layout, design, or operation of outdoor recreation
facilities shall not impair the continued enjoyment, use, and future orderly
development of adjacent and nearby properties. The Planning Commission may
specify the hours of operation in order to assure compatibility with adjacent
uses.
      (3)   Outdoor recreation uses shall not generate excessive noise, odors,
dust, or other impacts, such that the continued use and enjoyment of adjacent
properties would be impaired.
      (4)   All parking for outdoor recreation uses shall be provided in off-
street parking lots, which shall be designed in accordance with §§
154.065 through
154.070.
      (5)   Lighting for outdoor recreation uses shall be shielded to the
greatest extent possible from adjoining properties.
      (6)   Outdoor recreation uses shall be screened from view from adjacent
property zoned or used for residential purposes, in accordance with §
154.081(E).
      (7)   Accessary retail or commercial facilities, such as food and
beverage facilities or equipment shops, shall be designed to serve only the
patrons of the outdoor recreation facility, unless otherwise listed as a
permitted use in the district in which the facility is located.
   (B)   Indoor recreation facilities. Indoor recreation facilities, such as,
but not limited to, bowling establishments, indoor archery ranges, indoor
tennis courts, indoor skating rinks, and similar indoor recreation uses shall
comply with the following regulations.
      (1)   Indoor recreation uses shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from
any property line that abuts a residential district.
      (2)   The location, design, and operation of an indoor recreation use
shall not adversely affect the continued use, enjoyment, and development of
adjacent properties. In considering this requirement, particular attention
shall be focused on the adverse impact resulting from loitering on the
premises.
      (3)   Indoor recreation uses shall have direct access onto a major
thoroughfare.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.153 RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply to all religious institutions,
including churches, synagogues, temples, and related uses.
   (A)   Minimum site area. The minimum site area for a religious institution
shall be 40,000 square feet. For the purpose of determining minimum site area,
all contiguous land owned by the institution and any land area separated from
the principal use by a public right-of-way other than a major thoroughfare may
be included. Any land area separated by a right-of-way shall be considered to
be an integral part of the site plan for review and approval purposes.
   (B)   Lot width. The minimum lot width for religious institutions shall be
200 feet.
   (C)   Parking setback. Off-street parking shall be prohibited in the front
setback area required by this chapter for the underlying zoning district. No
parking shall be allowed within 15 feet of any property line. Except for the
above front yard setback requirement, the Zoning Board of Appeals may allow the
substitution of a wall per §§
154.100 and
154.101 in lieu of compliance with other setback requirements.
   (D)   Frontage and access. Religious institutions shall be located on a
major thoroughfare. The primary vehicular access to the site shall be provided
from a major thoroughfare.
   (E)   Landscaping. Religious institutions shall comply with the landscaping
requirements set forth in §
154.082(C).
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.154 STAMPING PLANTS, PUNCH PRESSES, AND LIKE MACHINES
   The following regulations shall apply to stamping machines, punch presses,
press brakes, and other like machines.
   (A)   General requirements. All such machines shall have shock absorbing
mountings and be placed on a suitable reinforced concrete footing. No machine
shall be loaded beyond the capacity prescribed by the manufacturer. All such
machines shall comply with the noise and vibration standards in §§
154.176.
   (B)   Automatic screw machine. Automatic screw machines shall be equipped
with noise silencers, and shall not be located closer than 300 feet from any
property zoned or used for residential purposes.
   (C)   Setbacks. Punch and stamp presses, other than hydraulic presses, shall
comply with the performance standards in §§
154.175 through
154.185.
   (D)   Power brakes. Press brakes shall be set back at least 300 feet from
any property line zoned for residential use.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.155 VETERINARY CLINICS.
   Veterinary clinics shall comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Enclosure. All activities shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building.
   (B)   Setbacks. All buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from
abutting land that is zoned for residential use.
   (C)   Treatment facilities. No veterinary clinic shall contain facilities
for boarding of animals. Treatment shall be limited to domesticated animals
considered as pets.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.156 VETERINARY HOSPITALS.
   Veterinary hospitals shall comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Enclosure. All activities shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building.
   (B)   Setbacks. All buildings shall be set back at least 200 feet from
abutting land that is zoned for residential use.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.157 ACCESSORY APARTMENT DWELLINGS.
   An accessory apartment dwelling as defined in §
154.005, shall comply with the following regulations.
   (A)   Incidental use to residence. The accessory apartment shall be clearly
incidental to the principal residence on the site. Accordingly, the following
conditions shall apply.
      (1)   Accessary apartments shall be established in owner-occupied
residences only.
      (2)   Only one accessory dwelling shall be permitted on each zoning lot.
      (3)   The total floor area of the accessory dwelling shall not exceed 600
square feet.
   (B)   Setbacks and placement on the parcel. An accessory dwelling shall
comply with all setback requirements for the district in which it is located.
   (C)   Compatibility with surrounding land use. The design of the accessory
dwelling shall not detract from the single-family character and appearance of
the principal residence or the surrounding neighborhood. The accessory dwelling
shall not have a front entrance visible from the front yard, other than the
entrance that serves the principal residence. When viewed from the outside, it
shall not appear that more than one household occupies the site.
   (D)   Parking and access. In addition to required parking for the principal
residence, one additional parking space shall be provided for the accessory
dwelling.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.158 SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING STANDARDS.
   As provided under Public Act 124 of 1992, being M.C.L.A. § 503, senior
citizen housing facilities shall be permitted in any R-3, C-1, C-2, C-3 or PD
district subject to the following requirements:
   (A)   Shared senior citizen living in a zoning district in which a maximum
of four unrelated individuals over the age of 50, with or without spouses, may
occupy a single dwelling structure specifically designed for such use. The
dwelling shall provide for separate bedrooms and sanitary facilities for each
occupant, (e.g. husband and wife constituting one occupant), together with a
shared kitchen, dining and living space. A minimum of 250 square feet of
private space (bedroom and sanitary facilities) shall be provided for each
occupant, together with shared space (kitchen, dining and living) of 200 square
feet per occupant. Each shared dwelling unit must be provided with adequate
management services to maintain the premises. All dwellings must be compatible
with abutting and surrounding single-family dwellings with respect to scale,
character, materials and landscaping. “Shared senior citizen living” does not
include adult foster care homes.
   (B)   Independent and congregate senior citizen living in any R-3, C-1, C-2,
C-3 or PD zoning district as follows:
      (1)   Independent senior citizen living units may include attached or
detached condominium dwellings, townhouses, or apartments consistent with all
provisions of this section otherwise applicable to such dwellings.
      (2)   Congregate senior citizen living shall consist of dwelling units
containing kitchen, sanitary, sleeping and living spaces in addition to common
service areas, including, but not limited to, central dining room(s),
recreational room(s) and a central lounge.
   (C)   Assisted senior citizen living and convalescent care in any R-3, C-1,
C-2, C3 or PD zoning districts, as follows:
   Assisted senior citizen living units and convalescent care facilities shall
consist of dwelling units containing living/sleeping areas and sanitary
facilities in addition to common service areas, including, but not limited to,
central dining room(s), recreational room(s), laundry service, housekeeping
service and a central lounge. Such facilities shall provide at least two common
meals per day seven days a week. Meals must be prepared in a kitchen facility
licensed by the state through the County Health Department. All construction of
these facilities must meet current applicable codes including State Public
Health Code Act 368 P.A. 1978 Part 129, as amended.
   (D)   Accessory buildings and uses as follows, subject to all conditions and
regulations provided in this section:
      (1)   General nursing facilities designed solely for the residents.
      (2)   Attached or detached carports or garages.
      (3)   Community and/ or recreational buildings for other than shared
senior citizen living units, not exceeding two stories in height, which are
designed to serve the residents of the development.
      (4)   Maintenance buildings and gatehouses for other than shared senior
citizen living units not exceeding one story in height.
      (5)   On-site manager’s dwelling unit and/or office.
   (E)   Additional required conditions:
      (1)   Shared senior citizen living, congregate senior citizen living, and
assisted senior citizen living and convalescent facilities shall front onto a
primary major thoroughfare, or secondary major thoroughfare, with the capacity
to accommodate expected traffic volumes from the use without detrimental impact
upon levels of safety, travel times and overall level of service.
      (2)   All facilities of a senior citizen housing development, such as
common service areas, central dining rooms, recreational rooms, and lounges,
shall be solely for the use of the residents, employees and invited guests of
the development, but not for the general public.
      (3)   For each dwelling unit in a congregate senior citizen living
development (division (B)(2)) in an assisted senior citizen living development
and in a convalescent care facility (division (C)), there shall be provided at
least 20 square feet of indoor recreation space and at least 50 square feet of
usable outdoor open space, which may include patios, park benches, courtyards
and landscaping, with such space to be available and accessible to all
residents of the development. Usable open space may be located on the ground,
on terraces or on rooftops, and shall be landscaped or developed for active or
passive recreation, and may include roofed recreation areas enclosed on not
more than one side, unenclosed porches and swimming pools. Usable open space
shall not include land used for required yard setbacks, driveways, parking lots
or loading/ unloading areas. Walkways and paved pedestrian plazas may be
included as eligible usable outdoor open space. Open space requirements may be
modified by the Planning Commission where a development site abuts a public
park or other suitable open space located within a reasonable walking distance
for the occupants of said housing development.
      (4)   For all senior citizen housing developments other than independent
senior citizen living units (division (B)(1)), there may be provided quarters
for an on-site/live-in manager and activities director who is trained and
knowledgeable of local resources relating to in-home support and other services
beneficial to residents.
      (5)   Except for independent senior citizen living units, (division (B)
(1)), an emergency alert system for senior citizen housing developments shall
be provided, which may include a bell entry system and an alarm system.
      (6)   Except for independent senior citizen living unit (division (B)
(1)), in addition to the requirements of the state’s Barrier Free Code, all
dwelling units and related facilities utilized by the tenants shall be
specifically designed for use by the elderly including, but not limited to,
provision for minimum 32-inch clear door widths and assist bars at water
closets, bathtubs and showers. In one-story units, wherever steps are located,
at least one ramp shall be provided. Where there are two-story units, at least
50% of the units of the building shall be accessible to handicapped
individuals.
      (7)   All units in a senior citizen housing development shall have a
minimum of one bedroom and one living room, but shall not exceed two bedrooms.
(See division (A) for shared senior citizen living units' special floor area
requirements.)
      (8)   Adequate sidewalks shall be provided for all senior housing
developments, subject to approval by the Planning Commission.
      (9)   Additional requirements:
         (a)   For purposes of this section, those eligible to be residents
within any senior citizen housing development are defined as individuals who
have attained the age of 50 years or older, or couples of which either partner
has attained the age of 50 years.
         (b)   All site development amenities, such as common service areas
(e.g. central dining rooms, recreational rooms, and central lounges) shall be
provided in the project plan.
   (F)   Procedures. A proposed senior citizen housing use shall be subject to
Planning Commission review and approval, after public hearing, pursuant to
notice requirements at §§
154.401 through
154.405, and subject to the following standards:
      (1)   The proposed use complies with all requirements of this section,
including, but not limited to: §§
154.020 through
154.039, General Zoning Regulations; §§
154.065 through
154.070, Off-street Parking; §§
154.080 through
154.086, Landscaping; and requirements for such use specified in each zoning
district classification.
      (2)   Project applications for other than independent senior citizen
living units (division (B)(2)), shall take into account the needs of elderly
persons for:
         (a)   Transportation.
         (b)   Shopping.
         (c)   Health facilities.
         (d)   Recreational facilities.
      (3)   The proposed use will not unduly affect existing community
resources and housing patterns.
      (4)   There is an established need for the proposed housing.
      (5)   The proposed use will not cause undue impact on existing
thoroughfares in terms of overall volumes, capacity, safety, travel times and
level of service.
      (6)   The proposed use will not cause undue impact on the capabilities of
public services and facilities, including water service, sewer service, police
and fire protection.
      (7)   The proposed use is planned and designed so as to minimize possible
adverse effects upon adjacent properties.
      (8)   The development of the proposed use will not result in or
contribute to an excessive concentration of senior citizen housing within the
surrounding area.
      (9)   That approval of this use by the Planning Commission after site
plan review and a public hearing shall be restricted to senior citizen housing
only.
      (10)   The Planning Commission shall conduct or have conducted necessary
field inspections and investigations to arrive at a proper decision. The
Planning Commission shall then act to approve, approve with conditions or
disapprove the site plan. Approval, or approval with conditions, of the site
plan by the Planning Commission shall be effective for a period of one year
absent the granting of an extension by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 02-009, passed 7-1-02; Am. Ord. 22-001,
passed 1-24-22) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.159 MANUFACTURED HOME PARK REQUIREMENTS.
   Manufactured home parks shall comply with the requirements of Public Act 419
of 1976, being M.C.L.A. § 125.2301 et seq., as amended. Further, manufactured
home parks shall comply with the city zoning regulations, Michigan Manufactured
Home Commission Rules, and any other lawfully adopted regulations of the city.
Should any conflict in regulatory provisions occur, the provision that imposes
the more restrictive or higher standard shall prevail.
   (A)   Location. Manufactured homes shall be located only in those zoning
districts in whichmanufactured home land use is permitted by these regulations.
Emergency or temporary parking of a manufactured home on any street, alley, or
highway may be permitted by the Building Official for a period not to exceed 12
consecutive hours, subject to any other limitations imposed by traffic or
parking regulations or ordinances for a particular street, alley or highway.
   (B)   Manufactured home standards. Each manufactured home shall be of
contemporary design and shall contain sanitary waste disposal facilities,
sleeping accommodations, a tub or shower bath, kitchen facilities, and plumbing
and electrical connections designed for attachment to appropriate external
system as commonly found in modern manufactured homes. Each manufactured home
shall comply with the zoning regulations for the district in which it is
located, regulations of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development as
adopted on June 15, 1976, and all subsequent amendments to such standards and
regulations. Manufactured homes constructed prior to June 15, 1976 shall be in
full compliance with NFPA 501B-1974/ANSI 119.1-1975 standards.
   (C)   Setbacks.
      (1)   Manufactured homes shall comply with the minimum distances
specified in R125.1941, Rule 941 of the Michigan Administrative Code.
      (2)   No manufactured home unit shall be located within 50 feet of the
right-of-way of a public thoroughfare, or within 35 feet of any other
manufactured home park property line.
      (3)   No manufactured home unit exterior wall shall be located within 20
feet of any other manufactured home unit’s exterior wall surface.
   (D)   Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a manufactured
home park unless that individual obtains a license for operation in compliance
with the requirements of Public Act 419 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. § 125.2301 et
seq., as amended. The Zoning Administrator shall communicate recommendations
regarding the issuance of any license to the Director of theManufactured
Housing Division, Corporation and Securities Bureau, Michigan Department of
Commerce.
   (E)   Violations. Whenever, upon inspection of any manufactured home park,
the Zoning Administrator finds that conditions or practices exist that violate
provisions of these zoning regulations or other regulations referenced herein,
the Zoning Administrator shall give notice in writing by certified mail to the
Director of the Michigan Manufactured Housing Commission, including the
specific nature of the alleged violations and a description of possible
remedial action necessary to comply with this chapter or other regulations. The
notification shall include such other information as is appropriate in order to
fully describe the violations and potential hazards to the public health,
safety and welfare resulting from the violation. A copy of the notification
shall be sent by certified mail to the last known address of the park owner or
agent.
   (F)   Inspections. The Zoning Administrator, or any delegated individual, is
granted the authority, as specified in Public Act 419 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §
125.2301 et seq. as amended, to enter upon the premises of any manufactured
home park for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of
these or other applicable city regulations.
   (G)   Park site development standards.
      (1)   Park area. A manufactured home park shall be at least ten
contiguous acres in size.
      (2)   Access. All manufactured home parks shall have direct access to a
major thoroughfare.
      (3)   Interior roadways.
         (a)   All interior roadways and driveways shall be hard-surfaced and
provided with curbs and gutters. Roadway drainage shall be appropriately
assigned such that storm water from the roadway will not drain onto the
manufactured home lots.
         (b)   Main access drives shall be no less than 32 feet wide. Secondary
access drives shall be no less than 26 feet in width. No parking shall be
permitted on any main or secondary access drives.
      (4)   Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed on the street
side of each manufactured home lot in accordance with established engineering
standards for the city. Sidewalks shall be placed not less than three feet from
the edge of the curb of a main access drive, but may be placed contiguous to
the curb of a secondary access drive. The areas between the sidewalk and curb
shall be seeded or sodded with grass, although shade or street trees may be
planted in the area.
      (5)   Water and sewer service. All manufactured home parks shall be
connected to the city water supply system and city sanitary sewer system and
shall meet the requirements of the Wayne County Health Department and the
Michigan Department of Health. Water shall be continuously supplied to each
manufactured home lot with a minimum available pressure of 20 pounds per square
inch. The plumbing connections to each manufactured home site shall be
constructed so that all lines are protected from freezing, accidental bumping,
or from creating any nuisance or health hazard.
      (6)   Storm drainage. All developed portions of the manufactured home
park shall be served by adequate storm drainage facilities, designed and
constructed in accordance with applicable city, county, and state regulations,
and shall be subject to review and approval by the City DPS Director.
      (7)   Telephone and electric service. All electric, telephone, and other
lines within the manufactured park shall be underground.
      (8)   Television antennas; satellite dishes. Individual exterior
television antennas or satellite dishes shall not be placed on any manufactured
home unit or lot. The manufactured home park may provide a master exterior
television antenna or dish for connection to individual mobile home units, or
an underground cable television system may be installed.
   (H)   Skirting. Each manufactured home must be skirted within 90 days after
establishment in a manufactured home park. In the event that skirting cannot be
installed in a timely manner due to inclement weather, the Zoning Administrator
may permit extension of the time period. All skirting shall conform to the
installation and materials standards specified in the Michigan Administrative
Code, R125.1604 Rule 604.
   (I)   Canopies and awnings.
      (1)   Canopies and awning may be attached to any manufactured home,
provided they are in compliance with the Michigan Administrative Code,
R125.1941, Rule 941(1)(b)(ii), and provided further that they shall not exceed
12 feet in width or exceed the length or the height of the manufactured home.
      (2)   A building permit shall be required for construction or erection of
canopies or awnings, or for construction of any area enclosed by glass,
screens, or other material, such that the enclosed area will be used for more
than casual warm weather leisure.
   (J)   Landscaping. Manufactured home parks shall be landscaped in accordance
with §§
154.080 through
154.086.
   (K)   Open space. Each manufactured home park shall provide a minimum of
15,000 square feet of open space area. The open space area shall be increased
by 250 square feet for each manufactured home site in excess of 50 manufactured
home park sites.
   (L)   Accessory storage areas.
      (1)   A parking area surrounded by an obscuring wall, in accordance with
§§
154.100 and
154.101, shall be located within each manufactured home park for the storage of
residents’ carrying trailers, boats, snowmobiles, motorized recreational
vehicles, and other similar equipment. This equipment shall not be stored
elsewhere in the park.
      (2)   Each manufactured home shall be provided with an accessory storage
building having at least 80 square feet of floor area for the storage of
household items, lawn equipment, and similar possessions.
   (M) Garbage and refuse collection. Garbage and refuse collection areas shall
be screened and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and other city regulations.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 21-004, passed 2-8-21) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.160 SINGLE-FAMILY CLUSTER OPTION.
   Except as stated within this section, an application for approval of a site
plan for a residential cluster option shall follow the procedures and
requirements established for a special use approval as stated in §§
154.415 through
154.417. The following standards shall apply to single-family cluster projects.
   (A)   Intent. The intent of the single-family cluster option is to provide
the opportunity for creative design in single-family residential districts to
accomplish the following primary objectives.
      (1)   To promote a higher quality of development than could be achieved
under conventional zoning regulations.
      (2)   To encourage innovation in land use and variety in design, layout,
and type of structures constructed.
      (3)   To provide a feasible means of residential development on sites
that would otherwise be difficult or impossible to develop because of the
parcel size or shape, the character of surrounding land uses, or other
constraints.
   (B)   Eligibility criteria.  
      (1)   In considering any proposal for the single-family cluster option,
the Planning Commission shall determine that the proposal satisfies one or more
of the following eligibility criteria.
         (a)   The overall impact of the development will provide a
recognizable and substantial benefit to its ultimate residents and to the
community.
         (b)   The parcel has narrow width, shallow depth, or a unusual
configuration that is a substantial detriment to development as a conventional
subdivision.
         (c)   A significant portion of the property's perimeter is bordered by
a major or secondary thoroughfare, so that, if developed as a conventional
subdivision, a substantial number of the lots would abut the thoroughfare and
be impacted by negative traffic noise and lights.
         (d)   A substantial portion of the property's perimeter is bordered by
land that is zoned or used for more intensive and potentially incompatible
nonresidential development.
         (e)   The parcel contains natural assets that would be preserved or
enhanced through the use of cluster development. Such assets may include stands
of trees, land that serves as a habitat for wildlife, unusual topographic
features, or other natural assets that should be preserved.
      (2)   An application for the single-family cluster option shall be
accompanied by written and graphic documentation demonstrating to the Planning
Commission that the proposal satisfies one or more of the listed eligibility
criteria.
   (C)   Project density.  
      (1)   The overall density of development on a site that qualifies for
cluster development shall not exceed the standards for density as established
by the underlying zoning regulations for the district in which the site is
located. The density of a development shall be computed by dividing the total
number of units proposed by the allowable acreage. The quotient shall be
rounded to the nearest tenth of an acre.
      (2)   For the purposes of computing density, allowable acreage shall
include the following.
         (a)   All areas to be used for residential purposes, including off-
street parking and private access roads, but excluding public street rights-of-
way.
         (b)   Dedicated private parks and/or common open space devoted for use
of residents of the single-family cluster development.
   (D)   Site design requirements. Single-family cluster developments shall
comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   Clustering alternatives.
         (a)   Attachment of units. A maximum of four single-family dwelling
units may be attached to each other, provided that measures are taken to avoid
monotonous facade design or the appearance of massive buildings that are out-
of-scale with surrounding single-family development. The attached units shall
be offset from one another, and/or different design details (i.e., different
building entrance designs, different building materials, and the like) shall be
used for each unit.
         (b)   Detached clusters. A maximum of single-family detached units may
be combined into a single cluster, provided that the units shall be spaced not
less than ten feet apart. This spacing requirement may be waived or modified by
the Planning Commission during site plan review, based upon a favorable
recommendation of the Fire Chief.
      (2)   Open space.  
         (a)   General requirements. Single-family cluster developments shall
provide and must maintain at least 15% of the site as dedicated common open
space.
         (b)   Water bodies and basins. Up to 25% of the required open space
may include the area of any created water bodies or water detention/retention
basins.
         (c)   Conveyance of open space. The required open space shall be set
aside by the developer through an irrevocable conveyance, such as a deed
restriction(s) or covenant(s) that runs with the land, assuring that the open
space will be developed, dedicated and continually maintained according to the
site plan and never changed to another use.
      (3)   Setbacks.
         (a)    Setbacks between clusters. Each cluster of attached or detached
dwelling units shall be set back a minimum distance of 50 feet from any other
cluster, except that the minimum setback for adjoining clusters that have a
side-to-side building relationship shall be 20 feet.
         (b)   Building setbacks. Buildings within each cluster shall comply
with the following minimum setbacks.
            1.   Internal private road: 20 feet from edge of traveled roadway.
            2.   Public road right-of-way: 25 feet.
            3.   Property line (other than road right-of-way): 25 feet.
            4.   Utility easement (other than individual unit lead): 12 feet.
      (4)   Landscaping. Single-family cluster developments shall comply with
the landscaping requirements specified in §§
154.080 through
154.086
      (5)   Transition in density. Where the parcel proposed for use as a
cluster development abuts a conventional single-family development, the cluster
development shall be designed to provide an orderly transition between the two
developments. Such a transition may be achieved by providing a buffer zone
consisting of open space, additional landscaping, berms, changes in topography,
or similar measures.
      (6)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided along all public and private
roads within the cluster development.
      (7)   Utility connections. Each dwelling unit shall be separately
connected and metered for city water and sewer service.
   (E)   Determination of eligibility. The application for cluster development
shall include documentation that the proposal satisfies one or more of the
eligibility criteria set forth in division (B)(1) of this section. The Planning
Commission shall make a preliminary determination whether the proposal
qualifies for the cluster option, based on the submitted documentation.
   (F)   Effect of preliminary eligibility determination. Preliminary
determination by the Planning Commission that a parcel qualifies for cluster
development does not assure approval of the site plan. Such a determination,
however, does give the applicant the opportunity to proceed further with site
plan review.
   (G)   Site plan review. A cluster housing development shall be subject to
the site plan review requirements in §§
154.400 through
154.405 of this chapter, as well as the additional requirements in this
section.
   (H)   Information required for site plan review. In addition to the
information required in §§
154.400 through
154.405 as a part of site plan review, the following information shall be
included on all cluster option plans submitted for review.
      (1)   Acreage and density computations.
      (2)   Setbacks from all property lines and distances between all
buildings and between buildings and roads.
      (3)   Proposed landscape screening along the perimeter and within the
site.
      (4)   Specific locations of significant site features such as tree stands
and water retention areas.
      (5)   Delineation of open space areas and detailed information concerning
common access and proposed landscaping or other improvements within the open
space.
   (I)   Recording of Planning Commission action. Each action taken with
reference to a cluster development proposal, including the grounds for the
action taken, shall be duly recorded in the minutes of the Planning Commission.
   (J)   Recording of documents. If the Planning Commission approves the
cluster development proposal, all requirements and conditions upon which
approval is based shall be included as part of the approved site plan.
Easements, deed covenants or deed restrictions shall be drafted into recordable
forms, reviewed and approved as to form by the City Attorney, and filed by the
applicant with the appropriate county agency prior to the issuance of a
building permit for any construction.
   (K)   Performance guarantee. A performance guarantee shall be deposited with
the city to ensure faithful completion of improvements, in accordance with §§
154.400 through
154.415.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.161 COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENTS.
   In all commercial districts, a limited amount of storage is permitted where
the storage is accessory to the principal retail use. Similarly, in industrial
districts office and sales operations are permitted where such activities are
clearly incidental to the principal industrial use. In certain businesses, the
accessory use is an integral part of the overall business operation, such that
the business takes on the character of a “mixed use.” In these cases, the
specific guidelines provided in this section to determine if the accessory use
is reasonable and should be permitted.
   (A)   Retail uses in industrial districts. Retail uses shall be deemed
acceptable accessory uses in industrial districts if the following criteria are
met.
      (1)   Character of the principal use. The principal use on the site must
be industrial in character. The retail activity must be an integral part of the
business such that separation of the manufacturing and retail activity would
adversely affect operating and management procedures.
      (2)   Percent of floor area. The retail activity shall occupy no more
than 30% of the total floor area or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less.
      (3)   Percent of gross value. The gross value of the retail sales shall
not exceed 30% of the gross value of the products produced on the premises.
      (4)   Products offered for sale. Retail sales shall be limited primarily
to products produced on the premises. If it is determined by the Zoning
Administrator that the sale of limited specialty products not produced on the
premises is essential to installation or use of the principal sold, then those
sales may be permitted, provided that in total they represent less than 50% of
the on-site retail sales.
      (5)   Compatibility of traffic. The type and quantity of traffic
generated by the retail sales operation shall be compatible with permitted
industrial uses in the district.
      (6)   Parking. Adequate parking shall be provided for the retail sales,
as specified in §§
154.065 through
154.069. Off-street parking shall be subject to the location and setback
requirements for the district in which the use is located.
   (B)   Industrial uses in commercial districts. Industrial, processing, and
warehouse uses shall be deemed acceptable accessory uses in commercial
districts if the following criteria are met.
      (1)   Character of the industrial use. Assembly, fabrication,
manufacturing, and warehouse activities shall be directly related to the
specific products or services permitted as principal use on the site.
      (2)   Limits of industrial activity. Any products manufactured or
produced shall not be for distribution to other retail stores or manufacturing
facilities.
      (3)   Types of equipment. Heavy machinery typically found in
manufacturing or industrial plants shall not be permitted. The machinery shall
not create dust, noise, odor, vibration or fumes that would cause an adverse
impact on neighboring properties.
      (4)   Percent of floor area. All industrial activity shall occur within a
defined area and shall occupy no more than 30% of the total building floor area
or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less.
      (5)   Compatibility of traffic. The type and quantity of traffic
generated by the industrial activity shall be compatible with permitted retail
uses in the district.
      (6)   Outside activity prohibited. Industrial activity, if permitted,
shall be located entirely within an enclosed building. There shall be no
outside storage, except as specifically permitted in the district in which the
use is located.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.162 AUTOMOBILE AND/OR VEHICLE RENTAL ESTABLISHMENTS.
   Automobile and/or vehicle rental operations with outdoor rental space shall
be subject to the requirements that follow. These requirements shall apply to
any operation involving the lease or rental of automobiles and/or vehicles.
   (A)   Grading, surfacing, and drainage. Outdoor lots, parking areas, and
other automobile and vehicle maneuvering areas shall be hard-surfaced with
concrete or bituminous material, and shall be graded and drained so as to
effectively dispose of or retain surface waters. Grading, surfacing, and
drainage plans shall be subject to review and approval by the Director of the
City DPS and/or City Engineer.
   (B)   Servicing of automobiles and/or vehicles. There shall be no servicing
of automobiles and/or vehicles on site, except for the minor routine
maintenance of the interior and exterior of the automobiles and/or vehicles,
and checking of fluid levels. No servicing of any engine compartments.
   (C)   Broadcasting devices prohibited. Devices for the outdoor broadcasting
of voice, telephone monitoring, music or any other amplified sound shall be
prohibited outside of any building.
   (D)   Setbacks. Outdoor rentals lots, parking areas, and other automobile
and vehicle maneuvering areas shall comply with the requirements for parking
lots, as specified in §
154.066(A).
(Ord. 08-004, passed 11-5-07)
Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.163 REGULATED USES.
   (A)   Scope of regulations. In the development and execution of this
chapter, it is recognized that there are some uses that, because of their very
nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational
characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under
certain circumstances, thereby causing a deleterious effect upon the adjacent
areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to insure that the adverse
effects of these uses will not contribute to the deterioration of the
surrounding neighborhood. These special regulations are itemized in this
section. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing a
concentration of these uses in any one area; i.e., not more than two such uses
within 1,000 feet of each other. The establishment of the following kinds of
uses is prohibited if the establishment of any one of the following uses
constitutes the third such use within a 1,000-foot radius.
      (1)   Adult book or supply store.
      (2)   Adult model studio.
      (3)   Adult motion picture arcade.
      (4)   Adult motion picture theater or adult live stage performing
theater.
      (5)   Adult outdoor motion picture theater.
      (6)   Adult physical cultural establishment.
      (7)    Bar/lounge/tavern.
      (8)   Boarding house or rooming house.
      (9)    Cabaret.
      (10)   Massage parlor or massage establishment.
      (11)   Pawn shop or collateral loan or exchange establishments.
      (12)    Public lodging house.
      (13)    Smoke shops.
      (14)    Specially designated distributor’s establishment.
      (15)    Specially designated merchant’s establishment.
      (16)    Hookah Lounge or Club.
   (B)   Application procedure. Application to establish any of the above
regulated uses shall be made to the Zoning Administrator, who shall not approve
any application if there are already in existence two or more regulated uses
within a radius of 1,000 feet of the outermost boundaries of the lot upon which
the proposed regulated use will be situated.
   (C)   Waivers. Upon denial of any application for a regulated use under
division (B) of this section, the applicant may appeal for a waiver of the
locational provisions above to the Zoning Board of Appeals consistent with the
standards set forth below. The Board may waive the locational provisions set
forth in division (B) of this section after all the following findings are
made.
      (1)   Compliance with regulations. The proposed use will not be contrary
to any other provision of this chapter, or injurious to nearby properties.
      (2)   Shall not enlarge district. The proposed use will not enlarge or
encourage the development of a “skid row” or “strip.”
      (3)   Consistent with program. That the establishment of an additional
regulated use will not be contrary to, or interfere with any program of urban
renewal or neighborhood development.
      (4)   Consistent with law. That all applicable city, state, or federal
laws and regulations will be observed.
   (D)   Procedure for waiver. Prior to granting a waiver of the locational
restrictions set forth above, and not less than five nor more than 15 days
before the request for waivers is considered or a public hearing held pursuant
to this section, the Board shall publish, in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city, one notice indicating that a request for waivers to establish a
regulated use has been received, and shall send by mail or personal delivery a
copy of that notice to the owners of the property for which waivers are being
considered and to all persons to whom any real property is assessed within 300
feet of the boundary of the premises in question, and to the occupants of all
structures within 300 feet. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term
“occupant” may be used in making notification.
      (1)   Notification to manager. Notification need not be given to more
than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than
one dwelling or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals,
partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one occupant of each dwelling unit
or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure
containing more than four dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned
or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations,
notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure, who shall be
requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure.
      (2)   Notice contents.  
         (a)   The notice of application shall do the following.
            1.   Inform the recipient of the applicant's name.
            2.   Describe the nature and type of use proposed.
            3.   Indicate the local address, the lot number and subdivision
name of the property in question.
            4.   Provide the section of the zoning chapter under which the
proposal is being processed.
         (b)   This notice shall also invite written comments, statements, or
opinions, and indicate the place and date upon which written comments
concerning the proposed use must be received.
      (3)   Hearing requests. The notice of application shall further indicate
that a public hearing on the proposed regulated use may be requested by a
property owner or occupant, no less than 18 years of age, of a structure
located within 300 feet of the boundary of the property being considered for
the regulated use. If the applicant or the Board requests a public hearing
under this section, any interested person may be represented by a person, firm,
organization, partnership, corporation, board or bureau.
   (E)   Establishment prohibited near schools and residential zones.
      (1)   Restrictions. It shall be unlawful to hereafter establish any
regulated use if the proposed regulated use will be within a 300-foot radius of
a residentially-zoned district, or within a 500-foot radius of any nursery,
primary, or secondary school. This prohibition relative to the establishment of
a regulated use near residentially-zoned districts shall be waived upon the
presentment to the Zoning Board of Appeals of a validated petition requesting
the waiver, signed by at least 51% of all those persons owning, residing, or
doing business within 300 feet of the proposed location. No waivers shall be
given to permit a regulated use to locate within a 500-foot radius of any
nursery, primary, or secondary school.
      (2)   Petitions for waiver. The Zoning Administrator shall adopt rules
and regulations governing the procedure for securing any petition of waiver,
which may be provided for this section. The rules shall provide that the
circulator of the petition requesting a waiver shall be over 18 years, and
subscribe to an affidavit attesting to the fact that the petition was
circulated in accordance with those rules, and that the circulator personally
witnessed the signatures on the petition, and that the same were affixed to the
petition by the persons whose names appeared thereon.
      (3)   Filing of waiver. The Board of Appeals shall not consider the
waiver of locational requirements until the above described petition, if
required, shall have been filed and verified by the Zoning Administrator.
      (4)   Conditions of approval. Prior to the granting of approval for the
establishment of any regulated use, the Board of Appeals may impose any
conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location, construction,
maintenance, or operation of the regulated use as in its judgment may be
necessary for the protection of the public interest. Any evidence, bond, or
other performance and guarantee may be required as proof that the conditions
stipulated in connection therewith will be fulfilled.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 96-01, passed 1-15-96; Am. Ord. 97-001,
passed 4-7-97 ; Am. Ord. 08-004, passed 11-5-07; Am. Ord. 10-011, passed 10-26-
09; Am. Ord. 20-003, passed 7-6-20)  Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.164 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)    Home occupations may be permitted as an accessory use in the R-1,
One-Family Residential and R-2, Two-Family Residential districts, subject to
the following:
      (1)   No employees other than those living on the premises are allowed.
      (2)   Delivery vehicles used to deliver goods to a home occupation are
limited to automobiles, passenger vehicles, mail carriers, and express package
carriers. Deliveries are limited to an average of once a week.
      (3)   Home occupations are not allowed outside of the interior of a
structure. An approved garage or accessory building may also be used for
storage of materials, supplies, goods or equipment incidental to the home
occupation.
   (B)    The following uses shall be permitted as home occupations:
      (1)   Home offices for such professionals as architects, doctors,
brokers, engineers, insurance agents, lawyers, realtors, accountants, writers,
salespersons, and similar occupations.
      (2)   Personal services, including hair or nail care, tutoring, music and
art classes.
      (3)   Workshops for tailors, dressmakers, milliners, and craft persons,
including weaving, lapidary, jewelry making, cabinetry, and wood working.
      (4)   Repair services, limited to watches and clocks, small appliances,
computers, electronic devices, and similar small devices.
      (5)   Any home occupation not specifically listed as permitted, may be
permitted as a special use subject to the provisions of this section and §
154.415.
   (C)   The following uses are expressly prohibited as a home occupation:
      (1)   Motor vehicle, recreational vehicle and/or boat repair, bump and
paint shops, and salvage and/or storage yards.
      (2)   Kennels and/or veterinary clinics.
      (3)   Medical or dental clinics.
      (4)   Retail sales of merchandise.
      (5)   Eating or drinking establishments.
      (6)   Adult uses and sexually oriented businesses.
      (7)   Growing of medical marijuana as a qualified caregiver under the
Michigan Marijuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, being M.C.L.A. §§ 333.26423 et
seq.
      (8)   Uses similar to the above listed uses, or any uses that would in
the determination of the Community Development Director result in nuisance
factors as defined by this section.
   (D)   Home occupations shall not include:
      (1)   Outdoor displays or storage of materials, goods, supplies, or
equipment used in the home occupation.
      (2)   The use of machinery or equipment not commonly incidental or
accessory to a residential dwelling.
      (3)   Changes or alterations to the character or appearance of the
residence.
      (4)   Parking that cannot be accommodated on the site.
      (5)   Signs unless expressly permitted by
Chapter 153, Sign Regulations.
(Ord. 09-007, passed 4-20-09; Am. Ord. 11-001, passed 1-10-11)
§ 154.165 MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITIES AND ADULT USE MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. It is the intent of this section to provide
appropriate locations with reasonable regulations for certain medical marijuana
facilities allowed by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act
and certain adult use marijuana establishments allowed by the Michigan
Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act. It is the intent of this section to
protect the health, safety, and general welfare of persons and property by
limiting medical marijuana facilities and adult use marijuana establishments to
areas of the M-1 zoning district that are compatible with such uses. Additional
regulations in this section are intended to provide reasonable restrictions so
that these facilities do not compromise the health, safety, and general welfare
of persons in the city, or other uses allowed in the M-1 zoning district or
adjacent zoning district.
   (B)   Types of facilities prohibited. The following types of medical
marijuana facilities and adult use marijuana establishments are prohibited in
all zoning districts within the city of Garden City:
      (1)   Medical marijuana safety compliance facilities;
      (2)   Medical marijuana secure transporters;
      (3)   Adult use marijuana microbusiness;
      (4)   Adult use marijuana microbusiness Class A;
      (5)   Adult use marijuana secure transporter;
      (6)   Adult use marijuana safety compliance facility;
      (7)    Adult use marijuana event organizer;
      (8)    Adult use temporary marijuana event;
      (9)   Adult use designated consumption lounge; and
      (10)   Adult use excess marijuana grower.
   (C)   Types of facilities permitted with special land use approval. The
following medical marijuana facilities provided for in the Michigan Medical
Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act and adult use marijuana establishments
permitted by the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act may be
permitted as a special land use in the M-1 zoning district, subject to the
requirements of this section:
      (1)   Medical marijuana grow operations, Class A growers, Class B
growers, and Class C growers. The maximum number of medical marijuana grow
operations in Garden City is three, regardless of which class the three grow
operations are. Grow operations previously granted a special land use permit by
the city shall be counted among the three grow operations permitted by this
section.
      (2)   Medical marijuana processing facilities. See division (F) of this
section, which requires co-location in the same building with a grow operation.
      (3)   Medical marijuana provisioning centers. See division (G) of this
section, which requires co-location in the same building with a grow operation
and processing facility.
      (4)   Adult use marijuana growers, Class A growers, Class B growers and
Class C growers.
      (5)   Adult use marijuana processors.  See division (F) of this section,
which requires co-location in the same building with an adult use grow
operation.
      (6)    Adult use marijuana retailers.  See division (G) of this section,
which requires co-location in the same building with an adult use grow
operation and an adult use processor.
   (D)   Requirements applicable to all medical marijuana facilities and adult
use marijuana establishments. The following requirements apply to all medical
marijuana facilities provided for in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities
Licensing Act and all adult use marijuana establishments provided for in the
Michigan Regulation and Taxation Act (MRTMA), and as otherwise permitted in
this zoning ordinance:
      (1)   Medical marijuana facilities and adult use marijuana establishments
are only authorized in the M-1 zoning district with special use approval.
      (2)   Separation distance requirements. The following minimum setbacks
apply to all medical marijuana facilities and adult use marijuana
establishments:
         (a)   From residentially zoned districts. All lots containing a
medical marijuana facility and/or an adult use marijuana establishment must be
located at least 300 feet from a residentially zoned district (regardless of
whether the residentially zoned district is located within the municipal
boundaries of the City of Garden City), measured from the nearest lot line of
the medical marijuana facility and adult use marijuana establishments to the
nearest line of the residentially zoned district.
         (b)   From child care facilities, schools, and like facilities. All
lots containing a medical marijuana facility and/or an adult use marijuana
establishment must be located at least 500 feet from the nearest lot line of
any child care center, licensed day care facility, preschool program center,
primary, intermediate or secondary school, or like facility, established
pursuant to and in accordance with the Revised School Code, P.A. 451 of 1976,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 380.1 through 380.1853, as amended, and/or the State School
Aid Act of 1979, P.A. 94 of 1979, being M.C.L.A. §§ 388.1601 through 388.1772,
as amended.
         (c)   Public parks. All lots containing a medical marijuana facility
and/or an adult use marijuana establishment must be located at least 500 from
any public park, measured from the nearest lot line of the medical marijuana
facility to the nearest lot line of the public park.
      (3)   Distance from Ford Road. The minimum setbacks of medical marijuana
facilities and/or adult use marijuana establishments from the right-of-way of
Ford Road are as follows:
         (a)   All buildings on a lot containing a medical marijuana facility
and/or an adult use marijuana establishment must be located at least 300 feet
from Ford Road, measured from the right-of-way of Ford Road to the nearest
building.
         (b)   All lots containing a medical marijuana facility and/or an adult
use marijuana establishment must be located at least 265 feet from Ford Road,
measured from the right-of-way of Ford Road to the nearest lot line of the
medical marijuana facility and/or an adult use marijuana establishment.
      (4)   State and local licensing and registration. Upon approval of a
special land use permit, all owners, possessors, occupants, partnerships,
corporations, and/or employees shall be subject to business license
requirements of the city and must be at all times in compliance with the laws
of the State of Michigan and ordinances of the city.
      (5)   Revocation and suspension. The city may suspend or revoke a special
land use permit as authorized in § 154.416(R).
      (6)    Home occupation and accessory use prohibited. A medical marijuana
facility, including any activities associated with the facility and/or an adult
use marijuana establishment, including any activities associated with the
establishment, may not be permitted as a home occupation or accessory use.
      (7)   Indoor activity only. All activities of a medical marijuana
facility and/or an adult use marijuana establishment must be conducted indoors.
   (E)    Requirements applicable to all medical marijuana grow operations and/
or adult use marijuana grow operations.
      (1)   The following requirements apply to all medical marijuana grow
operations and/or adult use marijuana grow operations:
      (2)   Water/wastewater. All medical marijuana grow operations and/or
adult use marijuana grow operations must submit and have approved a water/
wastewater statement that describes the expected volume of water used and any
on-site wastewater treatment, permits required for wastewater disposal, the
expected volume of wastewater based on the number of plants permitted, and any
other information required by the city.
   (F)   Requirements applicable to all medical marijuana processing facilities
and/or adult use marijuana processing establishments. The following
requirements apply to all medical marijuana processing facilities and/or adult
use marijuana processing establishments:
      (1)   Water/wastewater. All medical marijuana processing facilities and/
or adult use marijuana processing establishments must submit and have approved
a water/wastewater statement that describes the expected volume of water used
and any on-site wastewater treatment, permits required for wastewater disposal,
the expected volume of wastewater based on the type of processing, and any
other information required by the city.
      (2)   Co-location with grow operation. A medical marijuana processing
facility may only be established if it is co-located in the same building with
a medical marijuana grow operation in accordance with the State of Michigan's
co-location requirements. An adult use marijuana processing facility may only
be established if it is co-located in the same building with an adult use
marijuana grow operation in accordance with the State of Michigan's co-location
requirements. The facility and/or establishment must meet all applicable co-
location requirements of the State of Michigan, including separation
requirements between facilities and ingress and egress. When co-located, these
two uses must remain co-located. If the processing facility and/or processing
establishment is no longer co-located with a grow operation, the processing
facility and/or processing establishment use must cease and the city may revoke
the processing facility and/or processing establishment special land use. Not
more than one medical marijuana processing facility can be co-located with a
medical marijuana grow operation. Not more than one adult use marijuana
processing facility can be co-located with an adult use marijuana grow
operation.
   (G)   Requirements applicable to all medical marijuana provisioning centers
and/or adult use marijuana retailers. The following requirements apply to all
medical marijuana provisioning centers and/or adult use marijuana retailers:
      (1)   Co-location with grow operation and processing facility. A medical
marijuana provisioning center may only be established if it is co-located in
the same building with a medical marijuana grow operation and a medical
marijuana processing facility in accordance with the State of Michigan's co-
location requirements. An adult use retailer may only be established if it is
co-located in the same building with an adult use grow operation and an adult
use marijuana processing establishment in accordance with the State of
Michigan's co-location requirements The medical marijuana provisioning center
and/or the adult use retailer must meet the all applicable co-location
requirements of the State of Michigan, including separation requirements
between facilities and/or establishments and ingress and egress. When co-
located, these three uses must remain co-located. If the medical marijuana
provisioning center is no longer co-located with a medical marijuana grow
operation and a medical marijuana processing facility, the medical marijuana
provisioning center use must cease and the city may revoke the medical
marijuana provisioning center special land use. Not more than one medical
marijuana provisioning center may be co-located with a medical marijuana grow
operation and medical marijuana processing facility. If the adult use marijuana
retailer is no longer co-located with an adult use marijuana grow operation and
an adult use marijuana processing facility, the adult use marijuana retailer
use must cease and the city may revoke the adult use marijuana retailer special
land use. Not more than one adult use marijuana retailer may be co-located with
an adult use marijuana grow operation and an adult use marijuana processing
facility.
      (2)   Hours of operation. The medical marijuana provisioning center and/
or adult use retailer may only be open for business between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday, and between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. Sunday.
   (H)   Primary caregivers. Licensed medical marijuana primary caregivers as
defined and authorized by the State of Michigan under Initiated Law 1 of 2008,
that wish to grow medical marijuana for a qualifying patient other than
themselves shall be required to comply with the following standards in order to
conduct legal activities. Licensed medical marijuana primary caregivers growing
12 or less plants for their own use, not for use as a primary caregiver, and as
authorized by the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marijuana Act, Initiated
Law 1 of 2018, shall not be required to comply with the following standards.
      (1)   Location. Any site used by a licensed medical marijuana primary
caregiver to grow marijuana for a qualifying patient other than themselves must
meet all the following location requirements:
         (a)   Shall be located in the M-1, Light Industrial zoning district.
         (b)   Shall meet all the separation distance requirements of division
(D)(1) of this section.
      (2)   Wastewater. The site and grow facility shall be designed and
operated so as to minimize the amount of pesticides, fertilizers, nutrients,
marijuana, and any other potential contaminants discharged into the public
wastewater and/or stormwater systems.
      (3)   Odor. The site and grow facility must be equipped with an operable
filtration, ventilation, and exhaust system that effectively confines odors to
the interior of the building from which the odor is generated.
      (4)   Security. Marijuana grown by a registered primary caregiver or
qualifying patient must be kept in an enclosed, locked facility (as defined
under Initiated Law 1 of 2008) that permits access only by a registered primary
caregiver or qualifying patient.
      (5)   Site plan application and review. A licensed medical marijuana
primary caregiver seeking to grow marijuana for a qualifying patient other than
themselves must apply for site plan approval in compliance with §
154.401. At the time of application for site plan review, the primary caregiver
must provide a copy of their valid primary caregiver license and a copy of the
photo registration for each qualifying patient for which they will be growing
marijuana.
      (6)   State and local licensing and registration. All licensed medical
marijuana primary caregivers growing marijuana for a qualifying patient other
than themselves shall be subject to certificate of occupancy and business
license requirements of the city and must be at all times in compliance with
the laws of the State of Michigan and ordinances of the city.
   (I)   Design standards for all marijuana facilities. All development is
subject to the following Design Guidelines and must comply with the following
guiding principles. Each project shall include the complete renovation of an
existing building to include the guiding principles for design. Any new
construction shall conform to all of the following guiding principles. The
Planning Department will provide feedback on the project's compliance with
these principles and compliance during the approval process.
      (1)   Appropriate site design. All development should be appropriate for
its context, with building height, setbacks, orientation, lighting, and signage
all designed to fit with the surrounding area.
         (a)   For large developments, cluster buildings to allow for shared
circulation and parking, easy access to common outdoor spaces and promote
pedestrian safety.
         (b)   Building density should fit within the surrounding area.
         (c)   Create a strong street wall or comply with setback requirements
of the district.
         (d)   Provide clear building and site signage. All signage (including
wayfinding, directory and wall signs) shall have a unified design theme.
         (e)   Illuminate all parking areas, entrances and walkways to improve
safety. All lighting shall be directed away from the street and avoid spillover
impacts onto adjacent properties. Light sources should be integrated within the
building and shielded to reflect down onto the ground.
      (2)   Site access and circulation. Provide adequate access and
maneuverability for trucks and cars while paying special attention to the
attractiveness of the street frontage and conflicts with streets and pedestrian
paths.
      (3)   Parking, loading, and outdoor storage. Screen and locate parking,
loading, and outdoor storage areas toward the side or rear of the property away
from public streets. To mitigate negative impacts from industrial uses, sites
should provide natural buffers to rights-of-way and adjacent uses. Parking
Standards shall be met for each use (retailer, processor, grower) per § 154.065
(Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements).
      (4)   Building form and materials. Buildings shall be designed or
remodeled to avoid the appearance of long, blank walls and use high-quality
building materials to enhance key elements such as entrances and corners.
         (a)   All buildings shall be compatible in scale, massing and style
with structures in the area.
         (b)   Vary and articulate all facades to avoid large monotonous walls.
Where the building mass cannot be broken up, building walls may be articulated
through the use of texture, color material changes or other façade treatments.
Entrance facades shall have a high level of detail. Entranceways shall be
emphasized through special design to highlight the entrance location to
include, awnings, porches or porticos.
         (c)   Brick shall be the primary wall covering with variations of
design and layout to enhance the exterior of the building.
         (d)   Use of quality building materials that convey a sense of
permanence.
      (5)   Walls and fences and landscaping. Walls and fences are attractive,
durable, and used to provide screening or security in certain areas of the
site, rather than "wall off" the entire facility. Site landscaping is used to
offset expanses of impervious surfaces and soften visual impacts of buildings,
parking/loading, outdoor storage, and detention ponds.
         (a)   Parking areas shall have a three foot high (as measured from
grade) brick walls that shield the parking lot from the public right of way.
         (b)   Any fencing on the lot shall not exceed six feet in height (as
measured from grade) unless otherwise required by the Cannabis Regulatory
Agency or its successors and be decorative aluminum or steel fencing. There
shall be no razor wire or barbed wire on the site.
         (c)   All fencing shall be located in the rear or side of the lot and
building. No front yard fences are permitted.
         (d)   Landscaping shall be compatible with and integrated with the
building and suitable to the functions of the space. A narrow row of
landscaping is prohibited. The site shall be maximized to include landscaped
areas.
         (e)   Provide canopy trees in planting areas and parking areas.
         (f)   Foundation plantings are required and to include a mix of
evergreen and perennial plantings.
         (g)   Automatic irrigation is required in all landscaped and grass
areas.
         (h)   Landscape plans shall be completed by a registered Landscape
Architect.
      (6)   Sustainable design. Site and building design should utilize design
strategies that decrease energy use, reduce urban heat island effects, manage
stormwater runoff, and naturally mitigate air pollution resulting from
industrial operations and traffic.
         (a)   Orient buildings to take advantage of passive heating, cooling
and daylighting opportunities.
         (b)   Integrate solar panels to offset on-site energy needs.
         (c)   Employ stormwater management solutions such as green roofs,
permeable pavement, underground retention and bioswales.
      (7)   Safe site and design for community policing. Site layout should be
designed to provide clear site distances and visibility for safety and
approachability for Police Department interaction.
         (a)   Integrate Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED)
principles in the site and building design consistent with the Cannabis
Regulatory Agency or its successor's guidelines. The design will include the
five elements of CPTED:   
            1.   Natural access control;
            2.   Natural surveillance;
            3.   Territoriality;
            4.   Activity support; and
            5.   Maintenance.
(Ord. 10-016, passed 6-7-10; Am. Ord. 17-002, passed 9-25-17; Am. Ord. 18-002,
passed 2-5-18; Am. Ord. 18-022, passed 9-24-18; Am. Ord. 18-024, passed 12-3-
18; Am. Ord. 20-007, passed 11-23-20; Am. Ord. 24-010, passed 10-28-24; Am.
Ord. 25-005, passed 7-21-25)
§ 154.166 OUTDOOR SEATING AND DINING.
   (A)   Location. Outdoor seating and dining areas shall be located
immediately adjacent to the establishment with which it is associated. Outdoor
seating and dining areas shall not encroach upon any public right-of-way. A
minimum of five feet of sidewalk shall be maintained free of tables and other
encumbrances.
   (B)   Defined area. If alcoholic beverages are to be served, outdoor seating
and dining areas must be enclosed by a barrier, a minimum of three and one-half
feet in height above the ground. The barrier must be decorative and cannot
restrict visibility in or out of the area.
   (C)   Capacity. Outdoor seating and dining areas shall not exceed 25% of the
total seating for the establishment.
   (D)   Furniture storage. Tables, chairs, table umbrellas, railings,
planters, posts, and other items shall not be stored outside during the off-
season.
   (E)   Noise. No music, intercom, or other noise shall be permitted that
impacts adjacent properties per the standards of §
154.176.
   (F)   Patron entrance and exit. Patron entrance and exit from the enclosed
outdoor seating and dining areas at establishments serving alcohol may only
occur through the main establishment. The enclosed area shall have an approved
fire emergency exit. The emergency exit shall have an alarm to alert the
establishment in the event of unauthorized use when no emergency exists.
   (G)   Food and beverage service. All food and beverages shall be prepared
within the main establishment. The service of alcoholic beverages is subject to
the current state Liquor Control Commission rules and regulations.
(Ord. 11-002, passed 1-10-11)
§ 154.167 MASSAGE THERAPY AND SERVICES.
   Facilities and individuals offering therapeutic massage or unlicensed
massage services shall be subject to the following conditions.
   (A)   Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, medical clinics or the offices
of physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, psychologists, clinical
social workers or family counselors who are licensed to practice in the state
shall be permitted to provide massage therapy services as an accessory use
within the principal building.
   (B)   Therapeutic massage facilities and physical therapy facilities shall
be deemed to be personal service establishments and may operate in any district
in which personal service establishments are permitted as a principal permitted
use or special use.
   (C)   Therapeutic massage facilities shall only offer massage therapies that
are licensed pursuant to Public Act 471 of 2008, as amended. Unlicensed massage
services and massage therapy practices for which a license is not required as
identified in § 17957 of Public Act 471 of 2008, as amended, are prohibited.
   (D)   A licensed massage therapist may operate a home occupation, subject to
the provisions of §
154.164.
   (E)   Massages administered only to the scalp, face, neck or shoulders shall
be permitted within beauty salons or barber shops.
   (F)   Any unlicensed or unregistered individual not operating under a
physician’s direction providing massage services to any area of the body other
than the scalp, face, neck or shoulders shall only provide those services
within an unlicensed massage parlor or establishment.
   (G)   Unlicensed massage parlors or massage establishments are deemed
regulated uses and shall be subject to the provisions of §
154.163.
   (H)   All massage therapists shall be licensed in accordance with the
requirements of Public Act 471 of 2008, as amended. Proof of such licenses
shall be provided to the city and shall be posted in a location visible to
customers. The licensee’s home address does not need to be visible.
(Ord. 12-010, passed 11-19-12; Am. Ord. 22-001, passed 1-24-22)
§ 154.168 HOOKAH CLUBS.
   Hookah clubs shall be subject to the following conditions.
   (A)   Hours of operation. Hookah clubs shall not operate past 2:00 a.m. any
day of the week.
   (B)   Noise and sound systems. No speakers, live music or other forms of
vocal performance or announcement shall be discernable at the property line of
any adjacent residentially used or zoned lot. Any establishment that is
providing such equipment or uses shall not have a door or window along a facade
that is facing a residentially used or zoned lot.
   (C)   Air quality control. Hookah clubs shall abide by and continue to
operate under all state standards for air handling and quality required to
obtain a tobacco specialty retail store exemption from the state’s smoking
prohibition enacted by Public Act No. 188 of 2009, as amended. No smoke or odor
produced within the hookah club shall be discernable at the property line of
any adjacent lot.
   (D)   Fire safety compliance. The operations within a hookah club,
including, but not limited to, the heating or vaporizing of any product, shall
comply with all safety and operational requirements of the National Fire Code
and the City Fire Marshal.
   (E)   Area of operation. All activity related to the hookah club shall be
located inside the primary building, except for the parking and loading of
vehicles.
   (F)   Carry-out items. No disposable hookah pipes and or related products
shall be offered as a to-go item to customers.
(Ord. 22-001, passed 1-24-22)
§ 154.169 CIGAR LOUNGES.
   Cigar lounges shall be subject to the following conditions.
   (A)   Setback requirement. A cigar lounge club shall be setback a minimum of
1,000 feet from another cigar lounge, as measured from the nearest point on a
lot line of the cigar lounge property to the nearest point on the lot line of
any other cigar lounge property.
   (B)   Air quality control. Cigar lounges shall abide by and continue to
operate under all state standards for air handling and quality required to
obtain a cigar bar exemption from the state’s smoking prohibition enacted by
Public Act No. 188 of 2009, as amended. No smoke or odor produced within the
cigar lounge shall be discernable at the property line of any adjacent lot.
   (C)   Fire safety compliance. The operations within a cigar lounge,
including, but not limited to, the heating or vaporizing of any product, shall
comply with all safety and operational requirements of the National Fire Code
and the City Fire Marshal.
   (D)   Area of operation. All activity related to the cigar lounge shall be
located inside the primary building except for the parking and loading of
vehicles.
(Ord. 22-001, passed 1-24-22)
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 154.175 INTENT AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Intent. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish controls on the
impacts generated by permitted uses so as to prevent an unreasonable negative
impact that might interfere with another person's use of his or her property,
or that might cause harm to the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (B)   Scope of application. After the effective date of this chapter, no
structure or tract of land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no
structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, altered, reconstructed, or moved,
except in conformity with all applicable performance standards set forth in
this subchapter. No site plan shall be approved unless evidence is presented to
indicate conformity with the requirements of this subchapter.
   (C)   Submission of additional data. Nothing in this subchapter shall
preclude the applicant or other interested party from submitting additional
data or evidence related to a specific case. In consideration of such data or
evidence, the Planning Commission may waive or modify the regulations set forth
in this subchapter, provided that the Planning Commission finds that no harm to
the public health, safety and welfare will result and that the intent of this
chapter will be upheld.
   (D)   Adverse affects on surroundings. No activity, operation or use of
land, buildings, or equipment shall be permitted if the activity, operation, or
use produces an environmental impact or irritant to sensory perception which
exceeds the standards set forth in this subchapter.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.176 NOISE AND VIBRATION.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. Terms used in this section but not defined below or in §
154.005 shall have the meaning ascribed to them by the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
      A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound pressure level in decibels as measured
on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is
designated dB(A).
      DAY-NIGHT AVERAGE SOUND LEVEL. The 24-hour energy average of the A-
weighted sound pressure level, with the levels during the period of 10:00 p.m.
to 7:00 a.m. the following day increased by 10 dB(A) before averaging.
      EMERGENCY. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate attention.
      EQUIVALENT A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL or Leq. The constant sound level that,
in a given situation and time period, conveys the same sound energy as the
actual time-varying A-weighted sound. (For the purposes of this chapter, a time
period of 24 hours shall be used, unless otherwise specified.)
      IMPULSE SOUND. Sound of short duration, usually less than one second with
an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include
explosions, drop forge impacts, and discharge of firearms.
      NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound which endangers or injures the safety or
health of humans or animals, annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal
sensitivities, endangers or injures personal or real property, or exceeds the
Maximum Permitted Sound Levels in the table found in division (E) of this
section.
      NOISE SENSITIVE ZONE.  An area which contains noise-sensitive activities,
such as but not limited to, operations of schools, libraries, churches,
hospitals, and nursing homes.
      PURE TONE. Any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or a
set of single pitches.
      RMS SOUND PRESSURE. The square root of the time averaged square of the
sound pressure, denoted Prms.
      SOUND. An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that
causes compression and rarefaction of that medium.
      SOUND LEVELS. The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a
sound level motor and frequency weighting network (for the purposes of this
chapter, an A-weighted network), as specified by the American National
Standards Institute.
      SOUND PRESSURE. The instantaneous difference between the actual pressure
and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced
by sound energy.
      SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. Twenty times the logarithm to the base of 10 of the
ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20 micropascals
(20x10-6 N/m2). The sound pressure level is denoted LP or SPL and is expressed
in decibels.
      VIBRATION. An oscillatory motion of solid bodies of deterministic or
random nature described by displacement, velocity, or acceleration with respect
to a given reference point.
   (B)   Prohibited acts.  
      (1)   Noise disturbance prohibited. No person shall make, continue, or
cause to be made or continued, any noise disturbance.
      (2)   Loading and unloading. Loading and unloading, opening, closing, or
other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans,
or similar objects shall be prohibited between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential
district boundary or within a noise sensitive zone.
      (3)   Construction. Operation of any tools or equipment used in
construction, drilling, or demolition work shall be prohibited between the
hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays or any time on Sundays or
holidays, such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a
residential district boundary or within a noise sensitive zone, except for
emergency work of public service utilities.
      (4)   Vibration. Operating any device that creates vibration which is
above the vibration perception threshold of an individual at or beyond the
property of the source shall be prohibited. For the purposes of this section,
VIBRATION PERCEPTION THRESHOLD means the minimum ground or structure-borne
vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal person to be aware of the
vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or
visual observation of moving objects.
      (5)   Noise sensitive zones. Creating any sound within any noise
sensitive zone so as to disrupt the activities normally conducted within the
zone shall be prohibited, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed
indicating the presence of the zone.
   (C)   Exceptions.  
      (1)   Emergency exceptions. The provisions in this section shall not
apply to the emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to existence
of an emergency, or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
      (2)   Additional exceptions. The provisions in this section shall not
apply to the following activities, provided that the activities are conducted
in a legally accepted manner.
         (a)   Snow plowing, street sweeping, and other public works
activities.
         (b)   Church bells, chimes and carillons.
         (c)   Lawn care and house maintenance that occurs between 9:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m.
   (D)   Variances. An application for a variance from the provisions in this
section may be submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The owner or operator
of equipment on the property shall submit a statement regarding the effects of
noise from the equipment on the overall noise level in the area. The statement
shall include a study of the background noise levels, predicted level of noise
at the boundary line due to the proposed operation, and justification for the
variance. Upon review of the request for a variance, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may grant a variance where strict adherence to the permitted sound
level would create unnecessary hardship and only if the variance will not
create a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the public. The Zoning
Board of Appeals may impose conditions of operation when granting a variance.
   (E)   Maximum permitted sound levels by receiving zoning district. No person
shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound in such a manner as
to create a sound level which exceeds the 1imits set forth for the receiving
zoning district in the following table when measured at or within the property
boundary of the receiving district. All measurements and designations of sound
levels shall be expressed in day-night average sound levels (Ldn). The
provisions of this division shall not apply to the activities covered by
division (C).
 
Maximum Permitted Average A-weighted Sound Levels
Receiving Zoning District        Average Sound Level, dB(A)
Residential                      55
Commercial (not noise sensitive) 65
Commercial (noise sensitive)     55
Industrial                       70
Notes:
   a.   Correction for tonal sounds. For any source of sound which emits a pure
tone sound, the maximum sound level limits in the above table shall be reduced
by 5 dB(A) where the receiving district is residential or commercial-noise
sensitive.
   b.   Correction for impulsive or impact-type sounds. For any source of sound
which emits an atypical impulsive or impact-type sound, the maximum sound level
limits in the above table shall be reduced by 5 dB(A) where the receiving
district is residential or commercial-noise sensitive.
   c.   Planned development. Where the receiving district is a Planned
Development district, the applicable standard in the above table shall be based
on the most noise sensitive use within the planned development.
   (F)   Measurement of sound. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible
for developing and promulgating testing methods and procedures. In performing
this task, the Zoning Administrator may consult with outside specialists in the
field of sound measurement and control.
   (G)   Permitted land use. No new or substantially modified structure shall
be approved for construction unless the owner or developer of the land
demonstrates that the completed structure and the activities associated with
and on the same property as the structure will comply with the sound/noise
standards set forth in this section at all times of full-scale operation of
such activities.
   (H)   Applicability of city noise control regulations. The sound and noise
standards set forth in this section are intended to be used chiefly as
performance standards to assist the Planning Commission and other city
officials in determining whether a proposed development will generate a noise
disturbance. In contrast, the noise control regulations set forth in §§
92.30 through
92.33 of this Code are intended to be used chiefly by police or health
officials to regulate and/or curtail specific noise occurrences generated by an
existing source.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.177 DUST, SMOKE, AND OTHER AIR-BORNE MATTER.
   (A)   Dust, smoke, soot, dirt, fly ash, and products of wind erosion shall
be subject to the regulations established in conjunction with the Air Pollution
Act, Public Act 348 of 1965, as amended, or other applicable state or federal
regulations. No person, firm, or corporation shall operate or maintain any
process for any purpose, or furnace or combustion device for the burning of
coal or other natural or synthetic fuels, unless the processes or devices use
or are equipped with recognized and approved equipment, methods, or technology
to reduce the quantity of gas-borne or air-borne solids or fumes emitted into
the open air.
   (B)   The drifting of air-borne matter beyond the lot line, including wind-
blown dust, particles or debris from open stock piles, shall be prohibited.
Emission of particulate matter from materials, products, or surfaces subject to
wind erosion shall be controlled by paving, oiling, wetting, covering,
landscaping, fencing, or other means.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.178 ODORS.
   Offensive, noxious, or foul odors shall not be allowed to escape into the
atmosphere in concentrations which are offensive, which produce a public
nuisance or hazard on adjoining property, or which could be detrimental to
human, plant, or animal life.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.179 GLARE AND HEAT.
   Any operation or activity which produces glare shall be conducted so that
direct and indirect illumination from the source of light does not exceed one-
half of one footcandle when measured at any point along the property line of
the site on which the operation is located. Any operation which produces
intense glare or heat shall be conducted within an enclosure so as to
completely obscure and shield the operation from direct view from any point
along the lot limes. If heat is a result of an industrial operation, it shall
be so insulated as to not raise the temperature at any property line at any
time.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.180 FIRE AND SAFETY HAZARDS.
   (A)   General requirements. The storage and handling of flammable or
combustible liquids or gases and explosives shall comply with all applicable
federal, state, county and local regulations. All underground storage tanks
shall be registered with the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, in
accordance with Public Act 165 of 1985, as amended. The location and contents
of all such tanks shall be indicated on the site plan.
   (B)   Detonable materials. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of
detonable materials shall be permitted subject to approval by the Fire Chief
and the following restrictions.
 
Proposed Activity                       Restrictions
Storage, utilization or manufacture of  Permitted accessory use in M-1 District
5 pounds or less
Storage or utilization of over 5 pounds Special land use in M-1 District
Manufacture of over 5 pounds            Not permitted
 
   Detonable materials covered by these requirements include, but are not
necessarily limited to the following.
      (1)   All primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate,
fulminates, and tetracene.
      (2)   All high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN, and picric acid.
      (3)   Propellants and components thereof such as dry nitrocellulose,
black powder, baron hybrides, and hydrazine and its derivatives.
      (4)   Pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium powder, potassium
chlorate, and potassium nitrate.
      (5)   Blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine.
      (6)   Unstable organic compounds such as acetylides, tetrazoles, and
ozonides.
      (7)   Strong unstable oxidizing agents such as perchloric acid,
perchlorates, and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than 35%.
      (8)   Nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and products, and reactor
elements such as Uranium 235 and Plutonium 239.
   (C)   Liquified petroleum gas. The storage or utilization of liquified
petroleum gas shall be permitted subject to approval by the Fire Chief and the
following restrictions.
 
Proposed Activity                      Restrictions
Storage or utilization of 80 pounds or Permitted accessory use in all districts
less
Storage or utilization of more than 80 Permitted in M-1 District
pounds
 
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.181 SEWAGE AND WATER POLLUTION.
   Sewage disposal (including septic systems) and water pollution shall be
subject to the standards and regulations established by federal, state, county
and local regulatory agencies, including the Michigan Department of Health, the
Michigan Department of Natural Resources, the Wayne County Health Department,
and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.182 GASES.
   The escape of or emission of any gas which is injurious or destructive to
life or property, or which is explosive, is prohibited. Gaseous emissions shall
be subject to regulations established in conjunction with the Air Pollution
Act, Public Act 348 of 1965, as amended, the federal Clean Air Act of 1963, as
amended, and any other applicable state or federal regulations. Accordingly,
gaseous emissions measured at the property line at ground level shall not
exceed the levels indicated in the following chart, which in based on the
National Ambient Air Quality Standards, unless a higher standard is imposed by
a federal, state, county or local regulatory agency which has jurisdiction.
Gas                    Maximum Emissions Level Sampling Period
Sulfur Dioxide         0.14 ppm                24 hours
Hydrocarbons           0.24 ppm                3 hours
Petrochemical oxidants 0.12 ppm                1 hour
Nitrogen dioxide       0.05 ppm                Annual
Carbon monoxide        9.0 ppm                 8 hours
                       35.0 ppm                1 hour
Lead                   1.5 ug/cubic meter      3 months
Mercury                0.01 mg/cubic meter     10 hours
Beryllium              2.0 ug/cubic meter      8 hours
Asbestos               0.5 fibers/cc           8 hours
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.183 ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION.
   Electronic equipment required in an industrial, commercial, or other
operation shall be designed and used in accordance with applicable rules and
regulations established by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The
operation of such equipment shall not interfere with the use of radio,
television, or other electronic equipment on surrounding or nearby property.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.184 RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS.
   Radioactive materials, wastes and emissions, including electromagnetic
radiation such as from an X-ray machine, shall not exceed levels established by
federal agencies which have jurisdiction. No operation shall be permitted that
causes any individual outside of the lot lines to be exposed to any radiation
exceeding the lowest concentration permitted for the general population by
federal and state laws and regulations currently in effect.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.185 DETERMINATION OF COMPLIANCE; METHODS.
   In the event that the city receives complaints or otherwise acquires
evidence of possible violation of any of the performance standards not forth in
this subchapter, the following procedures shall be used to investigate, and if
necessary, resolve the violation.
   (A)   Official investigation. Upon receipt of evidence of possible
violation, the Zoning Administrator shall make a determination whether there in
reasonable cause to suspect the operation is indeed in violation of the
performance standards. The Zoning Administrator may initiate an official
investigation in order to make such a determination. Upon initiation of an
official investigation, the Zoning Administrator is empowered to require the
owner or operator of the facility in question to submit data along with any
evidence deemed necessary to make an objective determination regarding the
possible violation within a time period specified by the Zoning Administrator,
but in every case a reply must be forthcoming within three calendar days from
the receipt of notice. Failure of the owner or operator to supply requested
data within the stated time period shall be considered an admission of
violation and provide prima facie evidence of grounds for taking any action,
including legal action, to terminate the use and/or deny or cancel any permits
or licenses required for continued use of the land. Data which may be required
includes, but is not limited to the following.
      (1)   Plans of the existing or proposed facilities, including buildings
and equipment.
      (2)   A description of the existing or proposed machinery, processes and
products.
      (3)   Specifications for the mechanism and techniques used or proposed to
be used to control emissions regulated under the provisions of this subchapter.
      (4)   Measurement of the amount or rate of emissions of the material,
including but not limited to, heat, sound, and glare, purported to be in
violation.
      (5)   Copies of studies, reports, specifications, and any other
compilation of data, including, but not limited to, RCRA filings.
   (B)   Method and cost of determination.  
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall take measurements, or cause
measurements to be taken by a competent contractor, and complete investigation
necessary to make an objective determination concerning the purported
violation. Where required measurements and investigation can be accurately made
by the Zoning Administrator using equipment and personnel normally available to
the city without extraordinary expense, the measurements and investigation may
be completed before notice of violation is issued. If necessary, skilled
personnel and specialized equipment or instruments shall be secured in order to
make the required determination.
      (2)   If the alleged violation is found to exist in fact, the costs of
making the determination shall be charged against those responsible, in
addition to any other penalties as may be allowable. If the bill is not paid
within 30 days, the city shall take whatever appropriate action is necessary to
recover the
costs, or alternately, the cost shall be charged against the property where the
violation occurred. If it is determined that no substantive violation exists,
then the costs of this determination shall be paid by the city.
   (C)   Appropriate remedies. If, after appropriate investigation, the Zoning
Administrator determines that a violation does exist, the Zoning Administrator
shall take or cause to be taken lawful action as provided by this chapter or
any state or federal regulation to eliminate the violation. The owners or
operators of the facility deemed responsible shall be given written notice of
the violation. The Zoning Administrator shall take appropriate action in
accordance with the owner or operator's response to the notice of violation.
Appropriate action includes the following.
      (1)   Correction of violation within time limit. If the alleged violation
is corrected within the specified time limit, even if there is no reply to the
notice, the Zoning Administrator shall note “Violation Corrected” on the city's
copy of the notice, and the notice shall be retained on file. If necessary, the
Zoning Administrator may take other action as may be warranted by the
circumstances of the case, pursuant to this chapter and any other applicable
regulation.
      (2)   Violation not corrected and no reply from owner or operator. If
there is no reply from the owner or operator within the specified time limits,
and the alleged violation is not corrected in accordance with the regulations,
set forth in this subchapter, then the Zoning Administrator shall take any
action reasonably calculated to correct or abate the violation.
      (3)   Reply requesting extension of time. If the alleged violator
responds to the city within the specified time limit of the original notice and
requests an extension of time, the Zoning Administrator shall review the
information submitted with the reply. Upon finding that an extension is
warranted because of unique circumstances and that an extension will not cause
imminent peril to life, health, or property, the Zoning Administrator may
extend the specified time limit to a certain date, if the Zoning Administrator
concurs that one of the following are true.
         (a)   The information requested pursuant to divisions (A) of this
section is impractical to readily produce.
         (b)   An extreme hardship exists.
         (c)   The reply indicates that an alleged violation shall be corrected
or abated by the date certain and that all future operations shall comply with
the regulations as set forth herein.
      (4)   Reply requesting technical determination.  
         (a)   If a reply is received within the specified time limit
requesting further review and technical analysis, even though the alleged
violations continue, then the Zoning Administrator may call in properly
qualified experts to complete the analysis and confirm or refute the initial
determination of violation.
         (b)   If expert findings indicate that violations of the performance
standards do exist in fact, the costs incurred in making such a determination
shall be paid by the persons responsible for the violations, in addition to
such other penalties as may be appropriate under the terms of this chapter or
other applicable regulations. Costs shall be billed to those owners or
operators of the subject use who are deemed responsible for the violation. If
the bill is not paid within 30 days, the city shall take whatever appropriate
action is necessary to recover such costs, or alternately, the cost shall be
charged against the property where the violation occurred. If no substantial
violation is found, cost of determination shall be paid by the city.
   (D)   Continued violation. If, after the conclusion of the time period
granted for compliance, the Zoning Administrator finds that the violation still
exists, any permits previously issued shall be void and the city may initiate
appropriate legal action, including possible pursuit of remedies in Circuit
Court.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 154.195 CREATION OF DISTRICTS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the city is divided into the following
Zoning Districts as shown on the Official Zoning map.
      R-1 One-Family Residential District
      R-2 Two-Family Residential District
      R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District
      C-1 Local Business District
      C-2 Community Business District
      C-3 General Business District
      CBD Central Business District
      M-1 Light Industrial District
      PD Planned Development District
      VP Vehicular Parking District
      PR Public Recreation District
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 22-001, passed 1-24-22)
§ 154.196 ADOPTION OF ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The boundaries of the Zoning District listed in §
154.195 are established as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the city. The
Zoning Map with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon
shall be, and is declared to be a part of this chapter as if fully described
herein.
   (B)   In accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Public Act 207
of 1921, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.581 - 125.590, as amended, changes made in
district boundaries and other matters portrayed on the Zoning Map shall be
entered on the Zoning Map after the amendment has been approved by the City
Council and has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city. No changes of any nature shall be made to the Zoning Map except in
conformity with the procedures set forth in §§
154.400 through
154.466 of this chapter.
   (C)   Regardless of the existence of copies of the Zoning Map which may,
from time to time, be made or published, the official Zoning Map shall be
located at the municipal offices and shall be the final authority with regard
to the current zoning status of all land in the city.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.197 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The following rules shall apply to the interpretation of zoning district
boundaries.
   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, roads, or alleys shall be construed to follow the centerlines. On
parcels adjacent to a street or road, the zoning shall be construed to extend
to the centerline of the adjacent street or road, unless otherwise indicated on
the zoning map.
   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following the lot lines.
   (C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be
construed as following those limits.
   (D)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
ditches, drains, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow the
centerlines.
   (E)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or as an extension of features
cited in divisions (A) through (D) of this section shall be construed as being
parallel to or an extension of the features cited. Distances not specified on
the official Zoning Map shall be determined using the scale on the map.
   (F)   Where there is any uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict concerning
the intended location of zoning district boundaries, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall interpret the exact location of zoning district boundaries.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.198 VACATED AREAS.
   Whenever any street, allay, or other public way within the city is vacated,
that street, alley, or other public way shall be automatically be classified in
the same Zoning District as the property to which it attaches, and shall be
subject to the standards for that Zoning District.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.199 DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.
   Buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to all applicable
standards and requirements set forth in this chapter, including but not limited
to Appendix A: Schedule of Regulations.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.200 SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS; INTENT.
   (A)   Intent and scope of requirements. The purpose of this section is to
establish regulations governing lot size, required yards, setbacks, building
height, and development density for each zoning district. No building shall be
erected, nor shall an existing building be altered, enlarged, or rebuilt, nor
shall any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in
any manner, except in conformity with the regulations established for the
district in which the building or use is located. A portion of a lot used to
comply with the regulations in this section with respect to one building or use
shall not be simultaneously used to comply with the regulations with respect to
another building or use.
   (B)   Schedule of regulations. All buildings, uses, and parcels of land
shall comply with the regulations set forth in Appendix A, Schedule of
Regulations and footnotes thereto, at the end of this chapter.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
R-1 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.210 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The intent of the One-Family Residential Districts is to provide areas
of the city for the construction and continued use of single-family dwellings
within stable neighborhoods.
   (B)   The regulations in this subchapter are intended to promote development
that preserves the physical characteristics of the land and natural environment
to the maximum extent possible. It is further the intent of this district to
prohibit multiple-family, office, business, commercial, or industrial use of
the land, and to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere
with single-family development of or quality of life in this district.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.211 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned R-1 One-Family
Residential, no buildings shall be erected, used or structurally altered, nor
shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one or more
of the following principal permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings.
      (2)   Publicly-owned and operated parks, parkways, and recreation
facilities.
      (3)   Private parks owned and maintained by homeowner associations.
      (4)   Manufactured homes, subject to the provisions of §
154.024.
      (5)   State-licensed residential facilities which provide residential
service for six or fewer persons, such as family day care homes, adult foster
care family homes, foster family homes, or foster family group homes, subject
to the regulations in § 3b of Public Act 207 of 1921, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.581
- 125.590, as amended.
      (6)   Essential services, subject to the provisions in §
154.034.
      (7)   Uses and structures accessory to the above, subject to the
provisions in §
154.022.
   (B)   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted, subject to the
conditions specified for each use; review and approval of the site plan; any
special conditions imposed during the course of review; and, the provisions set
forth in §§
154.415 through
154.417.
      (1)   An accessory apartment subject to the provisions in §
154.157.
      (2)   Municipal buildings and uses, including public libraries, which do
not require outside storage of materials or equipment.
      (3)   Public, parochial, and other private elementary, intermediate, or
high schools licensed by the state to offer courses in general education.
      (4)   Public or private colleges, universities and other institutions of
higher learning, offering courses in general, technical or religious education.
      (5)   Group day care homes and child care centers, subject to the
provisions in §
154.142.
      (6)   Religious institutions, subject to the provisions in §
154.153.
      (7)   Private swimming pools and swimming pool clubs.
      (8)   Private noncommercial recreational facilities, such as a
subdivision or neighborhood center, a nonprofit swimming pool club, or similar
facility.
      (9)   Community buildings, including educational, social, neighborhood,
or community centers, but not a residential club operated as a commercial
enterprise.
      (10)   The use of a parcel for gardening or the production of
agricultural products, together with facilities for the sale of the products
grown thereon, provided that the facilities for the sale of products shall
comply with requirements for open-air businesses, as set forth in §
154.149.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92 ; Am. Ord. 12-009, passed 11-19-12 ) Penalty, see
§
154.999
§ 154.212 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all
uses except detached single- family residential uses, in accordance with §§
154.400 through
154.405.
   (B)   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the R-1 One-Family Residential Districts are subject to the area, height, bulk,
and placement requirements in Appendix A: Schedule of Regulations.
   (C)   Planned Development. Planned Development may be permitted as a means
to achieve the basic intent of this district, in accordance with the guidelines
in §§
154.330 through
154.336.
   (D)   Single-family development options. Single-family development in the R-
1 One-Family Residential Districts may be developed in accordance with the
single-family cluster option in §
154.160.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.225 PURPOSE.
   The intent of the R-2 Two-Family Residential District is to provide areas of
the city for the continued use and improvement of two-family dwellings. It is
further the intent of this district to prohibit multiple-family, office,
business, commercial, or industrial use of the land, and to prohibit any other
use which would substantially interfere with development of or quality of life
in this district.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.226 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned R-2 Two-Family
Residential, no building shall be erected, used, or structurally altered, nor
shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one or more
of the following principal permitted uses.
      (1)   All principal uses and structures permitted in the R-1 One-Family
Residential Districts as specified in §
154.211(A).
      (2)   Two-family dwellings.
   (B)   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted subject to the
conditions specified for each use; review and approval of the site plan; any
special conditions imposed during the course of review; and the provisions set
forth in §§
154.415 through
154.417; all special land uses and structures permitted in the R-1 One-Family
Residential Districts as specified in §
154.211(B).
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.227 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all
uses except detached single- family residential uses and two-family dwellings,
in accordance with §§
154.400 through
154.405.
   (B)   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the R-2 Two- Family Residential District are subject to the area, height, bulk,
and placement requirements in Appendix A: Schedule of Regulations.
   (C)   Planned Development. Planned Development may be permitted as a means
to achieve the basic intent of this district, in accordance with the guidelines
set forth in §§
154.330 through
154.336.
   (D)   Single-family development options. Single-family development in the R-
2 Two-Family Residential District may be developed in accordance with the
single-family cluster option set forth in §
154.160.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
R-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENT DISTRICT
§ 154.240 PURPOSE.
   The intent of the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District is to address the
varied housing needs of the community by providing locations for development of
multiple-family housing at a higher density than is permitted in the single-
family districts. In addressing these housing needs, multiple-family housing in
the R-3 district should be designed in consideration of the following
objectives.
   (A)   R-3 developments are generally considered suitable transitional uses
between single-family detached housing and nonresidential development.
   (B)   Multiple-family housing should be provided with necessary services and
utilities, including usable outdoor recreation space and a well designed
internal road network.
   (C)   Multiple-family housing should be designed to be compatible with
surrounding or nearby single- family housing. Accordingly, one and two-story
housing is considered appropriate in the R-3 district.
   (D)   Multiple-family developments in the R-3 district should have direct
access to a collector road or major thoroughfare.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.241 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned R-3, Multiple-Family
Residential District, no building shall be erected, used, or structurally
altered, nor shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for
one or more of the following principal permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings, subject to the area, height, bulk
and placement requirements for single-family dwellings in the R-1 district, as
set forth in §§
154.210 through
154.212.
      (2)   Single-family attached dwellings or townhouses, as defined in §
154.005.
      (3)   Multiple-family dwellings, including apartments, terrace
apartments, and townhouses.
      (4)   Two-family dwellings.
      (5)   Publicly-owned and operated parks, parkways, and recreation
facilities.
      (6)   Private parks owned and maintained by a homeowner association or
the proprietor of a housing project.
      (7)   State-licensed residential facility which provides resident service
for six or fewer persons, such as family day care homes, adult foster care
family homes, foster family homes, or foster family group homes, subject to the
regulations in § 206 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of
2006, being M.C.L. § 125.3206, as amended.
      (8)   Essential services, subject to the provisions of §
154.034.
      (9)   Uses and structures accessory to the above, subject to the
provisions set forth in §
154.022, including, but not necessarily limited to the following:
         (a)   Private swimming pools for the exclusive use of residents and
their guests.
         (b)   In a new housing development, temporary use of a residence as a
model during the period of construction and selling or leasing of homes in the
development.
         (c)   Private garages, carports, community garages, or parking lots.
         (d)   Signs, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 153.
   (B)   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted subject to the
conditions specified for each use; review and approval of the site plan; any
special conditions imposed during the course of review; and the provisions set
forth in §§
154.415 through
154.417.
      (1)   Multiple-family housing for the elderly, subject to the provisions
of §
154.158.
      (2)   Municipal buildings and uses including public libraries, which do
not require outside storage of materials or equipment.
      (3)   Public, parochial, and other private elementary, intermediate, or
high schools licensed by the state to offer courses in general education.
      (4)   Public or private colleges, universities and other institutions of
higher learning, offering courses in general, technical or religious education.
      (5)    Hospitals, subject to the provisions of §
154.143.
      (6)   Nursing homes or convalescent homes, subject to the provisions of §
154.148.
      (7)   Group day care homes and child care centers, subject to the
provisions of §
154.142.
      (8)   Religious institutions, subject to the provisions of §
154.153.
      (9)   Private noncommercial recreational facilities, such as a community
center for the housing project.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 09-005, passed 3-5-09; Am. Ord. 18-019,
passed 7-23-18) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.242 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all
uses except detached single-family residential uses and a two-family dwelling,
in accordance with §§
154.401 through
154.404.
   (B)   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the R-3, Multiple-Family Residential District are subject to the area, height,
bulk, and placement requirements in
Appendix A: Schedule of Regulations.
   (C)   Planned development.  Planned development may be permitted as a means
to achieve the basic intent of this district, in accordance with the guidelines
in §§
154.330 through
154.336.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 09-005, passed 3-5-09; Am. Ord. 18-019,
passed 7-23-18)  Penalty, see §
154.999
C-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 154.270 PURPOSE.
   The C-1 Local Business District is designed for the convenience of persons
residing in adjacent residential areas, and is intended to permit only those
uses as are necessary to satisfy the limited shopping and services needs of the
residents in the immediate area. Commercial development in this district offers
a less intensive range of goods and services than uses permitted in the C-
2 district and the C-3 districts. Because of the limited variety of business
types permitted in the C-1 district, special attention must be focused on site
layout, building design, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and coordination
of site features between adjoining sites. Accordingly, C-1 Local Business
District developments should be as follows.
   (A)   Compatible in design with adjacent commercial development and adjacent
residential districts.
   (B)   Designed with a pedestrian orientation,
   (C)   Buffered from or located away from residential areas.
   (D)   Located with direct access to a major thoroughfare or indirect access
to a major thoroughfare through a minor road or service drive.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.271 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Principal uses and structures. In the C-1 Local Business District,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all buildings shall be erected,
and all lands shall be used only for one or more of the following specified
uses.
      (1)   Business, executive, administrative, and professional offices.
      (2)   Business and technical schools and schools and studios for
photography, art, music, and dancing.
      (3)   Financial institutions without drive-through facilities.
      (4)   Medical or dental clinics and offices.
      (5)   Health or exercise clubs.
      (6)   Personal service establishments such as shoe repair shops, tailor
shops, beauty parlors, barber shops, and including dry cleaning or laundry
pickup stations without processing on the premises.
      (7)   Private clubs and fraternal lodges without facilities offered for
rent.
      (8)   Public utility business offices.
      (9)   Libraries, museums, and publicly-owned buildings used for offices
or business functions.
      (10)   Retail stores which supply goods and commodities on the premises
for persons residing in adjacent residential areas, such as groceries, dairy
products, beverages, packaged baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods,
notions, hardware, books, stationary, records, video cassette rentals or sales,
bicycles, flowers, sporting goods, paints, periodicals, shoes, hobby supplies,
and small household articles.
      (11)   Stores producing jewelry, leather goods, candles and similar
merchandise to be sold at retail on the premises, provided that the services of
not more than four persons are required to produce the merchandise.
      (12)   Therapeutic massage therapy establishments, subject to §
154.167.
      (13)   Arcade.
      (14)   Other uses not specifically listed in this chapter, after
determination by the Zoning Administrator that the use is similar to other
permitted uses in this district.
      (15)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses.
   (B)   Special land uses. The following uses may be subject to the conditions
specified for each use; review and approval of the site plan; any special
conditions imposed during the course of review, and the provisions set forth in
§§
154.135 through
154.162 and §§
154.400 through
154.405.
      (1)   Automatic washer, dryer, or dry cleaning establishments with
machines for family washing or dry cleaning, provided that on-site operations
are limited to coin-operated machines used directly by customers.
      (2)   Financial institutions with drive-through facilities.
      (3)   Funeral homes and mortuaries, subject to the provisions to §
154.141.
      (4)   Group day care homes or child care centers.
      (5)   Carry-out restaurants and ice cream parlors, without drive-through
facilities.
      (6)   Veterinary clinics, subject to the provisions of §
154.155.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 12-010, passed 11-19-12; Am. Ord. 20-
003, passed 7-6-20; Am. Ord. 22-001, passed 1-24-22) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.272 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Required conditions. Unless otherwise noted, buildings and uses in the
C-1 district shall comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   All permitted retail or service establishments shall deal directly
with retail customers. Manufacturing of products for wholesale distribution off
of the premises is not permitted.
      (2)   All business, services, or processing, except off-street parking
and loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, unless
otherwise specifically permitted.
      (3)   There shall be no outside storage of any goods, inventory, or
equipment without a temporary use permit, to be issued by the Zoning
Administrator. Approval shall be in accordance with §
154.025. All storage must be clearly accessory to the principal permitted use.
      (4)   Commercially-used or commercially-licensed vehicles used in the
normal operation of a permitted retail or service use on the site may be parked
in the rear only. This provision shall apply to operable vehicles that are
moved on and off of the site on a regular basis.
      (5)   Parking or storage of damaged or disabled vehicles shall be
prohibited. Vehicles parked on a site shall not be used principally for
storage, sales, or advertising.
      (6)   All sites shall be maintained in compliance with the open space and
landscaping requirements of §
154.082.
   (B)   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all
uses in the C-1 Local Business District in accordance with §§
154.400 through
154.405.
   (C)   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the C-1 district are subject to the area, height, bulk, and placement
requirements in Appendix A, Schedule of Regulations.
   (D)   Planned Development. Planned Development may be permitted as a means
to achieve the basic intent of this district, in accordance with the guidelines
in §§
154.330 through
154.336.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 02-013, passed 8-5-02) Penalty, see §
10.99
C-2 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 154.285 PURPOSE.
   The intent of the C-2 Community Business District is to provide for
commercial development that offers a broad range of goods and services. Uses
permitted in the C-2 district are generally intended to be less intensive than
permitted in the C-3 district. Commercial establishments in the C-2 district
cater to the convenience and comparison shopping needs of residents. Because of
the variety of business types permitted in the C-2 district, special attention
must be focused on site layout, building design, vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, and coordination of site features between adjoining sites.
Accordingly, Community Business District developments should be as follows.
   (A)   Compatible in design with adjacent commercial development.
   (B)   Designed as part of a planned shopping center or in coordination with
development an adjoining commercial sites.
   (C)   Buffered from or located away from residential areas.
   (D)   Served by a major thoroughfare.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.286 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned C-2 Community
Business District, no building shall be erected, used, or structurally altered,
nor shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one or
more of the following principal permitted uses.
      (1)   All principal uses and structures permitted in the C-1 Local
Business District as specified in §
154.271(A).
      (2)   Bakeries as with all goods for retail sale on the premises.
      (3)   Commercial parking lots.
      (4)   Electronics, bicycle, and household appliance repair shops.
      (5)   Pool or billiard hall.
      (6)   Standard and carry-out restaurants without drive-through
facilities.
      (7)   Other uses not specifically listed in this chapter, after
determination by the Zoning Administrator that the use is similar to other uses
permitted in this district.
      (8)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses.
      (9)   Laundries and dry cleaning establishments with coin-operated
machines or with processing limited to goods brought to the establishment by
the individual retail customer, provided that no goods are processed from any
other location.
   (B)   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted, subject to the
conditions specified for each use; review and approval of the site plan; any
special conditions imposed during the course of review; and, the provisions set
forth in §§
154.135 through
154.162 and §§
154.415 through
154.417.
      (1)   Financial institutions with drive-through facilities.
      (2)   Funeral homes and mortuaries.
      (3)   Group day care homes or child care centers.
      (4)   Private indoor recreation facilities.
      (5)   Open-air businesses.
      (6)   Veterinary hospitals.
      (7)   Minor auto repair garages.
      (8)   Secondhand stores.
      (9)   Fast-food restaurants with drive-through facilities.
      (10)   Hotel or motel.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 94-012, passed 10-17-94; Am. Ord. 94-
013, passed 10-17-94; Am. Ord. 12-008, passed 11-19-12; Am. Ord. 13-005, passed
5-20-13; Am. Ord. 20-003, passed 7-6-20) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.287 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Required conditions. Unless otherwise noted, buildings and uses in the
C-2 district shall comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   All permitted retail or service establishments shall deal directly
with customers. Manufacturing of products for wholesale distribution off of the
premises is not permitted.
      (2)   All business, services, or processing, except off-street parking
and loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, unless
otherwise specifically permitted.
      (3)   There shall be no outside storage of any goods, inventory, or
equipment without a temporary use permit, to be issued by the Zoning
Administrator. Approval shall be in accordance with §
154.025. Any storage must be clearly accessory to the principal permitted use.
      (4)   Commercially used or commercially licensed vehicles used in the
normal operation of a permitted retail or service use on the site may be parked
in the rear only. This provision shall apply to operable vehicles that are
moved on and off of the site on a regular basis.
      (5)   Parking or storage of damaged or disabled vehicles shall be
prohibited. Vehicles parked on a site shall not be used principally for
storage, sales, or advertising.
      (6)   All sites shall be maintained in compliance with the open space and
landscaping requirements of §
154.082.
   (B)   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all
uses in the C-2 Community Business District in accordance with §§
154.400 through
154.405.
   (C)   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the C-2 Community Business District are subject to the area, height, bulk, and
placement requirements in Appendix A, Schedule of Regulations.
   (D)   Planned Development. Planned Development may be permitted as a means
to achieve the basic intent of this district, in accordance with the guidelines
set forth in §§
154.330 through
154.336.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 02-014, passed 8-5-02) Penalty, see §
154.999
C-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 154.300 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The intent of the C-3 General Business District is to provide for
intensive commercial development. C-3 districts typically exhibit one or more
of the following characteristics.
      (1)   Permitted businesses offer a broad range of goods and services,
including both comparison and convenience goods and services.
      (2)   The market for businesses in the C-3 district may include the
general city population, residents in surrounding communities, and the people
in transit.
      (3)   Permitted businesses are frequently auto-oriented, rather than
pedestrian-oriented.
      (4)   Because of the negative impacts commonly generated by C-3 uses,
these districts are not generally appropriate adjacent to residential uses
unless extensive buffering is provided.
   (B)   Because of the variety of business types permitted in the C-
3 district, special attention must be focused on site layout, building design,
vehicular and pedestrian circulation, spacing of uses, and coordination of site
features between adjoining sites. Accordingly, General Business District
developments should be as follows.
      (1)   Compatible in design with adjacent commercial development.
      (2)   Designed in coordination with development an adjoining commercial
sites.
      (3)   Buffered from or located away from residential areas.
      (4)   Directly served by a major thoroughfare.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.301 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned C-3 General Business
District, no building shall be erected, used, or structurally altered, nor
shall the land or premises be used, in whole or in part, except for one or more
of the following principal permitted uses.
      (1)   All uses permitted in the C-2 district.
      (2)   Service establishments, including, but not limited to, a workshop
maintained by electricians, plumbers, painters, upholsterers, printers, when in
conjunction with retail establishments that offer merchandise of a related
nature.
      (3)   Greenhouses or nurseries.
      (4)   Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric
transformer stations and substations, gas regulator stations with service yards
but without storage yards, or water and sewage pumping stations.
      (5)   Minor auto repair garages.
      (6)   Standard and carry-out restaurants without drive-through
facilities.
      (7)   Cigar lounges, subject to the provisions of §
154.169.
      (8)   Other uses not specifically listed in this chapter, after
determination by the Zoning Administrator that the use is similar to other
permitted uses in this district.
      (9)   Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted use.
   (B)   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted, subject to the
conditions specified for each use; review and approval of the site plan; any
special conditions imposed during the course of review; and the provisions set
forth in §§
154.135 through
154.162 and §§
154.415 through
154.417.
      (1)   All special land uses permitted in the C-2 General Business
District as stated in §
154.286(B).
      (2)   Automobile and vehicle sales and rental establishments.
      (3)   Automobile filling stations, automobile or vehicle service
stations, major automobile repair garages.
      (4)   Automobile washes or car wash establishments.
      (5)   Commercial kennels.
      (6)   Drive-in establishments.
      (7)   Indoor motion picture theaters and rental halls.
      (8)   Open-air businesses.
      (9)   Private recreation facilities, indoor and outdoor.
      (10)   Regulated uses as stated in §
154.163, including the following.
         (a)   Adult physical cultural establishment.
         (b)   Adult book or supply store.
         (c)   Cabaret.
         (d)   Adult motion picture theater or adult live stage performing
theater.
         (e)   Adult model studio.
         (f)   Adult motion picture arcade.
         (g)   Massage parlor or massage establishment.
         (h)   Adult outdoor motion picture theater.
         (i)   Bar/lounge/tavern.
         (j)   Pawn shops and exchange establishments.
         (k)   Public lodging house.
         (l)   Boarding house, rooming house, or fraternity house.
         (m)   Smoke shop.
         (n)   Specially designated distributor's establishment.
         (o)   Specially designated merchant's establishment.
         (p)   Hookah lounge or club.
      (11)   Restaurants with drive-through facilities.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 94-013, passed 10-17-94; Am. Ord. 97-
001, passed 4-7-97; Am. Ord. 97-006, passed 7-1-96; Am. Ord. 08-004, passed 11-
5-07; Am. Ord. 10-011, passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 12-008, passed 11-19-12; Am.
Ord. 20-003, passed 7-6-20; Am. Ord. 22-001, passed 1-24-22) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.302 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Required conditions. Unless otherwise noted, buildings and uses in the
C-3 district shall comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   All permitted retail or service establishments shall deal directly
with customers. Manufacturing of products for wholesale distribution off of the
premises is not permitted.
      (2)   All business, services, or processing, except off-street parking
and loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, unless
otherwise specifically permitted.
      (3)   There shall be no outside storage of any goods, inventory, or
equipment without a temporary use permit, to be issued by the Zoning
Administrator. Approval shall be in accordance with §
154.025. Any storage must be clearly accessory to the principal permitted use.
      (4)   Commercially used or commercially licensed vehicles used in the
normal operation of a permitted retail or service use on the site may be parked
in the rear only. This provision shall apply to operable vehicles that are
moved on and off of the site on a regular basis.
      (5)   Parking or storage of damaged or disabled vehicles shall be
prohibited. Vehicles parked on a site shall not be used principally for
storage, sales, or advertising.
      (6)   All sites shall be maintained in compliance with the open space and
landscaping requirements of §
154.082.
   (B)   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all
uses in the C-3 General Business District in accordance with §§
154.400 through
154.405.
   (C)   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the C-3 General Business District are subject to the area, height, bulk, and
placement requirements in Appendix A, Schedule of Regulations.
   (D)   Planned Development. Planned Development may be permitted as a means
to achieve the basic intent of this district, in accordance with the guidelines
in §§
154.330 through
154.336.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 02-015, passed 8-5-02) Penalty, see §
154.999
M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 154.315 PURPOSE.
   The intent of the M-1 Light Industrial District is to provide locations for
planned industrial development, including development within planned industrial
park subdivisions and on independent parcels. It is intended that permitted
activities or operations produce no external impacts that are detrimental in
any way to other uses in the district or to properties in adjoining districts.
Permitted uses should be compatible with nearby residential or commercial uses.
Accordingly, permitted manufacturing, distribution, warehousing, and light
industrial uses permitted in this district should be fully contained within
well-designed buildings on amply landscaped sites, with adequate off-street
parking and loading areas.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.316 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned M-1 Light Industrial
District, no building shall be erected, used, or structurally altered, nor
shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one or more
of the following principal permitted uses.
      (1)    Manufacturing, assembly, processing and packaging of either
components to be used in an additional assembly process or actual final
products where the raw materials, activities associated with production and the
warehousing of finished products are all completely conducted within an
enclosed building.
      (2)   Data processing and computer centers, including electronic data
processing and computer equipment service establishments.
      (3)   Essential services, subject to the provisions in §
154.081.
      (4)   Greenhouses and plant nurseries.
      (5)   Laboratories involved in basic research, experiment, design,
testing, or prototype product development.
      (6)   Lumber yards or building material sales establishments which have
storage in partially open structures, subject to the following conditions.
         (a)   The ground floor premises facing upon and visible from any
abutting street shall be used only for entrances, offices, sales or display.
         (b)   Open storage structures shall be enclosed on three sides and
shall have a roof.
         (c)   The entire site, exclusive of access drives, shall be enclosed
with a six foot high chain link fence or masonry wall, constructed in
accordance with §§
154.100 and
154.101.
         (d)   A landscaped greenbelt with a minimum width of 20 feet shall be
required adjacent to any street, in conformance with §
154.081(D).
      (7)   Health or exercise clubs.
      (8)   Public utility or municipal service buildings, including electric
or gas service buildings and yards, telephone exchange buildings, electric
transformer stations, gas regulator stations, water treatment plants and
reservoirs, and sewage treatment plants, provided that any open storage shall
require special land use approval.
      (9)   Recycling collection stations and processing centers that are
privately owned and operated.
      (10)   Tool, die, gauge, and machine shops.
      (11)   Warehousing and wholesale activities.
      (12)   Other research or light manufacturing uses similar to the above.
      (13)   Uses and structures accessory to the above, subject to the
provisions in §
154.022. Accessory office and sales operations may be permitted where such
activities are clearly incidental to the principal industrial use, subject to
the provisions in §
154.161.
   (B)   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted subject to the
conditions specified for each use; review and approval of the site plan; any
special conditions imposed during the course of review; and the provisions set
forth in §§
154.415 through
154.417.
      (1)   Automobile repair garages, including minor and major repair,
subject to the provisions set forth in §
154.137, and provided that all operations are carried on within a completely
enclosed building.
      (2)   Contractor's storage yards, provided that such yards are completely
enclosed within an eight- foot masonry wall or screening, in accordance with §
154.081(E).
      (3)   Construction equipment and related equipment sales, leasing, and
storage, subject to the following conditions.
         (a)   Where feasible, equipment shall be stored inside. Open storage
structures may be permitted by the Planning Commission, provided that such
structures are enclosed on three sides and have a roof.
         (b)   Storage yards shall be screened from any abutting public or
private road in accordance with §
154.081(E).
      (4)   Manufacturing, wholesale distribution, or warehousing of fireworks,
explosives, ammunition, or other detonable materials subject to the provisions
of §
154.180(E).
      (5)   Metal plating, buffing, and polishing operations.
      (6)   Millwork, lumber, and planning mills when completely enclosed and
located on the exterior of the district so that no property line forms the
exterior boundary of the M-1 district.
      (7)   Mini-warehouses, subject to the provisions of §
154.146.
      (8)   Radio, television, cellular telephone, microwave, and/or related
transmitting and receiving towers, subject to the provisions of §
154.151.
      (9)   Retail or service accessory uses that are clearly intended to serve
the occupants and patrons of the principal use, provided that any such use
shall be an incidental use occupying no more than 5% of a building that
accommodates a principal permitted use. Permitted accessory retail and service
uses shall be limited to the following.
         (a)   Child care services which are intended to serve families of
workers in the district.
         (b)   Financial institutions, including banks, credit unions, and
savings and loan associations.
         (c)   Personal service establishments which are intended to serve
workers or visitors in the district, such as dry cleaning establishments,
travel agencies, tailor shops, or similar service establishments.
         (d)   Restaurants, cafeterias, or other places serving food and
beverages for consumption within the building.
         (e)   Retail establishments that deal directly with the consumer and
generally serve the convenience shopping needs of workers and visitors, such as
convenience stores, drug stores, uniform supply stores, or similar retail
businesses.
         (f)   Other accessory uses determined to be incidental to the
principle use upon completion of site plan review by the Planning Commission.
      (10)    Junk yards.
      (11)   Medical marijuana facilities and adult use marijuana
establishments subject to §
154.165.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 97-008, passed 12-22-97; Am. Ord. 10-
016, passed 6-7-10; Am. Ord. 20-003, passed 7-6-20; Am. Ord. 24-010, passed 10-
28-24)  Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.317 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Required conditions. Except as otherwise noted, buildings and uses in
the M-1 Light Industrial District shall comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   All manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing, packaging,
or other industrial or business activity shall comply with §§
154.175 through
154.185.
      (2)   All manufacturing, compounding, assembling, processing, packaging,
or other industrial or business activity shall be conducted within a completely
enclosed building, except as otherwise specified.
      (3)   There shall be no outside storage of any goods, inventory, or
equipment except in designated areas which shall be enclosed on all sides with
a screening fence or wall, subject to the requirements of §
154.081. Use of trailers for storage is prohibited.
      (4)   Where applicable, machinery shall comply with the standards in §
154.154.
   (B)   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all
uses in the Light Industrial District in accordance with §§
154.400 through
154.405.
   (C)   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the Light Industrial District are subject to the area, height, bulk, and
placement requirements set forth in Appendix A, Schedule of Regulations.
   (D)   Planned Development. Planned Development may be permitted as a means
to achieve the basic intent of this district, in accordance with the guidelines
in §§
154.330 through
154.336.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
§ 154.330 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the intent of these regulations to permit Planned Development
for the following purposes.
      (1)   Encouraging innovation in land use planning and development.
      (2)   Achieving a higher quality of development than would otherwise be
achieved.
      (3)   Encouraging assembly of lots and redevelopment of outdated
commercial corridors.
      (4)   Encouraging initial development on sites that would be difficult to
develop according to conventional standard because of the shape, size, abutting
development, accessibility, or other features of the site.
      (5)   Providing enhanced housing, employment, and shopping opportunities.
      (6)   Providing a development framework that promotes appropriate
business activity that significantly improves the economic viability of the
city.
      (7)   Ensuring compatibility of design and function between neighboring
properties.
      (8)   Encouraging development that is consistent with the city's Master
Plan.
   (B)   These Planned Development regulations are not intended as a device for
ignoring the more specific standards in this chapter, or the planning upon
which the standards are based. Rather, these provisions are intended to result
in development that is substantially consistent with the zoning standards
generally applied to the proposed uses, but allowing for modifications to the
general standards to assure a superior quality of development.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.331 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA.
   To be eligible for Planned Development approval, the applicant must
demonstrate that the following criteria will be met.
   (A)   Recognizable and substantial benefit. The Planned Development shall
result in a recognizable and substantial benefit to the ultimate users of the
project and to the community.
   (B)   Minimum frontage and size. The Planned Development shall have minimum
frontage of 200 feet along a public street or road. The minimum size of a
parcel that is developed as a Planned Development shall be 30,000 square feet.
   (C)   Availability and capacity of public services. The proposed type and
density of use shall not result in an unreasonable increase in the use of
public services, facilities, and utilities.
   (D)   Compatibility with the Master Plan. The proposed development shall not
have an adverse impact on the Master Plan of the city.
   (E)   Compatibility with the Planned Development intent. The proposed
development shall be consistent with the intent and spirit of these
regulations, as stated in §
154.330.
   (F)   Economic impact. The proposed development shall not impede the
continued use or development of surrounding properties for uses that are
permitted in this chapter.
   (G)   Unified control of property. The proposed development shall be under
single ownership or control, such that there is a single person or entity
having responsibility for completing the project in conformity with the Planned
Development regulations. This provision shall not prohibit a transfer of
ownership or control, provided that notice of transfer is given immediately to
the City Clerk.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.332 PROJECT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Proposed Planned Developments shall comply with the following project design
standards.
   (A)   Location. A Planned Development may be approved in any location in the
city, subject to review and approval as provided herein.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Any land use authorized in this chapter may be
included in a Planned Development as a principal or accessory use, provided
that public health, safety, and welfare are not impaired.
   (C)   Applicable base regulations. Unless waived or modified in accordance
with division (D) of this section, the yard and bulk, parking, loading,
landscaping, lighting, and other standards for the districts listed below shall
generally be applicable for uses proposed as a part of a Planned Development.
      (1)   Single-family residential uses shall comply with the regulations
applicable in the R-1 Single- Family Residential District, set forth in §§
154.210 through
154.212.
      (2)   Multiple-family residential uses shall comply with the regulations
applicable in the R-3 Multiple-Fami1y Residential District, set forth in §
154.240 through
154.242.
      (3)   Office, personal service and retail commercial uses shall comply
with the regulations applicable in the C-2 Community Business District set
forth in §§
154.285 through
154.287.
      (4)   Industrial uses shall comply with the regulations in the M-1 Light
Industrial District set forth in §§
154.315 through
154.317.
      (5)   Mixed uses shall comply with the regulations applicable for each
individual use, as outlined above, except that if regulations are inconsistent
with each other, the regulations applicable to the most dominant use shall
apply.
   (D)   Regulatory flexibility. To encourage flexibility and creativity
consistent with the Planned Development concept, departures from the
regulations in division (C) of this section may be permitted, subject to review
and approval by the Planning Commission and City Council. For example, such
departures may include modifications to lot dimensional standards; floor area
standards; setback requirements, density standards; parking, loading, and
landscaping requirements; and similar requirements. Such modifications may be
permitted only if they will result in a higher quality of development than
would be possible without the modifications.
   (E)   Residential density. Modifications to the density of residential
development may be permitted upon determination that the desired density will
not adversely affect water and sewer services, storm water drainage, road
capacity, traffic, parks and recreation, fire and police services, schools,
character of the area, and any planned public and private improvements in the
area.
   (F)   Permitted mix of uses. Where the existing underlying zoning district
is residential, nonresidential uses shall be permitted as part of a Planned
Development which also contain a residential component, provided that the
applicant demonstrates that the residential uses will be predominant. The
Planning Commission shall determine predominance of use after taking into
account the following criteria as they apply to each of the proposed uses:
amount of traffic generated; hours of operation or use; noise, odors, and
overall impact on adjoining uses; land area allocated to each use; and building
area allocated to each use.
   (G)   Open space requirements. Planned Developments containing a residential
component shall provide and maintain usable open space at the ratio of 350
square feet of open space per dwelling unit, provided that each development
shall contain a minimum of 10,000 square feet of open space. Any pervious land
area within the boundaries of the site may be included as required open space,
except for land contained in public or private street rights-of-way. The
required open space shall be set aside by the developer through an irrevocable
conveyance, such as a deed restriction or covenant that runs with the land,
assuring that the open space will be developed according to the site plan and
never changed to another use. The conveyance shall:
      (1)   Provide for the privately-owned open space to be maintained by
private property owners with an interest in the open space;
      (2)   Provide maintenance standards and a maintenance schedule;
      (3)   Provide for assessment of the private property owners by the city
for the cost of maintenance of the open space in the event that it is
inadequately maintained and becomes a public nuisance.
   (H)   Frontage and access.  
      (1)   Planned Developments shall front onto a primary major thoroughfare,
secondary major thoroughfare, or collector street, as specified in the adopted
Master Plan of the city, except where the Planned Development involves reuse or
redevelopment of an existing structure which fronts onto a local street.
      (2)   The nearest edge of any entrance or exit drive shall be located no
closer than 100 feet from any street or road intersection as measured from the
nearest intersection right-of-way line.
   (I)   Utilities. All utilities serving a Planned Development, including
electric, telephone, and cable television lines, shall be placed underground,
wherever feasible.
   (J)   Privacy for dwelling units. The design of a Planned Development shall
provide visual and sound privacy for all dwelling units within and surrounding
the development. Fences, walks, and landscaping shall be used in the site
design to protect the privacy of dwelling units.
   (K)   Emergency access. The configuration of buildings, driveways, and other
improvements shall permit convenient and direct emergency vehicle access.
   (L)   Pedestrian and vehicular circulation. A pedestrian circulation system
shall be provided that is insulated as completely as possible from the
vehicular circulation system. The layout of vehicular and pedestrian
circulation routes shall respect the pattern of existing or planned streets,
sidewalks, and bicycle pathways in the vicinity of the site.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 22-001, passed 1-24-22) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.333 PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   The approval of a Planned Development proposal shall require an amendment to
the Zoning ordinance to revise the zoning map and designate the subject
property as “Planned Development.” Approval of a Planned Development proposal,
including all aspects of the final plan and conditions imposed on it, shall
constitute and inseparable part of the zoning amendment. Planned Development
applications shall be submitted in accordance with the procedures and
requirements set forth in §§
154.430 through
154.438. That subchapter calls for a two-step approval process as follows.
   (A)   The applicant shall first submit a Planned Development Plan which
shall be reviewed in accordance with zoning amendment procedures. The Planning
Commission shall review the Planned Development Plan, hold a public hearing,
and make a recommendation to the City Council. The City Council shall have the
final authority to act on a Planned Development Plan and grant the requested
Planned Development zoning.
   (B)   Following approval of the Planned Development Plan and rezoning to
Planned Development (PD), the applicant shall submit a final site plan for
review by the Planning Commission in accordance with normal site plan review
procedures.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.334 STANDARDS FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   In considering any application for approval of a Planned Development
proposals, the Planning Commission and City Council shall make the
determinations on the basis of standards set forth for site plan review in §
154.331, as well as the following standards and requirements.
   (A)   Conformance with the Planned Development concept. The overall design
and all uses proposed in connection with a Planned Development shall be
consistent with and promote the intent of the Planned Development concept as
described in §
154.330, as well as with the specific project design standards set forth
herein.
   (B)   Compatibility with adjacent uses. The proposed Planned Development
shall set forth specifications with respect to height, setbacks, density,
parking, circulation, landscaping, views, and other design and layout features
which exhibit due regard for the relationship of the development to surrounding
properties and the uses thereon. In determining whether this requirement has
been met, consideration shall be given to the following.
      (1)   The bulk, placement, and materials of construction of proposed
structures.
      (2)   The location and screening of vehicular circulation and parking
areas in relation to surrounding development.
      (3)   The location and screening of outdoor storage, outdoor activity or
work areas, and mechanical equipment in relation to surrounding development.
      (4)   The hours of operation of the proposed uses.
      (5)   The provisions of landscaping and other site amenities.
   (C)   Public services. The proposed Planned Development shall not exceed the
capacity of existing and available public services, including but not
necessarily limited to utilities, public roads, police and fire protection
services, and educational services, unless the project proposal contains an
acceptable plan for providing necessary services or evidence that those
services will be available by the time the Planned Development is completed.
   (D)   Impact of traffic. The Planned Development shall be designed to
minimize the impact of traffic generated by the proposed development on
surrounding uses. In determining whether this requirement has been met,
consideration shall be given to the issues required in the traffic impact
analysis set forth in §
154.438(C)(3).
   (E)   Accommodations for pedestrian traffic. The Planned Development shall
be designed with a sidewalk network to accommodate safe pedestrian circulation
throughout and along the perimeter of the site, without interference from
vehicular traffic.
   (F)   Compatibility with the Master Plan. The proposed Planned Development
shall be consistent with the general principles and objectives of the adopted
Master Plan.
   (G)   Compliance with applicable regulations. The proposed Planned
Development shall be in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and
local laws and ordinances.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.335 PHASING; COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Integrity of each phase. Where a project is proposed for construction
in phases, the project shall be so designed that each phase, when completed,
shall be capable of standing on its own in terms of the presence of services,
facilities, and open space, and shall contain the necessary components to
ensure protection of natural resources and the health, safety and welfare of
the users of the Planned Development and residents of the community.
   (B)   Rate of completion of residential and nonresidential components.  
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the following provisions is to ensure that
Planned Developments are constructed in an orderly manner and, further, to
ensure that the Planned Development approach is not used as a means of
circumventing restrictions on the location or quantity of certain types of land
use.
      (2)   General standards. In developments which include residential and
nonresidential components, the phasing plan shall provide for completion of at
least 35% of all proposed residential units concurrent with the first phase of
any nonresidential construction; completion of at least 75% of all proposed
residential construction concurrent with the second phase of nonresidential
construction; and completion of 100% of all residential construction prior to
the third phase of nonresidential construction. For purposes of carrying out
this provision, the percentages shall be approximations as determined by the
Planning Commission and Chief Building Inspector, based on the floor area and
land area allocated to each use.
      (3)   Modifications to general standards. The percentages may be modified
should the Planning Commission and Chief Building Inspector determine that the
applicant has presented adequate assurance that the residential component or
components of the project will be completed within the specified time period.
      (4)   Completion of each phase.
         (a)   Construction of any facility may commence at any time following
site plan approval per §
154.405, provided that construction shall be commenced for each phase of the
project within 24 months of the schedule set forth on the approved plan for the
planned development. However, the applicant may submit a revised phasing plan
for review and approval by the Planning Commission. The applicant shall also
submit a statement indicating the conditions which made the previous phasing
plan unachievable. Once construction of a planned development has commenced,
approval of a revised phasing plan shall not be unreasonably withheld or
delayed, provided that the revised phasing does not materially change the
integrity of the approved planned development proposal. In the event that
construction has not commenced within the required time period and a revised
phasing plan has not been submitted, the city may initiate proceedings to end
the zoning classification of the undeveloped portion of the site.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.336 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Buildings and uses in the Planned Development District are subject to the
area, bulk, and placement requirements specified in §
154.332.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
MUO MIXED USE OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 154.340 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The intent of the MUO Mixed Use Overlay District is to accommodate a
mix of commercial and residential uses on a single lot and/or building. Mixed
use sites function as a transition from sites that are exclusively commercial
uses to the higher-density, mixed uses that are permitted within the Central
Business District. Office, personal service and retail commercial uses that are
compatible with residential uses are envisioned to be located on the same lot
to create additional development options for property owners. The Mixed Use
Overlay is a permissive alternative for owners and is not a requirement.
   (B)   This district encourages the creation of corridors and sites in the
city with greater pedestrian-scale interaction between businesses and
residents. Mixed use sites will allow property owners a wider variety of
development opportunities while creating unique types of housing alternatives
for new and existing residents. Businesses will have an increased customer base
by having more residents in close proximity to their location. Residents will
have more opportunities to walk, rather than drive, to conduct business in the
city.
(Ord. 22-001, passed 1-24-22)
§ 154.341 OVERLAY DISTRICT ESTABLISHED.
   The MUO Mixed Use Overlay District is a mapped zoning district that overlays
the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts along specific corridors or intersections. The
MUO district is shown on the City Zoning Map. Any reference to the overlay
district means the MUO district requirements, while any reference to the
underlying zoning district means that standard zoning district over which the
MUO district is overlaid. The MUO district establishes specific dimensional and
design standards that replace any similar standard from any other article,
chapter, or section of this zoning ordinance that apply in the underlying
zoning district.
(Ord. 22-001, passed 1-24-22)
§ 154.342 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned MUO Mixed Use
Overlay District, no building shall be erected, used, or structurally altered,
nor shall the land or premises be used, in whole or in part, except for one or
more of the following principal permitted uses. Any combination of the
following principal uses may be located on the same lot and within the same
building when in compliance with all applicable ordinance requirements, except
for those uses cited below.
      (1)   (a)   Property in the MUO Mixed Use Overlay may be used in
accordance with the uses that are permitted by right or by special land use
approval in the underlying zoning district, except as cited below. All land
uses proposed or expanded within the MUO District shall follow the site plan
and special land use application and review standards specified in §§
154.400 et seq. and §§
154.415 et seq., as required.
         (b)   Any property currently occupied or proposed to be occupied by
any of the following uses shall not be permitted to establish another use on
the property:
            1.   Automobile or vehicle sales;
            2.   Automobile repair and filling stations;
            3.   Automobile or vehicle rental establishments;
            4.   Car wash establishments;
            5.   Drive-in establishments;
            6.   Fast-food or drive-through restaurants;
            7.   Regulated uses.
      (2)   Other uses not specifically listed in this chapter, after
determination by the Zoning Administrator that the use is similar to other
permitted uses in this district or the underlying zoning district.
      (3)   Townhouses and multiple-family dwellings only when located above a
commercial use.
      (4)   Live-work uses only when the work shop or retail area is located on
the ground floor and in the front of the building, and the residential living
area is located to the rear or a floor above the work shop or retail area.
      (5)   Accessary structures and uses customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses.
   (B)   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted, subject to the
conditions specified for each use; review and approval of the site plan; any
special conditions imposed during the course of review; and the provisions set
forth in §§
154.135 through
154.162 and §§
154.415 through
154.417:
      (1)   Financial institutions with a single drive-through window;
      (2)   Fast-food restaurants with a single drive-through window;
      (3)   Hotels;
      (4)   Child care centers.
(Ord. 22-001, passed 1-24-22)
§ 154.343 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Required conditions. Unless otherwise noted, buildings and uses in the
MUO Mixed Use Overlay District shall comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   Mixed use buildings shall be designed to the following standards.
         (a)   Building materials on the front facade, exclusive of window and
door areas, shall be comprised of at least 50% standard-size brick and 25%
other masonry-type products. Smooth or flat face concrete masonry units are
prohibited, unless approved as part of the overall facade in the building
review process.
         (b)   Building materials on the side and rear facades shall be select
and high-quality, reducing maintenance requirements.
         (c)   Roofs shall contain a variety of peaks, gables or dormers to
break long, monotonous roof lines.
         (d)   Facades shall be traditional, offering a variety of
architectural features such as window openings, entrance features (porches) and
unique elements.
         (e)   Garages, if any, shall be built to the rear of the primary
structure, screened from road rights-of-way.
      (2)   All business, services, or processing, except off-street parking
and loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, unless
otherwise specifically permitted.
      (3)   There shall be no outside storage of any goods, inventory, or
equipment.
      (4)   Warehousing and/or indoor storage of goods or material, beyond that
normally incidental to the above permitted uses, shall be prohibited.
      (5)   Parking shall be permitted in the rear yard only.
      (6)   Vehicular access shall be provided at the rear or side of the lot
when possible to minimize curb cuts on busy thoroughfares.
      (7)   Pedestrian paths and interior sidewalks shall be provided and
connect to the city’s sidewalk system.
      (8)   All sites shall be maintained in compliance with the open space and
landscaping requirements of §
154.082. Open space shall be provided for the enjoyment, use and recreation of
the development’s residents when feasible.
   (B)   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all
uses in the MUO Mixed Use
Overlay District in accordance with §§
154.400 through
154.406.
   (C)   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the MUO Mixed Use Overlay District are subject to the area, height, bulk, and
placement requirements in Appendix A, Schedule of Regulations.
   (D)   Planned Development. Planned Development may be permitted as a means
to achieve the basic intent of this district, in accordance with the guidelines
in §§
154.330 through
154.336.
(Ord. 22-001, passed 1-24-22)
CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 154.350 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Central Business District is to integrate the
recommendations of the city Master Plan and the Downtown Development
Authority's market analysis and strategic action plan with the community's
objective to revitalize its commercial core. The CBD zoning district
acknowledges that the commercial core should retain a specific mixture of
retail and office uses which favor pedestrian traffic and comparison shopping.
Further, to promote revitalization of the commercial core and reinvestment in
businesses and properties within the district, these regulations contain
provisions specifying development and design criteria and standards for their
review.
(Ord. 96-008, passed 12-2-96; Am. Ord. 10-015, passed 4-12-10)
§ 154.351 BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries of the Central Business District shall include parcels
bounded by Block Avenue, Ford Road, Central Avenue, and Middlebelt Road;
Krauter Avenue, Ford Road, Garden Avenue, and Central Avenue; parcels bounded
by Ford Road, Pardo Avenue, Garden Avenue, and Middlebelt Road; parcels bounded
by Pardo Avenue, John Hauk Road, the east property line of Lot 26a of the
Folkers Full Acre Farms Subdivision, and Middlebelt Road; parcels with frontage
on the south side of Ford Road between Brandt Avenue and Middlebelt Road;
parcels with frontage on the west side of Middlebelt Road between Ford Road and
John Hauk Road; parcels bounded by Beechwood Avenue, Ford Road, Middlebelt Road
and Brandt Avenue; and parcels with frontage on the west side of Middlebelt
Road between Beechwood and the north property line of Lot 188a of the Folker's
Full Acre Farms No. 1 Subdivision. The CBD boundary is illustrated in Graphic
1.
(Ord. 96-008, passed 12-2-96; Am. Ord. 10-015, passed 4-12-10)
Graphic 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2919.jpg]
 
§ 154.352 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned CBD, Central
Business District, no buildings shall be erected, used, or structurally
altered, nor shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for
one or more of the following principal permitted uses. Other uses not
specifically listed in this subchapter may be considered following a
determination by the Zoning Administrator, with review and recommendation of
the Downtown Development Authority, that such use is similar to other permitted
uses in this district.
      (1)   Retail and office uses.
         (a)   Art, music, dance, crafts, cooking, martial arts, photography,
and similar schools and studios.
         (b)   Art galleries.
         (c)   Banks, credit unions, and savings and loan associations
(excluding drive-through facilities, which may be permitted with special land
use approval per §
154.352(B)(3).
         (d)   Bars, lounges, and taverns (live entertainment and music
permitted, but not adult regulated).
         (e)   Business, technical, and beauty schools.
         (f)   Cafes, coffee houses, and delicatessens.
         (g)   Child care centers (subject to §
154.142).
         (h)   Club and fraternal organizations.
         (i)   Establishments which perform services on the premises and
associated offices, showrooms, and workshops, such as: appliance repair;
barber, beauty shops, and health spas; catering; computer centers and similar
uses, including the sales, serving, and maintenance of electronic equipment;
dry cleaning or laundry pick-up stations with processing on the premises
(excluding drive-through facilities, which may be permitted with special land
use approval per § 154.352(B)(3); interior decorating; mail and packaging;
optical; photography studios; printing and photocopying; shoe repair; tailor
shops; and, travel agencies.
         (j)   Funeral homes and mortuaries (subject to §
154.141).
         (k)   Medical, dental, and physical therapy clinics and offices.
         (l)   Offices for any of the following occupations or similar fields:
accounting; administrative; advertising; architectural; clerical; engineering;
insurance; legal; management; personnel services; professional; public
relations; real estate; sales; security brokers; and tax services.
         (m)   Outdoor seating and dining areas.
         (n)   Personal fitness centers.
         (o)   Pet grooming and obedience training, with no boarding.
         (p)   Public buildings such as government offices, libraries, police
and fire stations, community centers, and similar uses, but not including
storage yards.
         (q)   Restaurants, fast-food (excluding drive-through facilities,
which may be permitted with special land use approval per §
154.352(B)(3) (subject to §
154.140).
         (r)   Restaurants, standard (subject to §
154.150).
         (s)   Retail businesses which supply commodities on the premises, such
as: antiques; automobile parts and supplies; baked goods; bikes; books (not
including adult bookstores); camera; clothing; drugstores (excluding drive-
through facilities, which may be permitted with special land use approval per §
154.352(B)(3); electronics and appliances; florists; fruit and vegetable
market; furniture; general merchandise; gift/novelty; groceries; hardware;
hobby; jewelry; music (CDs, records, tapes); shoes; specialty meats/fish
market; sporting goods; stationary; toys; variety stores; video rental and
sales; and similar businesses.
         (t)   Theaters (indoor, motion picture or live performance, but not
adult regulated).
         (u)   Therapeutic massage therapy establishments (subject to §
154.167).
      (2)   Residential uses. The minimum floor area requirements of
residential uses shall be consistent with those required for an R-3 Multiple
Family Residential District as specified in §§
154.240 through
154.242. Off-street parking requirements shall be consistent with the
requirements in §§
154.065 through
154.070. The following residential uses shall be permitted above the first
floor:
         (a)   Home occupations.
         (b)   Live-work dwelling units.
         (c)   Loft apartments.
         (d)   Residential apartments on upper floor above a retail, personal
service, or office use on the ground floor.
   (B)   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted, subject to the
conditions specified for each use; review and approval of the site plan; any
special conditions imposed during the course of review; and the provisions set
forth in §§
154.135 through
154.162 and §§
154.415 through
154.417.
      (1)   Amusement/recreation (miniature golf courses, playgrounds, and
indoor facilities only) (subject to §
154.152).
      (2)   Automobile and/or vehicle rental establishments (subject to §
154.162).
      (3)   Drive-through facilities for banks, credits unions, dry cleaners,
drugstores, and fast-food restaurants.
      (4)   Open air businesses (subject to §
154.149).
      (5)   Doggy day care establishments (subject to §
154.145).
(Ord. 96-008, passed 12-2-96; Am. Ord. 01-004, passed 4-9-01; Am. Ord. 08-004,
passed 11-5-07; Am. Ord. 10-015, passed 4-12-10; Am. Ord. 12-010, passed 11-19-
12; Am. Ord. 13-004, passed 5-20-13; Am. Ord. 16-002, passed 4-18-16; Am. Ord.
19-011, passed 9-23-19) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.353 PROPERTY GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   General provisions of this subchapter shall conform to §§
154.020 through
154.040. However, if certain provisions contained in this subchapter conflict
with those provisions, the provisions of this subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. 96-008, passed 12-2-96; Am. Ord, 10-015, passed 4-12-10) Penalty, see
§ 154.999
§ 154.354 SITE DESIGN REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Setbacks and corner building placement. Buildings in the CBD zoning
district shall meet the following setback and corner building placement
requirements:
      (1)   Setback requirements.
 Minimum Maximum Additional Requirements
           Minimum Maximum         Additional Requirements
Front Yard 0 feet  12 feet         c
Side Yard  a       b               c
Rear Yard  a       b               c
a.   Where any walls are not of appropriate fire-rated construction or where
any walls contain openings, a side or rear setback shall be provided as
follows:
                   Building Height Minimum Side or Rear Setback
                   1 story         5 feet
                   2 stories       8 feet
b.   The maximum side or rear yard setback shall be zero where all abutting or
facing walls are composed of appropriate fire-rated materials and contain no
windows, doors, or other openings.
c.   Depending on the layout and design of the subject site, the front, side,
and/or rear setbacks shall be a minimum of 20 feet to accommodate drive-through
facilities, parking areas, and drive aisles.
 
      (2)   Corner building placement.
         (a)   Corner buildings shall be constructed parallel to both street
frontages to provide areas for streetscape focal points and adequate sight
distance as required in §
154.027 as illustrated in Graphic 2.
Graphic 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2935.jpg]
         (b)    Buildings situated at a corner shall possess a level of
architectural design that incorporates accents and details that accentuate its
prominent location, as illustrated in Graphic 3. This can be accomplished
through height projections incorporated into a design feature such as
additional height, a building peak, tower, or similar accent with the highest
point located at the intersecting corner. Alternatively, a pedestrian plaza may
be provided at the corner of the intersecting streets.
Graphic 3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2939.jpg]
         (c)    Where possible, a main entrance shall be on a street-facing
wall and either at the corner or within 25 feet of the corner.
   (B)   Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking and loading
requirements for properties within the CBD zoning district shall comply with
the requirements set forth in §§
154.066 through
154.070, with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Except as otherwise permitted for collective off-street parking,
the location of off-street parking shall be on the same block as the facility
on the same side of Ford Road or Middlebelt Road.
      (2)   Off-street parking shall be located in the rear portion of the
subject property and behind the principal building or use. Off-street parking
lots having frontage on Ford Road or Middlebelt Road right-of-way are
prohibited.
      (3)   If parking in the rear of the lot is not feasible because the lot
is too shallow, or other unique circumstances, then parking may be allowed on
the side of the building in conformance with the following:
         (a)   The area adjacent to the road or right-of-way shall meet the
requirements of §
154.081(B). In addition, a 32-inch tall brick knee-wall, decorative metal fence
(open or semi-open fence, ornamental in nature and not intended to provide a
permanent barrier to passage, and does not include chain link fence), evergreen
landscaping, or combination thereof that serves as an extension of the adjacent
building shall be provided between the parking and sidewalk (see Graphic 4).
Graphic 4
Parking Lot Screening
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2941.jpg]
         (b)    The parking lot shall meet the requirements of §
154.081(F). Additionally, no row of parking may exceed 25 spaces and shall
include landscape islands to break rows of parking stalls. All islands shall be
landscaped per the requirements of §
154.081(F) (see Graphic 5).
Graphic 5
Landscape Islands within Parking Lot
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2943.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2945.jpg]
      (4)    Where possible, if the parking lot is located adjacent to a
building, a five-foot wide sidewalk shall be installed between the building and
the parking area.
      (5)   A curb of at least six inches in height shall be installed to
prevent motor vehicles from being driven or parking so that any part of that
vehicle extends within two feet of abutting landscaped areas, sidewalks,
streets, buildings, or adjoining property. In lieu of a curb, wheel chocks may
be provided to prevent vehicles from extending over grass areas, setback lines,
or lot lines. A freeway-type guardrail is prohibited from use in lieu of curbs
or wheel chocks.
      (6)    Grading, surfacing, and drainage plans shall comply with city
engineering standards and shall be subject to review and approval by the city
DPS Director. The surface of the parking lot, access lanes, driveways, and
other maneuvering areas shall be hard-surfaced with concrete or plant-mixed
bituminous material. If the maneuvering lane will be used by commercial
vehicles (tractor trailers, stake trucks, panel trucks, and the like) it shall
be constructed with a deep strength bituminous surface.
      (7)   Off-street parking areas, access lanes, and driveways shall be
graded and drained so as to dispose of surface waters. Surface water shall not
be permitted to drain onto adjoining property, unless in accordance with an
approved drainage plan.
      (8)   For a lot facing two streets, parking is prohibited on the corner
facing the intersection.
      (9)   Access to parking lots shall be provided off alleys when available
in order to minimize curb-cuts across pedestrian sidewalks.
      (10)   Loading areas shall meet the requirements of §
154.070. Additionally, loading bays/docks shall be hidden from public view by
walls and landscaping to the greatest extent possible. When any loading bay/
dock is visible from customer or general parking areas, visible from a private
or public road, or adjacent to land that is zoned or used for non-commercial
uses, the loading bay/dock shall be enclosed with a solid masonry wall or live
plant materials forming a solid screen a minimum of six feet in height. The
wall shall be integrally designed and consistent with the style and materials
of the building.
      (11)   Collective off-street parking. Parking for separate buildings or
uses may be provided collectively subject to the following:
         (a)   If the parking facility is deemed to be a private collective
parking lot (not for public use), the total number of spaces provided
collectively shall not be less than the sum of spaces required for each
separate use.
         (b)   If the property owner participates with the city Downtown
Development Authority in a public collective parking facility by contributing,
through an easement, their property behind the rear building line, the required
parking spaces for the subject building or use may be reduced by up to 20%.
         (c)   If a property cannot physically accommodate off-street parking
and is within 300 feet of a public collective parking facility, the property
owner/tenant may use the public collective parking facility to satisfy their
off-street parking requirements upon the Planning Commission making a
determination that the parking demands of the uses served do not overlap, or
there is sufficient capacity in the off-street parking facility to accommodate
the increased parking. Further, the property owner exercising this provision
will contribute an annual amount, as established by the Downtown Development
Authority with City Council approval (based on their parking demand) to the
Downtown Development Authority Collective Parking Maintenance Fund.
         (d)   When required parking is located on a lot or parcel that is
under different ownership from the building it serves or is not contiguous to
the building site, a formal written agreement or easement assuring the
continuing usage of the parking for the building must be properly drawn and
executed by the parties concerned and made part of the site plan approval.
         (e)   Design and layout. Collective off-street parking facilities,
public or privately-owned, shall comply with the following standards in
addition to those contained in §
154.081(F).
            1.   Buildings abutting the collective parking facility shall
provide connecting walks to their building and adjacent buildings. These walks
shall be at least five feet in width. Walkways which connect adjacent buildings
shall be setback from the building a distance sufficient to accommodate a
landscape entrance area between the walkway and the building.
            2.   Rows of parking shall include landscape islands at each end.
The landscape islands shall be a minimum of ten feet wide with a length equal
to the length of the parking stall(s). Further, no row of parking may exceed 25
spaces and shall include landscape islands to break rows of parking stalls. All
islands shall be landscaped per the requirements of §
154.081(F).
            3.   Access drives into the collective parking facility shall be
bounded by median islands with a minimum width of 15 feet. These median islands
shall be landscaped per the requirements of §
154.081(F).
            4.   The primary circulation route(s) within the collective parking
facility must be designed for limited access. The number of parking stalls
which back directly on the primary circulation route(s) shall be minimized.
   (C)   Lighting. Lighting requirements for all parking areas, walkways,
driveway, building entryways, off-street parking and loading areas, and
buildings within the CBD zoning district shall comply with the requirements set
forth in §
154.030, Lighting Requirements.
   (D)   Signs. Permitted signs within the CBD Zoning District shall comply
with
Chapter 154 of this code, Sign regulations (§§
154.600 through
154.612).
   (E)   Support service elements. Developed property must accommodate certain
support services such as electrical transformers, air conditioning units, HVAC
systems, compressors, chillers, trash dumpsters, and utility meters. The
following provisions address the location of these support services on the
property:
      (1)   Mechanical equipment such as transformers, compressors, HVAC
systems, and chillers shall be located on the side, top, or rear of the
buildings and appropriately screened from pedestrians. Screening shall include
a planting bed per §
154.081(E)(2), or a low, solid masonry screen wall consistent with the
predominate materials of the building. The clearance between the screen wall
and the mechanical equipment shall conform to local building codes. Ground
mechanical units shall not be permitted in front of a building and shall be
located in safe, convenient, and unobtrusive locations and adequately protected
from vehicles.
      (2)   Trash dumpsters and their enclosures shall conform to the
provisions of §
154.032, standards for trash dumpsters.
      (3)   Utility meters, electrical conduit, and other service lines shall
not be located on the building façade facing the street and should, when
practical, not be visible from the street.
      (4)   Gutter downspouts shall not be located on the front building
façade. If the rear of the building abuts a collective parking facility, the
gutter downspout shall not discharge water on a sidewalk or other pedestrian
way.
   (F)   Landscaping. Landscaping shall comply with the provisions of §§
154.080 through
154.086.
   (G)   Shared site access. The used of shared site access, in conjunction
with driveway spacing, is intended to preserve traffic flow along major roads
and minimize traffic conflicts, while retaining reasonable access to the
property. Where the Planning Commission determines that reducing the number of
access points may have a beneficial impact on traffic operations and safety
while preserving the property owner's right to reasonable access, access from a
side street, a shared driveway, or parking lot connection between two or more
properties or uses may be required.
(Ord. 96-008, passed 12-2-96; Am. Ord. 10-015, passed 4-12-10; Am. Ord. 19-011,
passed 9-23-19)  Penalty, see
§ 154.999
§ 154.355 BUILDING DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   The intent of these requirements is to encourage the renovation of existing
buildings and the construction of new buildings in the Central Business
District that follow the rules established by the majority of the existing
buildings. The goal is to re-establish and build upon the visual character that
once existed in order to recreate Downtown Garden City.
   (A)   Building scale. The intent of these guidelines is to encourage the
construction of buildings that are in scale with the majority of the existing
buildings in the Central Business District. The majority of the older buildings
are narrow in width. The intent of these guidelines is not to limit building
width, but to encourage the subdivision of wider façades, breaking-up the scale
and mass of larger buildings, making them more compatible with existing
façades.
      (1)   Large, long façades shall be subdivided into bays, through the
location and arrangement of openings and architectural treatments that are
compatible in size and scale to existing buildings: bay width to be 16 feet to
35 feet.
      (2)   The height-to-width ratio of one-story buildings(including single
bay façades or individual bays of multiple bay façades) is not to exceed one to
two (1:2).
      (3)   The height-to-width ratio of two-story buildings (including single
bay façades or individual bays of multiple bay façades) is not to exceed one to
one (1:1).
   (B)   Building height. Buildings in the Central Business District are
primarily one-story in height with some two-story buildings. The goal is to
provide a variety of buildings heights to enhance the visual diversity in the
Central Business District. Buildings shall be limited to a 45-foot maximum
height to include all special architectural features, such as corner towers,
entry treatments, and the like.
      (1)   The maximum one-story height shall be 24 feet.
      (2)   The maximum two-story building height shall be 35 feet.
      (3)   Special architectural features (i.e., corner towers, entry
treatments, and the like) will be allowed to exceed the above height
requirements if either of the following apply:
         (a)   The feature is located at a corner (the intersection of two
public rights-of-way).
         (b)   The feature is deemed to be necessary to the type, use, or style
of the building in question.
      (4)   Special architectural features shall not exceed the height of the
remainder of the building by more than 30%.
   (C)   Building roof types.
      (1)   Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission, buildings
shall have a flat roof appearance from the street with a decorative cornice
that is designed proportionate to the size of the building and length of the
wall.
      (2)   Flat roofs shall be enclosed by parapets.
      (3)   The Planning Commission may permit a pitched roof. Mansard roofs
shall not be permitted on single-story buildings. If an alternative roof type
other than flat is permitted, applicant shall ensure all stormwater drainage
will be maintained on the subject property.
      (4)   Parapets and other screening treatment shall use high quality
building materials and shall blend with the design of the building in terms of
color, materials, style, scale, and height.
      (5)   All rooftop-mounted equipment shall be screened from view on all
sides of the building.
Graphic 6
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2947.jpg]
 
   (D)   Front façade. The majority of the existing front façades, the façades
that face public rights-of-way, are comprised of common façade components. The
arrangement of façade elements shall follow this model which includes the
following typical components, such as façade frame, storefront opening, canopy/
awning, and signs.
      (1)   Façade frame. The façade frame, or wall, shall be brick masonry,
constructed principally in a single plane. The top of the parapet wall shall be
flat or step slightly to accentuate end piers. The façade frame shall be capped
by a stone, or simulated stone, coping with a narrow cap flashing. Brick shall
be laid primarily in running bond with minimal decorative detail.
      (2)   Storefront opening. The storefront opening shall be a rectangular
opening, ten to 12 feet high. The opening shall be almost entirely glass
(window or showcases) with few subdivisions. The building entry is often
centered in the storefront opening and is commonly recessed.
         (a)   The glass framing system shall be aluminum or pre-painted steel;
natural-finish aluminum is a typical material and finish.
         (b)   Windows shall be clear or with a slight green tint only.
Reflective, mirror, heavily tinted, or unusually colored glass is prohibited.
         (c)   Entry doors shall be one- or two-lite door that matches the
storefront glass framing system.
         (d)   Windows shall not be blocked with opaque materials or the back
of shelving units.
      (3)   Canopies and awnings.
         (a)   For purpose of this division, the following definition shall
apply (see Graphic 7):
Graphic 7
Canopy and Awnings Types
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2951.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2949.jpg]
 
         CANOPY or AWNING. An architectural feature or roof-like structure
directly attached to a building that may shade a window or door opening or
provide pedestrians protection from the weather. A CANOPY or AWNING is
typically located over a sidewalk and may be a fixed architectural element or
constructed to be raised or retracted.
         (b)   Front façade canopies and awnings.
            1.   Canopies and awnings shall be traditional in design,
consistent with those illustrated in Graphic 7 above. Unusually shaped awnings
are prohibited.
            2.   Canopies and awnings may project a maximum of eight feet
beyond the building façade and must be a minimum of six feet from the curb
line.
            3.   Canopies and awnings may project over a sidewalk with a
minimum-eight-foot clearance provided above the sidewalk grade.
            4.   Canopies and awnings shall be constructed of a durable
material such as canvas or other opaque fabric, metal, plastic, or rigid
fiberglass. High-gloss or plasticized materials are not permitted.
            5.   Canopies and awnings shall not be internally illuminated. Any
signs shall be illuminated by fixtures located above the awning and directed
downward.
            6.   Canopies and awnings are not intended to be a principal means
of signage. The type and amount of signage shall be limited, as set forth in §
154.355(D)(4)(d) and §
154.606(E).
            7.   Canopies and awnings shall be maintained in good appearance
and repair.
      (4)   Signs. Permitted signs within the CBD Zoning District shall comply
with
Chapter 154 of this Code, Sign Regulations (§§
154.600 through
154.612), as well as the following additional requirements.
         (a)   Building-mounted signs shall not exceed the width of the
storefront opening.
         (b)   The height of building-mounted signs shall not exceed 50% of the
height of the upper façade wall, as measured from the top of the storefront
opening to the top of the parapet cap. Projecting signs are exempt from this
requirement.
         (c)   Projecting signs are allowed. The maximum allowable projection
is 42 inches. The height of projecting signs shall not exceed 75% of the height
of the upper façade wall, as measured from the top of the storefront opening to
the top of the parapet cap.
         (d)   Signs are permitted to be located on awning and canopy fascias
but are prohibited on the sloping portion of awnings and canopies. The height
of lettering on the fascia of an awning or canopy shall be limited to a maximum
of 12 inches.
   (E)   Side or rear façades. Side or rear façades are, in many cases, as
important as front façades, as they are often located adjacent to parking, and,
therefore, serve as the primary entrance to the building, as illustrated in
Graphic 8. Often times they must also accommodate service and delivery
functions as well. Side or rear façades shall exhibit the same components as
front façades wherever the façade is visible from a public street, or if the
main parking area is located to the side or rear of a building. Materials and
architectural features similar or complimentary to those present on the front
of the building shall be used on the side or rear façade.
Graphic 8
Side or Rear Façade
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2953.jpg]
 
      (1)   Façade frame. The façade frame, like that of the front façade,
shall be constructed principally in a single plane. If a parapet is used at the
side or rear façade, the top of the parapet wall shall be flat or step slightly
to accentuate end piers, as illustrated. If no parapet is used, downspouts
shall be located at the outer sides of the façades, not in the middle of the
façade.
      (2)   Storefront opening. Like the front façade, the storefront opening
shall be a rectangular or square opening, ten to 12 feet high, yet it may be a
smaller portion of the width of the façade, or bay, than the front façade. The
opening shall be almost entirely glass (window, showcases, or door) with few
subdivisions.
         (a)   The glass framing system shall be aluminum or pre-painted steel;
natural-finish aluminum is a typical material and finish.
         (b)   Windows shall be clear or with a slight green tint only.
Reflective, mirror, heavily tinted, or unusually colored glass is prohibited.
         (c)   Entry doors shall be one- or two-lite door that matches the
storefront glass framing system.
         (d)   Windows shall not be blocked with opaque materials or the back
of shelving units.
         (e)   Service delivery doors shall be solid hollow metal in color that
is compatible with the colors on the building.
      (3)   Canopies, awnings and porte cocheres.
         (a)   For purposes of this division the following definitions shall
apply (see Graphic 7 above).
            CANOPY or AWNING. An architectural feature or roof-like structure
directly attached to a building that may shade a window or door opening or
provide pedestrians protection from the weather. A CANOPY or AWNING is
typically located over a sidewalk and may be a fixed architectural element or
constructed to be raised or retracted.
            PORTE COCHERE. A covered structure directly attached to a building
that is large enough for a vehicle to pass through, typically located adjacent
to a building entrance or a drive-through window, intended to provide visitors
protection from the elements.
         (b)   Side or rear façade canopies and awnings.
            1.   Canopies and awnings shall be traditional in design,
consistent with those illustrated in Graphic 7 above. Unusually shaped awnings
are prohibited.
            2.   Canopies and awnings may project a maximum of eight feet
beyond the building façade and side façade. Canopies and awnings must be a
minimum of six feet from the curb line for corner lots.
            3.   Canopies and awnings may project over a sidewalk with a
minimum-eight-foot clearance provided above the sidewalk grade.
            4.   Canopies and awnings shall be constructed of a durable
material such as canvas or other opaque fabric, metal, plastic, or rigid
fiberglass. High-gloss or plasticized materials are not permitted.
            5.   Canopies and awnings shall not be internally illuminated. Any
signs shall be illuminated by fixtures located above the awning and directed
downward.
            6.   Canopies and awnings are not intended to be a principal means
of signage. The type and amount of signage shall be limited, as set forth in §
154.355(E)(4)(d) and §
154.606 (E).
            7.   Canopies and awnings shall be maintained in good appearance
and repair.
         (c)   Porte cocheres.
            1.   Porte cocheres shall be considered a component of the
principal structure and shall be subject to all setback requirements of the
principal structure. Porte cocheres shall also be consistent with the
architectural style of the building.
            2.   Porte cocheres shall be located on private property and shall
not project into any adjacent right-of-way.
            3.   Porte cocheres shall comply with all lighting standards of §
154.030.
            4.   Each elevation of a porte cochere shall be considered a part
of the side and/or rear principal building façade and shall comply with all
signage requirements as set forth in §
154.355(E)(4).
      (4)   Signs. Permitted signs within the CBD Zoning District shall comply
with Chapter 154 of this Code, Sign Regulations (§§
154.600 through
154.612), as well as the following additional requirements.
         (a)   Building-mounted signs shall not exceed the width of the
storefront opening (entrance and windows).
         (b)   The height of building-mounted signs shall not exceed 75% of the
height of the upper façade wall, as measured from the top of the storefront
opening to the top of the parapet cap. Projecting signs are exempt from this
requirement.
         (c)   Projecting signs are allowed. The maximum allowable projection
is 42 inches. The height of projecting signs shall not exceed 75% of the height
of the upper façade wall, as measured from the top of the storefront opening to
the top of the parapet cap.
         (d)   Signs are permitted to be located on awning and canopy fascias
but are prohibited on the sloping portion of awnings and canopies. The height
of lettering on the fascia of an awning or canopy shall be limited to a maximum
of 12 inches.
   (F)   Building materials. Maintaining a consistent palette of materials is
important to establish continuity within the streetscape and to improve the
overall appearance of the Central Business District. The Downtown Development
Authority will provide assistance in identifying acceptable materials when
requested. The following are identified as acceptable building materials.
      (1)   Front façade. The following exterior finish materials are required
on the front façade.
         (a)   All walls exposed to public view from the street or parking area
shall be constructed of not less than 75% brick (including natural clay brick,
panel brick, and thin brick) with common tooled joints. Brick color (commonly
blond, beige, or dull red) and texture (from smooth or glazed to rough) shall
be compatible with the existing façades in the Central Business District.
         (b)   Up to 25% of the façade may include smooth-finish stone, such as
limestone or sandstone, or other masonry materials, which may include
decorative concrete masonry unit (CMU).
         (c)   Exterior insulation finishing systems (EIFS) may be used for
architectural detailing only.
         (d)   Aluminum, artificial stone, and precast parapet caps are
permitted. Color and finish of aluminum shall match that of the window framing
system or be compatible with other building materials. Stone and precast shall
simulate traditional limestone and sandstone caps.
         (e)   The use of aluminum siding, bare metal, metal panels, mirrored
glass, plastic, plywood siding, stucco, wood panels, and wood siding shall be
prohibited.
      (2)   Side or rear façade – Facing a public street or main parking area.
The following exterior finish materials are required on any side or rear façade
facing a public street or main parking area.
         (a)   All walls exposed to public view from the street or parking area
shall be constructed of not less than 75% brick (including natural clay brick,
panel brick, and thin brick) with common tooled joints. Brick color (commonly
blond, beige, or dull red) and texture (from smooth or glazed to rough) shall
be compatible with the existing façades in the Central Business District.
         (b)   Up to 25% of the façade may include smooth-finish stone, such as
limestone or sandstone, or other masonry materials, which may include
decorative concrete masonry unit (CMU).
         (c)   Exterior insulation finishing systems (EFIS) may be used for
architectural detailing only.
         (d)   Aluminum, artificial stone, and precast parapet caps are
permitted. Color and finish of aluminum shall match that of the window framing
system or be compatible with other building materials. Stone and precast shall
simulate traditional limestone and sandstone caps.
         (e)   The use of aluminum siding, bare metal, metal panels, mirrored
glass, plastic, plywood siding, stucco, wood panels, and wood siding shall be
prohibited.
      (3)   Side or rear façade – All others. The following exterior finish
materials are required on all other side or rear façades.
         (a)   Acceptable materials include brick (including natural clay
brick, panel brick, and thin brick), decorative concrete masonry unit (CMU),
exterior insulation finishing systems (EIFS), smooth-finish stone (such as
limestone or sandstone), and other masonry materials.
         (b)   Aluminum, artificial stone, and precast parapet caps are
permitted. Color and finish of aluminum shall match that of the window framing
system or be compatible with other building materials. Stone and precast shall
simulate traditional limestone and sandstone caps.
         (c)   Aluminum gutters and downspouts are permitted. Color and finish
of aluminum shall match that of the window framing system or the primary color
of the building.
         (d)   The use of aluminum siding, bare metal, metal panels, mirrored
glass, plastic, plywood siding, stucco, wood panels, and wood siding shall be
prohibited.
   (G)   Building colors. Exterior colors of all façade and roof materials
shall be compatible with the colors on the same building and adjacent
buildings, subject to review by the Planning Commission. All proposed colors
shall be specified on the site plan. The use of natural, muted tones shall be
encouraged.
(Ord. 96-008, passed 12-2-96; Am. Ord. 00-002, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 10-015,
passed 4-12-10; Am. Ord. 22-001, passed 1-24-22) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.356 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Site plan review. Principal uses and structures in the Central
Business District shall be subject to all applicable standards and requirements
set forth in §§
154.400 through
154.405, Site Plan Review.
   (B)   Special use review. Special land uses and structures in the Central
Business District shall be subject to all applicable standards and requirements
set forth in §§
154.400 through
154.405, Site Plan Review and §§
154.415 through
154.417, Special Use Regulations.
   (C)   Administrative review. The Zoning Administrator shall review all plans
in the Central Business District and provide the Downtown Development Authority
the same set of plans for review and comment.
   (D)   Exterior design review.
      (1)   Intent. The exterior appearance of any building located within the
Central Business District has an effect upon the desirability of the immediate
area and of neighboring areas for business and other purposes. Maintenance of
an attractive, compatible, and pleasing exterior appearance of such buildings
will prevent impairment of the stability of the value of other real property in
the area, permit the most appropriate development of the area, and will prevent
attendant deterioration of conditions affecting the general welfare of the
citizens of the city.
      (2)   Scope of application. Except for those items listed below, all
plans submitted for site plan review and special use review shall be subject to
design review requirements of this section. Those items exempt from these
provisions are items such as window replacement, antennas, roof vents, small
mechanical equipment not readily visible to the public, painting to a similar
color, and items of ordinary repair and maintenance.
      (3)   Approval procedure. The Downtown Development Authority shall review
submitted materials concurrently with site plan review by the Planning
Commission. In considering approvals of site plans in the Central Business
District, the Planning Commission shall review recommendations provided by the
Downtown Development Authority. The Downtown Development Authority must forward
a recommendation to the Planning Commission seven days prior to the Planning
Commission meeting during which the site plan will be reviewed. If no
recommendation is provided by the Downtown Development Authority, the Planning
Commission shall complete the site plan review and approval process.
      (4)   Information required. The Downtown Development Authority shall
receive same set of plans as being reviewed by the Planning Commission and
promptly review all drawings, data, plans, and specifications in the same form
as submitted to the Planning Commission.
      (5)   Design criteria. In the process of reviewing the submitted
materials, the Downtown Development Authority shall consider:
         (a)   Site design.
            1.   The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable
transition, between the building(s) with the streetscape to provide for
adequate planting, safe pedestrian movement, and parking areas.
            2.   Parking areas shall be treated with decorative elements,
building wall extensions, plantings, or other innovative means so as to screen
parking area from view of public ways.
            3.   The height and scale of each building shall be compatible with
its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings.
            4.   Newly installed utility services, and service revisions
necessitated by exterior alterations, shall be underground.
         (b)   Building design. Architectural style, building mass, and
placement shall be compliant with design guidelines of §
154.355.
      (6)   Approval standards. The Downtown Development Authority shall review
the particular circumstance and facts applicable to each submittal in terms of
preceding design criteria, and shall make a recommendation as to whether the
proposal meets the following standards:
         (a)   The appearance, color, texture, and materials being used will
preserve property values in the immediate neighborhood and will not adversely
affect any property values.
         (b)   The building exterior will not detract from the general harmony
of and is compatible with other buildings already existing in the immediate
neighborhood.
         (c)   The appearance of the building exterior will not be garish or
otherwise offensive to the sense of sight.
         (d)   The appearance of the building exterior will tend to minimize or
prevent discordant and unsightly surroundings in the immediate neighborhood.
   (E)   Required conditions.
      (1)   Outdoor storage prohibited; exemption; personal vehicle rental or
sale. Outdoor storage of goods, inventory, or equipment shall be prohibited
unless a temporary use permit, to be issued by the Zoning Administrator.
Approval shall be in accordance with under §
154.025. All permitted storage must be clearly accessory to the principal
permitted use.
      (2)   Exemption. Inventory being stored, maintained, or sold as part of a
business which has been granted a special use under §
154.352(B), which is part of an open air business or inventory consists
entirely of personal vehicles as that term is defined herein and which personal
vehicles were manufactured within the previous five years, and are for sale or
rental.
      (3)   Definition.     For the purpose of this definition, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PERSONAL VEHICLE. The term personal vehicle shall mean any automobile or
light truck or van not exceeding 10,000 lbs. in gross vehicle weight (GVW) as
that term is defined in the Revised Motor Vehicle Code, which vehicle is
primarily designed to be used as a passenger vehicle but which may, with slight
modifications (i.e., fold down seats) be used for hauling cargo.
(Ord. 96-008, passed 12-2-96; Am. Ord. 02-016, passed 8-5-02; Am. Ord. 08-004,
passed 11-5-07; Am. Ord. 10-015, passed 4-12-10) Penalty, see
§ 154.999
VP VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICT
§ 154.370 PURPOSE.
   The intent of the VP Vehicular Parking District is to provide areas to be
used solely for off-street parking as an incidental use to an abutting
commercial, office, or industrial use. More specifically, the
VP district is intended to accommodate the parking needs of businesses which
may have developed without adequate parking, or which have the need for
additional parking due to business growth, or which have inadequate parking
because of shallow lot depth.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.371 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   In all areas zoned VP Vehicular Parking District, the land or premises shall
be used only for off- street parking, and shall be developed and maintained in
accordance with the regulations set forth herein.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.372 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Required conditions. Except as otherwise noted, buildings and uses in
the Vehicular Parking District shall comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   Permitted off-street parking shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the provisions set forth in §§
154.065 through
154.070.
      (2)   Off-street parking in the VP district shall be accessory to, and
for use in connection with one or more business, office, or industrial uses,
located in an adjoining commercial, office, or industrial district.
      (3)   Permitted off-street parking shall abut a nonresidential zoning
district. There may be a private driveway or public alley between the off-
street parking and the abutting nonresidential district.
      (4)   Permitted off-street parking shall be used solely for parking of
city of passenger vehicles for periods of less than one day.
      (5)   Permitted off-street parking areas shall not be used for off-street
loading, outside storage or display, or vehicular repair.
      (6)   No signs shall be permitted except for signs designating entrances,
exits, and conditions of use of the off-street parking area.
      (7)   No buildings shall be erected within this district.
      (8)   Notwithstanding the landscaping requirements in §§
154.080 through
154.086, off-street parking in the VP district need not be screened from the
business it is intended to serve.
      (9)   A masonry screen wall shall be constructed along any side or rear
yard of a VP district which abuts a residentially-zoned district, in accordance
with §§
154.100 and
154.101. In addition, a ten-foot setback shall be provided between the side or
rear property line and the edge of the parking lot.
      (10) Where a VP district is contiguous to a residentially-zoned district
which has common frontage on the same road, the minimum front yard setback
shall be equal to the required front yard setback for the residential district.
A landscaped berm shall be required to screen the parking from view of the
road, in accordance with §
154.081(C).
   (B)   Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all
uses in the Vehicular Parking District in accordance with §§
154.400 through
154.405.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
PR PUBLIC RECREATION DISTRICT
§ 154.385 PURPOSE.
   The intent of the PR Public Recreation District is to provide a district
wherein the city’s parks can be located. The district shall preserve and
protect the parks from intrusion by incompatible uses.
(Ord. 97-007, passed 12-1-97)
§ 154.386 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned PR Public Recreation
District, no building shall be erected, used, or structurally altered, nor
shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for one or more
of the following principal permitted uses.
      (1)   Public parks.
      (2)   Picnicking areas.
      (3)   Hiking and nature trails.
      (4)   Bike paths.
      (5)   Natural open space.
      (6)   Swimming pools.
      (7)   Golf courses.
      (8)   Sports fields, courts, ice arenas/rinks and recreation areas.
      (9)   Children's playground and playground equipment.
      (10)   Special events.
      (11)   Ancillary uses to a park including ticket booths, guard houses,
comfort station/rest
rooms.
      (12)   Other uses not specifically listed in this subchapter, after
determination by the Zoning Administrator that the use is similar to other
permitted uses in this district.
   (B)   Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted, subject to the
conditions specified for each use; compatibility with the adopted city-wide
Master Plan and adopted Parks and Recreation Master Plan; approval of the site
plan; any special conditions imposed during the course of review; the
provisions set forth in the §
154.387 of this subchapter, Development Standards, and §§
154.175 through
154.185 and §§
154.415 through
154.417.
      (1)   Food or beverage facilities or equipment shops designed for the
exclusive use of the patrons of the public park.
      (2)   Community buildings including educational, social, neighborhood, or
community centers so long as the facilities serve the residents of the city and
do not adversely impact adjacent residential areas. At the request of the
Recreation Commission, the Planning Commission shall have the authority to
determine the impacts created by any of the above uses and require measures to
mitigate those impacts.
      (3)   Buildings used for the storage and maintenance of equipment for the
parks.
      (4)   Wireless Telecommunication Facilities, accessory towers and
accessory antennas.
(Ord. 97-007, passed 12-1-97; Am. Ord. 06-003, passed 12-19-05)  Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.387 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Required conditions. Unless otherwise noted, all uses within the PR
Public Recreation District shall comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   All development shall be subject to the requirements in §
154.152 of this chapter.
      (2)   There shall be no outside storage of any goods, inventory, or
equipment except picnic tables and garbage cans. All storage must be within an
enclosed building and clearly accessory to the principal permitted use.
      (3)   No permanent outdoor advertising shall be permitted, except for
those businesses, not-for- profit groups or individuals that donate land or
provide donations for the actual purchase of land or construction of the park
and recreation facilities or provide donations for recreational activities and
special events.
      (4)   No temporary signs, banners or flags shall be permitted except for
those used during specific events. These temporary signs, banners or flags
shall only be allowed to remain for the period of the event and must be removed
immediately after the event.
      (5)   The need for off-street parking, whether improved or unimproved,
shall be determined on a site-by-site basis. In determining the need for off-
street parking, the function of the park (i.e., neighborhood, community, or
regional), and the uses proposed for the site will be taken into consideration,
as well as the availability for shared parking. The parking space dimensions
and parking lot design shall meet the standards in §§
154.065 through
154.070.
      (6)   The height, type and size of fences and walls shall be determined
on a site-by-site basis. At the request of the Recreation Commission, the
height and type of the fences and walls may deviate from the standards in §§
154.100 and
154.101 when a determination is made by the Planning Commission that it is for
the protection of the public's health, safety, and welfare.
   (B)   Site plan review. Site plan approval is required for all uses in the
PR Public Recreation District, in accordance with §§
154.400 through
154.405.
   (C)   Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. Buildings and uses in
the PR Public Recreation District are subject to the area, height, bulk, and
placement requirements in Appendix A, Schedule of Regulations.
(Ord. 97-007, passed 12-1-97) Penalty, see §
154.999
HISTORIC STRUCTURES AND SITES DISTRICT
§ 154.390 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The intent of the Historic Structures and Sites District is to protect
the public health, safety, and welfare by preserving the social and economic
well-being of the community. The purpose is to:
      (1)   Enable the city, as the steward for the preservation of the city’s
history, to protect and preserve the city’s historic and cultural resources for
future generations;
      (2)   Promote, preserve, and protect the integrity of the city’s
significant historic structures and sites such as the Straight Farmhouse;
      (3)   Protect and enhance the historic area to attract residents,
tourists, and visitors to serve as a support and stimulus to business and
industry; and
      (4)   Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past.
   (B)   The regulations in this subchapter shall apply to the property as
shown on the city’s official zoning map.
(Ord. 10-001, passed 7-13-09; Am. Ord. 20-003, passed 7-6-20)
§ 154.391 PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Principal uses and structures. In all areas zoned HS, Historic Structures
and Sites District, no buildings shall be erected, used or structurally
altered, nor shall the land or premises be used in whole or in part, except for
one or more of the following principal permitted uses:
   (A)   Buildings and sites that have contributed to the history of the City
of Garden City;
   (B)   Parks and recreation facilities;
   (C)   Historical museum; and
   (D)   Uses and structures accessory to the above, subject to the provisions
of §
154.022.
(Ord. 10-001, passed 7-13-09; Am. Ord. 20-003, passed 7-6-20)
§ 154.392 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Required conditions. Unless otherwise noted, all uses within the HS,
Historic Structures and Sites District shall comply with the following: area,
height, bulk, and placement requirements: all strucutres in the HS Historic
Structures and Sites District are subject to the standards of the R-1, One-
Family Residential District in Appendix A, Schedule of Regulations.
(Ord. 10-001, passed 7-13-09; Am. Ord. 20-003, passed 7-6-20)
SITE PLAN REVIEW
§ 154.400 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter and the four subsequent subchapters to
provide procedures and related standards for the review and regulation of land
uses and uses of structures within the city.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.401 SITE PLAN REVIEW.
      (A)   Site plan required. Except as provided in division (B) of this
section, the development of any new use, the construction of any new
structures, or the redevelopment of any existing site that does not meet the
standard for minor site modifications of §
154.406(A) shall require site plan approval by the Planning Commission prior to
construction and/or occupancy pursuant to this subchapter. For example, site
plan review is required for any of the following activities.
      (1)   Any development that would, if approved, provide for the
establishment of more than one principal use on a parcel, such as a single-
family site condominium or similar project where a single parcel is developed
to include two or more sites for detached single-family dwellings.
      (2)   Development of non-single-family residential uses in single-family
districts.
      (3)   Any use or construction for which submission of a site plan is
required by any provision of these regulations.
      (4)   Establishment of any regulated use.
   (B)   Site plan not required. Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A)
of this section, site plan approval by the Planning Commission is not required
for the following activities.
      (1)   Construction, moving, relocating or structurally altering a single
or two-family home, including any customarily incidental accessory structures.
      (2)   Excavating, filling, or otherwise removing soil, provided that the
activity is normally and customarily incidental to single-family uses described
in this section for which site plan approval is not required.
      (3)   A change in the ownership of land or a structure.
      (4)   A change in the use of a structure to a similar use allowed by
right in the zoning district in which it is located, provided that no
modification to the site is proposed or required by the standards of the
regulations, and that the site maintains full and continuing compliance with
these regulations.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 96-006, passed 7-1-96; Am. Ord. 20-003,
passed 7-6-20)  Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.402 SITE PLAN APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Submission of site plan for review by Planning Commission.
      (1)   In order to initiate formal review by the Planning Commission, the
applicant is required to submit the following materials to the Zoning
Administrator.
         (a)   Three completed and signed copies of an application for site
plan review.
         (b)   Eighteen individually folded copies of the site plan.
         (c)   Evidence that the plan has been submitted for review to affected
county, state and federal agencies, including but not limited to the Wayne
County Department of Roads, Wayne County Drain Commissioner, Wayne County
Health Department, and Michigan Department of Transportation.
         (d)   The required review fee.
      (2)   These materials must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator in
sufficient time to allow review by city staff and consultants prior to the
Planning Commission workshop at which the review will occur. The Zoning
Administrator shall determine what is “sufficient time,” based on the scope and
complexity of the proposal.
   (B)   Distribution of plans. Upon submission of all required application
materials and following completion of all items required by the adopted site
plan review manual, the proposed site plan shall be placed on the next open
Planning Commission workshop agenda. The site plan and application shall be
distributed by the Zoning Administrator to appropriate city officials and the
City Planner for review. If deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator, the
plans may also be submitted to the City Engineer and\or Director of Public
Services for review.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.403 REVIEW AND ACTION.
   (A)   Review. The Planning Commission shall hold regular meetings, and may
call special meetings to consider applications requesting action based on this
section and P.A. 110 of 2006, as amended. The Planning Commission shall review
the reports of the appropriate city staff and consultants and discuss the
findings and recommendations with the applicant prior to making a decision.
   (B)   Request for revisions. Upon review of the site plan proposal, the
Planning Commission may require the applicant to revise the plans or supply
additional information. The applicant shall submit any requested revised plans
for review prior to formal action being taken. All review fees must be paid
prior to any review. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to consult with
city staff and consultants during this revision process. Action on the site
plan shall remain tabled until the applicant has provided a substantially
complete plan for review by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Public hearing. A site plan involving use(s) subject to special land
use approval or Planned Development shall require a public hearing. After
payment of fees, the Zoning Administrator may set the date of the public
hearing for a regular or special meeting of the Planning Commission.
   (D)   Submission of plans for final review. Eighteen individually folded
copies of the revised plan shall be submitted for final review at least ten
days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which review scheduled. The
revised plan shall be distributed to the appropriate reviewing parties by the
zoning Administrator.
   (E)   Final action. The Planning Commission is authorized to take the
following final action on a site plan subject to guidelines in this chapter.
      Approval
      Approval with conditions
      Denial
      Table the site plan
      (1)   Approval. Upon determination that a site plan in full compliance
with the standards and requirements of these regulations and other applicable
city regulations and laws, approval shall be granted.
      (2)   Approval with conditions.  
         (a)   Upon determination that a site plan is in compliance except for
minor modifications, the conditions for approval shall be identified and the
applicant shall be given the opportunity to correct the site plan. Conditions
may include the requirement to obtain variances or to obtain approvals from
other agencies. For example, as a condition of approval, the Planning
Commission may delegate the responsibility for final approval of engineering
and other technical issues to the City Engineer or other appropriate staff or
consultants. If a plan is approved subject to conditions, the applicant shall
submit a revised plan with a revision date, indicating full compliance with the
required conditions.
         (b)   The Planning Commission may require that the applicant resubmit
the site plan for final approval by the Planning Commission after conditions
have been met. The Planning Commission may waive its right to review the
revised plan, and delegate authority to the Zoning Administrator to review and
approve a revised site plan on the Commission’s behalf after required
conditions have been addressed. The Planning Commission may require that the
Zoning Administrator secure a favorable recommendation from the City Planner
and/or City Engineer prior to final approval of the revised plan.
      (3)   Denial. Upon determination by the Planning Commission that a site
plan does not comply with the standards and regulations set forth in these
regulations, or that the submittal requires extensive revision to comply with
standards and regulations, approval of the site plan shall be denied.
      (4)   Tabling. Upon determination by the Planning Commission that a site
plan is not sufficiently complete for approval or rejection, or upon a request
by the applicant, the Planning Commission may table consideration of a site
plan until a later meeting.
   (F)   Recording of site plan review action. 
      (1)   Each action taken with reference to a site plan review shall be
duly recorded in the minutes of the Planning Commission. The grounds for action
taken upon each site plan shall also be recorded in the minutes.
      (2)   After the Planning Commission has taken final action on a site
plan, the Planning Commission secretary shall clearly mark three copies of the
application and final site plans “Approved” or “Denied,” as appropriate, with
the date that action was taken. One marked copy will be returned to the
applicant and the other two copies will be kept on file by the city.
   (G)   Procedure after site plan approval. 
      (1)   Building permit. Following final approval of the site plan by the
Planning Commission, the applicant may apply to the city for a building permit.
The issuance of a building permit shall be subject to the review of
construction plans by the Building Department, and, if deemed necessary by the
Building Official, the City Engineer. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to obtain all applicable city, county, or state permits prior to
issuance of a building permit.
      (2)   Approval expiration. Site plan approval becomes null and void if
substantial construction has not commenced within 12 months following the final
approval of the site plan by the Planning Commission, or if construction has
not been completed within 12 months after it commenced following the issuance
of a Building Permit. In such a case, the applicant shall file a new
application. Review by the Planning Commission of the new application and site
plan shall be required.
      (3)   Approval extensions. Upon written request of the applicant, prior
to the expiration of a previously granted approval, the Planning Commission may
review the circumstances surrounding a failure to meet the required deadlines.
The Planning Commission may grant an extension of up to 12 months to an
approval, if it finds that the approved site plan continues to adequately
represent current conditions on and surrounding the site, and that the site
plan conforms to the standards of the city regulations in affect at the time of
the applicant's request for an extension.
      (4)   Scanning of documents. Prior to occupancy, city approved, stamped,
“as built” plans, specifications, and all correspondence shall be scanned and
transferred to an imaging system, and submitted to the Community Developer
Department for storage as a digital version of the scanned record on an optical
storage disc, in accordance with PA 116 of 1992, § 2, which provides for the
storage and reproduction of public records. The disc shall be formatted as
required by the Community Development Department.
      (5)   Application for certificate of occupancy. Following building
construction and completion of site work, the applicant may apply to the city
for a certificate of occupancy or a temporary certificate of occupancy from the
Building Official in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
154.466. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to obtain the required
certificates prior to any occupancy of the property.
      (6)   Site maintenance after approval.  
         (a)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a property for
which site plan approval has been granted to maintain the property in
accordance with the approved site design on a continuing basis until the
property is razed, new zoning regulations supersede the regulations upon which
site plan approval was based, or a new site design is approved following
Planning Commission review.
         (b)   Any property owner who fails to maintain an approved site plan
in full compliance with approvals granted by the Planning Commission according
to the provisions of these regulations, shall be deemed in violation of the use
provisions of these regulations.
   (H)   Revocation.  An approved site plan may be revoked by the Planning
Commission if construction on the site is not completed or is not progressing
in a manner consistent with the approved plans. In such a case, the site plan
shall be placed on the agenda of a Planning Commission meeting for a public
hearing. The Zoning Administrator shall cause written notice to be provided to
the applicant at least ten days prior to the meeting, and shall publish notice
of the hearing no later than five days prior to the date and time. The notice
shall reduce all alleged inconsistencies and violations to writing. The Zoning
Administrator, the Building Official, the applicant, and other interested
persons shall be allowed to present information and testimony to the Planning
Commission at the hearing. If the Planning Commission finds that an
inconsistency or violation of the approved site plan exists at the time of the
hearing, then, by a majority vote of attending members, the Planning Commission
may revoke the approval of the site plan and order the site returned to its
original condition by a date certain. Failure to comply with such an order
shall be deemed a violation of the use provisions of these regulations.
   (I)   Modification to approved plan. A previously approved site plan may be
subsequently modified, subject to the requirements of §
154.406 Minor Site Modifications.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 96-006, passed 7-1-96; Am. Ord. 06-005,
passed 2-13-06; Am. Ord. 09-008, passed 4-20-09; Am. Ord. 20-003, passed 7-6-
20) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.404 REQUIRED INFORMATION.
   The following information shall be included on all site plans, where
applicable.
   (A)   Application form. The application form shall contain the following
information.
      (1)   Applicant's name and address.
      (2)   Name and address of property owner, if different from applicant.
      (3)   Common description of property and complete legal description,
including the parcel tax identification (sidwell) number(s).
      (4)   Total gross and net acreage of the site.
      (5)   Existing zoning.
      (6)   Proposed use of land and of proposed development, if applicable.
      (7)   Proposed buildings to be constructed, including square feet of
gross floor area.
      (8)   Proof of property ownership.
      (9)   Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of engineers, attorneys,
architects, and other professionals associated with the project.
      (10)   Any additional information required by the site plan review manual
adopted by the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Descriptive and identification data. Site plans shall consist of an
overall p1an for the entire development, drawn to a scale of not less than one
inch equals 20 feet for property less than one acre, one inch equals 30 feet
for property larger than one acre but less than three acres, and one inch
equals 50 feet for property larger than three acres. Sheet size shall be at
least 24 inches by 36 inches. The following descriptive and identification
information shall be included on all site plans:
      (1)   Applicant's name, address, and telephone number.
      (2)   Title block indicating the name of the development.
      (3)   Scale.
      (4)   Northpoint.
      (5)   Dates of submission and revisions (month, day, year).
      (6)   General location map drawn to scale with northpoint.
      (7)   Legal and common description of property, including parcel
identification (sidwell) number(s).
      (8)   The dimensions of all lots and property lines, showing the
relationship of the site to abutting properties. If the site is a part of a
larger parcels, the plan should indicate the boundaries of total land holding.
      (9)   A schedule for completing the project, including the phasing or
timing of all proposed developments, if applicable.
      (10)   Identification and seal of an architect, engineer, land surveyor,
licensed community planner or landscape architect who prepared the plan.
      (11)   Written description of proposed land use.
      (12)   Zoning classification of applicant's parcel and all abutting
parcels.
      (13)   Proximity to driveways serving adjacent parcels.
      (14)   Proximity to major thoroughfare(s).
      (15)   Notation of any variances that have or must be secured.
      (16)   Net acreage (minus rights-of-way) and total acreage, to the
nearest 1/10 acre.
      (17)   Any additional information required by the site plan review manual
adopted by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Site data.  
      (1)   Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas, and
other improvements on the site and on parcels within 100 feet of the site.
      (2)   Front, side and rear setback dimensioned from minimum location(s).
      (3)   Topography on the site and within 100 feet of the site at two-foot
contour intervals, referenced to a U.S.G.S. benchmark.
      (4)   Proposed site plan features, including building, roadway widths and
names, and parking areas.
      (5)   Dimensions and centerline of existing and proposed roads and road
rights-of-way.
      (6)   Acceleration, deceleration, and passing lanes, where required.
      (7)   Proposed location of driveway entrances and on-site driveways with
dimensioned minimum and maximum widths.
      (8)   Typical cross-section of proposed roads and driveways, if
applicable.
      (9)   Location of existing drainage courses and drains, open or enclosed
and with elevations and/or inverts.
      (10)   Location of existing or proposed underground improvements such as
storage tanks, culverts, and water gates.
      (11)   Location of sidewalks within the site and within the right-of-way.
      (12)   Exterior lighting locations and method of shielding.
      (13)   Trash receptacle locations and method of screening, if applicable.
      (14)   Transformer pad location(s) and method of screening, if
applicable.
      (15)   Parking spaces, including delineated handicap spaces, typical
dimensions of spaces, indication of total number of spaces, drives, and method
of surfacing.
      (16)   Information needed to calculate required parking in accordance
with Zoning Ordinance standards.
      (17)   The location of lawns and landscaped areas, including required
landscaped greenbelts. The percentage of the site used for open space.
      (18)   Landscape plan, including location, size, type and quantity of
proposed shrubs, trees and other live plant material. A maintenance plan for
landscaping shall be stated on the plan.
      (19)   Location, sizes, and types of existing trees five inches or
greater in diameter, measured at one foot above grade, before and after
proposed development.
      (20)   Cross-section of proposed berms.
      (21)   Location, description, and County Registrar of Deeds filing
identification of all easements for public right-of-way, utilities, access,
shared access, and drainage.
      (22)   Designation of fire lanes.
      (23)   Delineation of dedicated loading/unloading area.
      (24)   The location of any outdoor storage of materials and the manner by
which it will be screened.
      (25)   Any additional information required by the site plan review manual
adopted by the Planning Commission.
   (D)   Building and structure details.
      (1)   Location, height, and outside dimensions of all proposed buildings
or structures.
      (2)   Indication of the number of stores and number of commercial or
office units contained in the building.
      (3)   Building floor plans.
      (4)   Total floor area.
      (5)   Proposed usable floor area.
      (6)   Location, size, height, and lighting information of all proposed
signs.
      (7)   Proposed fences and walls, including typical cross-section and
height above the ground on both sides.
      (8)   Architectural elevations of building facades and walls, drawn to a
scale of one inch equals four feet, or another scale approved by the Zoning
Administrator and adequate to determine compliance with the requirements of
these regulations. Elevations of proposed buildings shall indicate type of
building materials, roof design, dimensions of projections and architectural
features, canopies, awnings and overhangs, screen walls and accessory
buildings, and any outdoor or roof-located mechanical equipment, such as air
conditioning units, heating units, and transformers and related screening. The
Zoning Administrator may permit photographs in lieu of evaluations for existing
buildings where minor or no change to the facade is proposed.
      (9)   Any additional information required by the site plan review manual
adopted by the Planning Commission.
   (E)   Information concerning utilities, drainage, and related issues.  
      (1)   Schematic layout of existing and proposed sanitary sewers
connections; water mains, and water service leads; hydrant locations that
service the site; and the location and size or capacity of gas, electric, and
telephone lines supply lines and building leads.
      (2)   Location and size or capacity of exterior drains, catch basins,
retention/detention areas, culverts and other facilities designed to collect,
store, or transport storm or waste water. The point of discharge for all drains
and pipes must be specified on the site plan. Compliance with city discharge
standards must be noted.
      (3)   Indication of site grading, drainage patterns, and proposed
contours.
      (4)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures.
      (5)   Proposed finish grades on the site, including the finish grades of
all buildings, driveways, walkways, and parking lots.
      (6)   Listing of types and quantities of hazardous substances and
polluting materials that will be used or stored on-site at the facility in
quantities greater than 25 gallons per month.
      (7)   Areas to be used for the storage, use, loading/unloading,
recycling, or disposal of hazardous substances and polluting materials,
including interior and exterior areas.
      (8)   Location of underground storage tanks.
      (9)   Delineation of areas on the site that are known or suspected to be
contaminated, together with a report on the status of site cleanup.
      (10)   Any additional information required by the site plan review manual
adopted by the Planning Commission.
   (F)   Information concerning residential development.
      (1)   The number, type and location of each type of residential unit
(one-bedroom units, two- bedroom units, and the like).
      (2)   Density calculations by type of residential unit (dwelling units
per acre).
      (3)   Lot coverage calculations.
      (4)   Floor plans of typical buildings with square feet of floor area.
      (5)   Garage and carport locations and details, if proposed.
      (6)   Details of the pedestrian circulation system.
      (7)   Location and names of roads and internal drives with an indication
of how the proposed circulation system will connect with the existing adjacent
roads. The plan must indicate whether proposed roads are intended to be private
or dedicated to the public.
      (8)   Community building location, dimensions, floor plans, and
elevations, if applicable.
      (9)    Swimming pool fencing detail, including height and type of fence,
if applicable.
      (10)   Location and size of recreation open areas.
      (11)   Indication of type of recreation facilities proposed for
recreation area.
      (12)   Any additional information required by the site plan review manual
adopted by the Planning Commission.
   (G)   Additional information.  
      (1)   Information related to condominium development. The following
information shall be provided with all site plans that include a development
involving condominium ownership.
         (a)   Condominium documents, including the proposed Master Deed,
condominium by-laws, restrictive covenants, and easements.
         (b)   Condominium subdivision plan requirements, as specified in § 66
of Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 - 559.272, as amended, and
Rule 401 of the Condominium Rules promulgated by the Michigan Department of
Commerce, Corporation and Securities Bureau.
      (2)   Items not applicable. If any of the items listed are not applicable
to a particular site, the following must be provided on the site plan.
         (a)   A statement of each item considered not applicable.
         (b)   The reasons why each listed item in not considered applicable.
      (3)   Other data that may be required. Any additional information
required by the site plan review manual adopted by the Planning Commission must
be supplied. Other data may be required if deemed necessary by the Planning
Commission or Zoning Administrator to determine compliance with provisions in
these regulations. Such information may include traffic studies, market
analysis, environmental assessment and evaluation of the demand on public
facilities and services.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.405 STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL.
   The following criteria shall be used as a basis upon which site plans will
be reviewed and approved.
   (A)   Adequacy of information. The site plan shall include all required
information in sufficiently complete and understandable form to provide an
accurate description of the proposed uses and structures.
   (B)   Site design characteristics. All elements of the site design shall be
harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, the size and
type of parcel, the character of adjoining land uses, and the type and size of
buildings. The site shall be developed so as not to impede the normal and
orderly development or improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted
by these regulations.
   (C)   Appearance. Landscaping, earth berms, fencing, signs, walls, and other
site features shall be designed and located on the site so that the proposed
development is aesthetically pleasing and harmonious with nearby existing or
future developments.
   (D)   Compliance with district. The site plan shall comply with the district
requirements for minimum floor space, height of building, lot size, open space,
density and all other requirements set forth in
Appendix A, the Schedule of Regulations, unless otherwise provided in these
regulations.
   (E)   Privacy. The site design shall provide reasonable visual and sound
privacy. Fences, walls, barriers, and landscaping shall be used, as
appropriate, for the protection and enhancement of property and the safety and
privacy of occupants and uses.
   (F)   Emergency vehicle access. All buildings or groups of buildings shall
be so arranged as to permit convenient and direct emergency vehicle access.
   (G)   Ingress and egress. Every structure or dwelling unit shall be provided
with adequate means of ingress and egress via public streets and walkways.
   (H)   Pedestrian circulation. The site plan shall provide a pedestrian
circulation system that is insulated as completely as is reasonably possible
from the vehicular circulation system.
   (I)   Vehicular and pedestrian circulation layout. The arrangement of public
and common ways for vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall respect the
pattern of existing streets or pedestrian ways in the vicinity of the site. The
width of streets and drives shall be appropriate for the volume of traffic they
will carry. In order to ensure public safety and promote efficient traffic flow
and turning movements, the applicant may be required to limit street access
points or construct a secondary access road.
   (J)   Drainage. Appropriate measures shall be taken to insure that the
removal or drainage of surface water will not adversely affect adjoining
properties or the capacity of the public drainage system. Provisions shall be
made for a feasible storm drainage system, the construction of storm water
collection, storage and transportation facilities, and the prevention of
erosion. Surface water on all paved areas shall be collected at intervals so
that it will not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic and will not create
nuisance pending in paved areas. Final grades may be required to conform to
existing and future grades of adjacent properties. Grading and drainage plans
shall be subject to review by the DPS Director or the City Engineer.
   (K)    Soil erosion and sedimentation. The proposed development shall
include measures to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation during and upon
completion of construction, in accordance with current county and city
standards.
   (L)   Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting shall be designed so that it is
deflected away from adjoining properties, visual glare is minimized, and so
that it does not impede vision of drivers along adjacent streets.
   (M) Public services. Adequate services and utilities, including water,
sewage disposal, sanitary sewer, and storm water control services, shall be
available or provided, and shall be designed with sufficient capacity and
durability to properly serve the development.
   (N)    Screening. Off-street parking, loading and unloading areas, outside
refuse storage areas, and other storage areas that are visible from adjacent
homes or from public roads, shall be screened by walls or landscaping of
adequate height.
   (O)   Danger from hazards.  
      (1)   The level of vulnerability to injury or loss from incidents
involving hazardous materials or processes shall not exceed the capability of
the city to respond to hazardous incidents so as to prevent injury and loss of
life and property. In making such an evaluation, the city shall consider the
location, type, characteristics, quantities, and use of hazardous materials or
processes in relation to the personnel, training, equipment and materials, and
emergency response plans and capabilities of the city.
      (2)   Sites that include storage of hazardous materials or waste, fuels,
salt, or chemicals shall be designed to prevent spills and discharges of
polluting materials to the surface of the ground, groundwater, and public sewer
system.
   (P)   Health and safety concerns. Any use in any zoning district shall
comply with applicable federal state, county, and local health and pollution
laws and regulations with respect to noise; dust, smoke and other air
pollutants; vibration; glare and heat; fire and explosive hazards; games;
electromagnetic radiation; radioactive materials; and toxic and hazardous
materials.
   (Q)   Sequence of development. All development phases shall be designed in
logical sequence to ensure that each phase will independently function in a
safe, convenient and efficient manner without being dependent upon subsequent
improvements in a later phase or on other sites.
   (R)   Coordination with adjacent sites. All site features, including
circulation, parking, building orientation, landscaping, lighting, utilities,
common facilities, and open space shall be coordinated with adjacent
properties.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.406 MINOR SITE MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Determination of minor modification. The Zoning Administrator shall
determine if proposed modifications to an existing site or structure are minor
in accordance with the guidelines in this section. In order to make a
determination, the Zoning Administration may solicit comments and
recommendations from the City Attorney, City Planner, City Engineer, and Public
Safety officials, as deemed necessary. Minor modifications that require a
variance, special land use approval, Planned Development, or the construction
of a new principal building or structure are not considered a minor site
modification and shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning
Commission.
      (1)   Minor modification defined. Minor modifications include the
following changes in use or site construction activities that do not
detrimentally affect the character or intensity of the area.
         (a)   An addition to an existing building that does not increase or
decrease the floor area by more than 15% or 1,000 square feet.
         (b)   Re-occupancy of a building by a permitted use requiring
modifications to site improvements.
         (c)   Changes to building height.
         (d)   Additions or alterations to the landscape plan or landscape
materials.
         (e)   Relocation or resizing of utility supply lines or service
connections.
         (f)   Relocation or screening of the trash receptacle.
         (g)   Alterations to the internal parking layout of an off-street lot.
         (h)   Other building or site improvements deemed similar by the Zoning
Administrator
      (2)   Modifications not deemed minor. If the modifications are not deemed
minor by the Zoning Administrator, then review and approval of the changes by
the Planning Commission shall be required.
   (B)   Review of minor site modifications. The Zoning Administrator shall
determine if an applicant must submit a site plan consistent the requirements
of §
154.404 or sketch plan consistent with the minimum information requirements of
division (D) of this section. Minor modifications to an approved site plan
shall be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with
all standards and requirements of this zoning ordinance and all applicable city
ordinances.
   (C)   Required information for sketch plans. The following information shall
accompany or be included on all sketch plans.
      (1)   An application form as described in Sec.
154.404(A) shall be prepared and submitted with the sketch plan.
      (2)   Sketch plans shall consist of an overall plan for the building and
site or part of a site related to the building. The plan shall be drawn to a
scale of not less than one inch equals 20 feet for property less than one acre,
one inch equals 30 feet for property larger than one acre but less than three
acres, and one inch equals 50 feet for property larger than three acres. Sheet
size shall be at least 24 inches by 36 inches. The following description and
identification information shall be included on all sketch plans.
         (a)   Scale and northpoint.
         (b)   Name, address, and phone number of the applicant and the person
preparing the drawing.
         (c)   Zoning classification of the subject site.
         (d)   Property boundary lines and dimensions; if more than one lot is
included in the site, the lot lines of each lot shall be indicated.
         (e)   Front, side, and rear setbacks dimensioned from the minimum
location(s).
         (f)   Exiting and proposed driveways and edges of all existing and
proposed paved surfaces, as required.
         (g)   Parking spaces for the use, of the size required by this
chapter.
         (h)   The outline and dimensions of all existing and proposed exterior
building walls on the site.
         (i)   All exterior site improvements or modifications proposed in
conjunction with the use described on the sketch plan, including, but not
limited to, building construction, new pavement, landscaping, trash
receptacles, and site clearing.
         (j)   A written description of the proposed use.
         (k)   A floor plan describing the use of all interior floor space.
(Ord. 20-003, passed 7-6-20)
SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS
§ 154.415 PURPOSE.
   The procedures and standards in this subchapter intended to provide a
consistent and uniform method for review of Special Use proposals. Special Uses
are uses, either public or private, which possess unique characteristics and
therefore cannot be properly classified as permitted uses in a particular
zoning district. These review procedures and standards are intended to
accomplish the following purposes.
   (A)   Ensure full compliance with the standards contained in this chapter
and other applicable local ordinances, and state and federal laws.
   (B)   Achieve efficient use of the land.
   (C)   Prevent adverse impact on adjoining or nearby properties.
   (D)   Protect natural resources.
   (E)   Facilitate development in accordance with the city’s land use
objectives.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.416 PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   Special Use applications shall be submitted in accordance with the following
procedures and requirements, which provide for review and action by the
Planning Commission, followed by optional review by the City Council. Although
a site plan must be submitted with a Special Use application, approval of the
Special Use is required prior to site plan approval.
   (A)   Applicant eligibility. The application shall be submitted by the owner
of an interest in land for which Special Use approval in sought, or by the
owner's designated agent. The applicant or a designated representative should
be present at all scheduled review meetings or consideration of the proposal
may be tabled.
   (B)   Application forms and documentation. The application for Special Use
shall be made on the forms and according to the guidelines in the city’s site
plan manual, as provided by the Building or Planning Department.
   (C)   Application data requirements. A site plan shall be submitted with the
Special Use application. In addition, the applicant shall complete any forms
and supply any other data that may be required by the Planning Commission, City
Council, or city staff to make the determination required, herein. The
applicant shall provide all necessary written or graphic materials to document
compliance with the standards set forth in section §
154.417, and other regulatory guidelines specified for particular Special Uses
elsewhere in this chapter.
   (D)   Site plan preparation. The site plan shall be prepared in the manner
specified in §§
154.401 through
154.405, the site plan manual, and on the Special Use application form. A site
plan which does not meet the stipulated requirements shall be considered
incomplete and shall therefore not be subject to formal review.
   (E)   Submission of a completed plan. The special use application materials,
required fees, and six copies of the completed site plan shall be submitted to
the Building Department for review.
   (F)   Review by the city officials. The Zoning Administrator and other
appropriate city officials shall review the site plan and application
materials, and prepare a written review, which shall specify any deficiencies
in the site plan and application and make recommendations as appropriate.
   (G)   Submission of a revised plan and special use application. The
applicant shall revise the site plan and application materials, based on the
recommendations set forth in the Zoning Administrator's review. The applicant
shall then submit 25 copies of the revised plan for further review by staff and
the Planning Commission.
   (H)   Planning Commission consideration. After all application materials
have been received and review fees paid, the application shall be reviewed in
accordance with following procedures.
      (1)   Acceptance for processing. The application shall be placed on the
agenda of the next available scheduled Planning Commission workshop and a
public hearing shall be scheduled.
      (2)   Public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in
a newspaper which circulates in the city, and sent by mail or personal delivery
to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all
persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of
the property in question, and to the occupants of all structures within 300
feet. Notification shall be made in accordance with the provisions in the
Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Act 101 of 2006, as amended.
      (3)   Planning Commission review. Following the public hearing, the
Special Use proposal and plan shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission,
based on the standards and regulations in this section.
      (4)   Plan revision. If the Planning Commission determines that revisions
are necessary to bring the Special Use proposal into compliance with applicable
standards and regulations, the applicant shall be given the opportunity to
submit a revised application and site plan. Following submission of revised
application materials, the Special Use proposal shall be placed on the agenda
of the next available scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission for further
review and possible action.
   (I)   Planning Commission determination.  
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall review the application for Special
Use, together with the public hearing findings and reports and recommendations
from the Building Official, City Planner, City Engineer, public safety
officials, and other reviewing agencies. The Planning Commission shall then
make a determination on the Special Use application, based on the requirements
and standards of this chapter. The Planning Commission may approve, approve
with conditions, or deny a Special Use request as follows.
         (a)   Approval. Upon determination by the Planning Commission that the
final plan for Special Use is in compliance with the standards and requirements
of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and laws, approval shall be
granted.
         (b)   Approval with conditions. The Planning Commission may impose
reasonable conditions with the approval of a Special Use proposal, to the
extent authorized by law. Conditions imposed shall meet all of the following
requirements.
            1.   Conditions shall be designed to protect natural resources, the
health, safety and welfare, and the social and economic well-being of those who
will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners
immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the community as
a whole.
            2.   Conditions shall be related to the valid exercise of the
police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity.
            3.   Conditions shall be necessary to meet the intent and purpose
of this chapter, related to the standards established in this chapter for the
land use or activity under consideration, and necessary to ensure compliance
with those standards.
         (c)   Denial. Upon determination by the Planning Commission that a
Special Use proposal does not comply with the standards and regulations set
forth in this chapter, or otherwise would be injurious to the public health,
safety, welfare, and orderly development of the city, the Special Use proposal
shall be denied.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall prepare and transmit a report to the
City Council stating its conclusions and decision, the basis for its decision,
and any conditions relating to an affirmative decision.
   (J)   Submission of plans for City Council review.  After the Planning
Commission makes its determination, the Special Use application and site plan
shall be submitted to the City Council for possible consideration. The City
Council shall have 20 days to formally take the application under consideration
in a public meeting or to formally decide that they will consider the
application at a future public meeting. If the City Council decides not to take
the application under consideration, the decision by the Planning Commission
shall become final. If the City Council does consider and act on the
application, then the Planning Commission’s decision shall be considered a
recommendation and the decision by the City Council shall become final.
   (K)   City Council determination. If the City Council chooses to consider a
Special Use application, the City Council shall make a determination based on
review of the application and site plan, together with the findings of the
Planning Commission, and the reports and recommendation from the Building
Official, City Planner, City Engineer, Public safety officials, and other
reviewing agencies. Following completion of its review, the City Council shall
approve, approve with conditions, or deny a Special Use proposal in accordance
with the guidelines described previously in division (I) of this section.
   (M)    Recording of Planning Commission and City Council action. Each action
taken with respect to a Special Use shall be duly recorded in the minutes of
the Planning Commission or City Council, as appropriate. The minutes shall
record the findings of fact relative to each Special Use proposal, the grounds
for the action taken, and any conditions imposed in conjunction with approval.
   (N)   Affect of approval. Upon approval, a Special Use shall be deemed a
conforming use permitted in the district in which it in proposed, subject to
any conditions imposed and final approval of the site plan. Approval shall
affect only the lot or portion thereof on which the proposed use is located.
   (O)   Zoning Board of Appeals authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
not have the authority to consider an appeal of a decision by the City Council
or Planning Commission concerning a Special Use proposal. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall have the authority to consider variances associated with a
Special Use site plan which relate to setbacks and dimensional requirements.
   (P)   Application for a building permit. Prior to issuance of a building
permit, the applicant shall submit proof of the following.
      (1)   Final approval of the Special Use application.
      (2)   Final approval of the site plan.
      (3)   Final approval of the engineering plans.
      (4)   Acquisition of all other applicable city, county, or state permits.
   (Q)   Expiration of Special Use approval. If construction has not commenced
within 24 months of final approval, the approval becomes null and void and a
new application for Special Use shall be required. Upon written request from
the applicant, a 12-month extension may be granted by the body which made the
final decision on the initial request, if it finds that the approved Special
Use application and site plan adequately represent current conditions on and
surrounding the site. The written request for extension must be received prior
to the site plan expiration date or a new application for Special Use review
will be required.
   (R)   Revocation of Special Use approval. Approval of a Special Use proposal
and site plan may be revoked by the body which made the final decision if
construction is not in conformance with the approved plans. In such a case, the
Building Official shall ask that the Special Use proposal be placed on the
agenda of the Planning Commission or City Council, as appropriate. Written
notice shall be provided to the applicant at least five days prior to the
meeting at which the case will be considered. The applicant shall be given the
opportunity to present information and to answer questions. The Planning
Commission or City Council, as appropriate, may revoke approval if it finds
that a violation exists and has not been remedied prior to the hearing.
   (S)   Performance guarantee. The Planning Commission or City Council may
require that a performance guarantee be deposited with the city to ensure
faithful completion of the improvements. Improvements that shall be covered by
the performance guarantee include, but are not necessarily limited to
landscaping, open-space improvements, streets, lighting, and sidewalks. The
performance guarantee shall comply with the requirements in §
154.036.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 13-014, passed 9-9-13; Am. Ord. 20-003,
passed 7-6-20)  Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.417 STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL.
   Approval of a Special Use proposal shall be based on the determination that
the proposed use will comply will all applicable requirements of this chapter,
including site plan review criteria set forth in this subchapter, applicable
site development standards for specific uses set forth elsewhere in this
chapter, and the following standards.
   (A)   Compatibility with adjacent uses. The proposed Special Use shall be
designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be compatible with uses on
surrounding land. The site design shall minimize the impact of site activity on
surrounding properties. In determining whether this requirement has been met,
consideration shall be given to the following.
      (1)   The location and screening of vehicular circulation and parking
areas in relation to surrounding development.
      (2)   The location and screening of outdoor storage, outdoor activity or
work areas, and mechanical equipment in relation to surrounding development.
      (3)   The hours of operation of the proposed use. Approval of a Special
Use may be conditioned upon operation within specified hours considered
appropriate to ensure minimal impact on surrounding uses.
      (4)   The bulk, placement, and materials of construction of the proposed
use in relation to surrounding uses.
   (B)   Compatibility with the Master Plan. The proposed Special Use shall be
consistent with the general principles and objectives of the adopted city
Master Plan.
   (C)   Compliance with applicable regulations. The proposed Special Use shall
be in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and
ordinances.
   (D)   Use of adjacent property. The Special Use shall not interfere with the
use and enjoyment of adjacent property.
   (E)   Public services. The proposed Special Use shall not exceed the
capacity of existing and available public services, including but not
necessarily limited to utilities, public roads, police and fire protection
services, and educational services, unless the project proposal contains an
acceptable plan for providing necessary services or evidence that such services
will be available by the time the Special Use is completed.
   (F)   Impact of traffic. The location of the proposed Special Use shall
within the zoning district shall minimize the impact of traffic generated by
the proposed use. In determining whether this requirement has been met,
consideration shall be given to the following.
      (1)   Proximity and access to major thoroughfares.
      (2)   Estimated traffic generated by the proposed use.
      (3)   Proximity and relation to intersections.
(4)   Adequacy of driver sight distances.
      (5)   Location of and access to off-street parking.
      (6)   Required vehicular turning movements.
      (7)   Provision of pedestrian traffic.
   (G)   Enhancement of surrounding environment. The proposed Special Use shall
provide the maximum feasible enhancement of the surrounding environment, and
shall not unreasonably interfere with or discourage the appropriate development
and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonably affect their value. In
determining whether this requirement has been met, consideration shall be given
to the following.
       (1)   The provision of landscaping and other site amenities. Provision
of additional landscaping over and above the specific requirements of this
chapter may be required as a condition of approval of a Special Use.
      (2)   The bulk, placement, and materials of construction of proposed
structures in relation to surrounding uses.
   (H)   Impact on public health, safety, and welfare. The proposed Special Use
shall not involve any activities, processes, materials, equipment, or
conditions of operation, and shall not be located or designed in a manner that
is detrimental to public health, safety, and welfare. In determining whether
this requirement has been met, consideration shall be given to the production
of traffic, noise, vibration, noise, fumes, odors, dust, glare, and light.
   (I)   Isolation of existing uses. The location of the proposed Special Use
shall not result in a small residential area being substantially surrounded by
nonresidential development, and further, the location of the proposed Special
Use shall not result in a small nonresidential area being substantially
surrounded by incompatible uses.
   (J)   Need for the proposed use. The Planning Commission and/or City Council
shall find that a need for the proposed use exists in the community at the time
the Special Use proposal is considered.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS
§ 154.430 INTENT.
   The procedures and standards in this subchapter are intended to provide a
consistent and uniform method for review of planned development proposals. The
planned development regulations are intended to provide design and regulatory
flexibility so as to accomplish the objectives of this chapter, using
innovative and effective planning. The review procedures and standards set
forth in this subchapter are intended to ensure full compliance with the
standards contained in this chapter, particularly §§
154.330 through
154.336, and other applicable local ordinances, and state and federal laws.
These regulations are further intended to achieve efficient use of land, to
protect natural resources, and to prevent adverse impact on adjoining or nearby
properties. It is the intent of these provisions to encourage cooperation and
consultation between the city and the applicant so as to facilitate development
in accordance with the city’s land use objectives.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.431 AMENDMENT REQUIRED.
   The approval of a Planned Development application shall require an amendment
to the Zoning ordinance to revise the zoning map and designate the subject
property as Planned Development. Approval granted under this subchapter,
including all aspects of the final plan and conditions imposed on it, shall
constitute an inseparable part of the zoning amendment.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.432 REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   Planned Development applications shall be submitted in accordance with the
following procedures and requirements, which provide for detailed review of
Planned Development proposals by the Planning Commission, followed by review
and approval by the City Council.
   (A)   Applicant eligibility. The application shall be submitted by the owner
of an interest in land for which Planned Deve1opment approval is sought, or by
the owner's designated agent. The applicant or a designated representative
shall be present at all scheduled review meetings or consideration of the
proposal may be tabled.
   (B)   Application forms and documentation. The application for Planned
Development shall be made on the forms and according to the guidelines
specified in the city's site plan manual, as provided by the Building
Department.
   (C)   Site plan preparation. The site plan shall be prepared in the manner
specified in this subchapter, in the city's site plan manual, and on the
Planned Development application form. A site plan which does not meet the
stipulated requirements shall be considered incomplete and shall therefore not
be subject to formal review.
   (D)   Submission of a completed plan. The Planned Development application
materials, required fees, and sufficient copies of the completed site plan
shall be submitted to the Building Department for review.
   (E)   Review by the city officials. The Zoning Administrator and other
appropriate city officials shall review the site plan and application materials
and prepare a written review, which shall specify any deficiencies in the site
plan and make recommendations as appropriate.
   (F)   Submission of a revised plan and Planned Development application. The
applicant shall revise the site plan and application materials, based on the
recommendations set forth in the Zoning Administrator's review. The applicant
shall then submit sufficient copies of the revised plan for further review by
staff and the Planning Commission. Copies of the site plan and application
shall also be transmitted to the City Council for information purposes.
   (G)   Planning Commission consideration. After all application materials
have been received and review fees paid, the application shall be reviewed in
accordance with following procedures.
      (1)   Acceptance for processing. The application shall be placed on the
agenda of the next available scheduled Planning Commission workshop, and a
public hearing shall be scheduled.
      (2)   Public hearing. The public hearing shall be scheduled in the same
manner as required for Special Uses in §
154.416 of this chapter and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006,
as amended. The public hearing and notice required by the division shall be
regarded as fulfilling the public hearing and notice requirements for amendment
of this chapter. The Planning Commission and City Council may hold a joint
public hearing on a Planned Development application if they so desire.
      (3)   Planning Commission review. Following the public hearing, the
Planned Development proposal and plan shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission in relation to applicable standards and regulations and consistency
with the intent and spirit of the Planned Development concept.
      (4)   Plan revision. If the Planning Commission determines that revisions
are necessary to bring the Planned Development proposal into compliance with
applicable standards and regulations, the applicant shall be given the
opportunity to submit a revised plan. Following submission of a revised plan,
the Planned Development proposal shall be placed on the agenda of the next
available scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission for further review and
possible action.
   (H)   Planning Commission determination. The Planning Commission shall
review the application for Planned Development, together with the public
hearing findings and reports and recommendations from the Building official,
City Planner, City Engineer, Public Safety Officials, and other reviewing
agencies. The Planning Commission shall then make a recommendation to the City
Council based on the requirements and standards of this chapter. The Planning
Commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial as
follows.
      (1)   Approval. Upon determination by the Planning Commission that the
final plan for Planned Development is in compliance with the standards and
requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and laws, the
Planning Commission shall recommend approval.
      (2)   Approval with conditions.  
         (a)   The Planning Commission may recommend that the City Council
impose reasonable conditions with the approval of a Planned Development
proposal, to the extent authorized by law, for the following purposes.
            1.   To insure that public services and facilities affected by the
proposed development will be capable of accommodating increased public service
loads caused by the development.
            2.   To protect the natural environment and conserve natural
resources and energy.
            3.   To insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land.
            4.   To promote the use of land in a socially and economically
desirable manner.
            5.   To protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the
individuals in the development and those immediately adjacent, and the
community as a whole.
            6.   To achieve the intent and purpose of this chapter.
         (b)   In the event that the Planned Development is approved subject to
conditions, the conditions shall become a part of the record of approval, and
shall be modified only as provided herein.
      (3)   Denial. Upon determination by the Planning Commission that a
Planned Development proposal does not comply with the standards and regulations
set forth in this chapter, or otherwise would be injurious to the public
health, safety, welfare, and orderly development of the city, the Planning
Commission shall recommend denial. The Planning Commission shall prepare and
transmit a report to the City Council stating its conclusions and
recommendation, the basis for its recommendation, and any recommended
conditions relating to an affirmative decision.
   (I)   Submission of plan for City Council review. After the Planning
Commission makes its recommendation, the applicant shall make any required
revisions and submit sufficient copies of the revised site plan and supporting
materials for City Council review.
   (J)   Public hearing. Upon receipt of a Planned Development plan and
application, the City Council shall schedule a public hearing, unless a joint
public hearing has already occurred, in accordance with division (G) of this
section. The public hearing shall be scheduled in the same manner as required
for Special Uses in §
154.416 of this chapter and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006,
as amended.
   (K)   City Council determination. The City Council shall make a
determination based on review of the final plan together with the findings of
the Planning Commission, and the reports and recommendation from the Building
Official, City Planner, City Engineer, Public Safety Officials, and other
reviewing agencies. Following completion of its review, the City Council shall
approve, approve with conditions, or deny a Planned Development proposal in
accordance with the guidelines described previously in divisions (H) of this
section.
   (L)   Recording of Planning Commission and City Council action. Each action
taken with respect to a Planned Development shall be duly recorded in the
minutes of the Planning Commission or City Council, as appropriate. The grounds
for the action taken shall also be recorded in the minutes.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 13-014, passed 9-9-13) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.433 EFFECT OF APPROVAL.
   Approval of a Planned Development proposal shall constitute an amendment to
the Zoning ordinance. All improvements and use of the site shall be in
conformity with the Planned Development amendment and any conditions imposed.
Notice of the adoption of the amendment shall be published in accordance with
the requirements set forth in §
154.006. The applicant shall record an affidavit with the Register of Deeds
containing the legal description of the entire project, specifying the date of
approval, and declaring that all future improvements will be carried out in
accordance with the approved Planned Development unless an amendment is adopted
by the City Council upon request by the applicant or his/her successors.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.434 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS AUTHORITY.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to consider an
appeal of a decision by the City Council or Planning Commission concerning a
Planned Development proposal.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.435 APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT.
   Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall submit proof of
the following.
   (A)   Final approval of the site plan and Planned Development application.
   (B)   Final approval of the engineering plans.
   (C)   Acquisition of all other applicable city, county, or state permits.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.436 EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL.
   If construction has not commenced within 24 months of final approval, the
approval becomes null and void and a new application for Planned Development
shall be required. The City Council may grant a 12-month extension, upon
written request from the applicant, if it finds that the approved site plan
adequately represents current conditions on and surrounding the site. The
written request for extension must be received prior to the site plan
expiration date. In the event that an approved Planned Development plan becomes
null and void, the city shall initiate proceedings to amend the zoning
classification of the site.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.437 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.
   The Planning Commission or City Council may require that a performance
guarantee be deposited with the city to ensure faithful completion of the
improvements. Improvements that shall be covered by the performance guarantee
include, but are not necessarily limited to landscaping, open space
improvements, streets, lighting, and sidewalks. The performance guarantee shall
comply with the requirements in §
154.036.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.438 REVISION OF APPROVED PLANS.
   (A)   General revisions. An approved Planned Development proposal and plan
may be revised in accordance with the procedures set forth for approval of a
new proposal.
   (B)   Minor changes. Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, minor
changes may be permitted by the Planning Commission, following normal site plan
review procedures outlined in §§
154.401 through
154.405, subject to the following Planning Commission findings.
      (1)   The proposed changes will not affect the initial basis on which
initial approval was granted.
      (2)   The proposed minor changes will not adversely affect the overall
Planned Development in light of the intent and purposes of the development as
stated in §
154.330.
      (3)   The proposed changes will not affect the character or intensity of
use, the general configuration of buildings and uses on the site, vehicular or
pedestrian circulation, drainage patterns, or the demand for public services.
      (4)   Examples of minor changes include, but are not limited to the
following.
         (a)   Additions or alteration to the landscape plan or landscape
materials.
         (b)   Alterations to the internal parking layout of an off-street lot,
provided that the total number of spaces does not change.
         (c)   Relocation of a trash receptacle.
         (d)   An increase in floor area of less than 20% of the initial total
floor area up to 5,000 square feet.
   (C)   Application data requirements. Applications for Planned Development
approval shall include all applicable data required for site plan review as
specified in §§
154.401 through
154.405 and the city’s site plan manual. In addition, the application shall
include the following.
      (1)   An overall plan for the planned development. The overall plan shall
graphically represent the development concept, using maps and illustrations to
indicate each type of use, square footage or acreage allocated to each use,
approximate locations of each principal structure and use in the development,
setbacks, and typical layouts and elevations for each type of use. The overall
plan shall clearly delineate each type of residential use; office, commercial
and other nonresidential use; each type of open space; community facilities and
public areas; and other types of land use.
      (2)   A map and written explanation of the relationship of the proposed
Planned Development to the city's Master Plan.
      (3)   Information concerning traffic generated by the proposed Planned
Development. Sufficient information shall be provided to allow the city to
evaluate the impact of the proposed development on adjoining roads. Traffic-
related information which is provided shall be estimates of the volume of
traffic generated by each use, the peak hour volume of traffic expected to be
generated by the proposed development, a schematic drawing indicating vehicular
movement through the site, including anticipated turning movements, and
measures being proposed to alleviate the impact of the development on the
circulation system.
      (4)   Analysis of the fiscal impact of the proposed Planned Development
on the city and the school district.
      (5)   Evidence of market need for the proposed use(s) and the feasibility
of completing the project in its entirety. This requirement may be waived by
the Planning Commission upon making the determination, based on existing
evidence and knowledge about the local economy, that market support does exist
for the proposed uses.
      (6)   Legal documentation of single ownership or control. The
documentation shall be in the form of agreements, contracts, covenants, and
deed restriction which indicate that the development can be completed as shown
on the plans, and further, that all portions of the development that are not to
be maintained at public expense will continue to be operated and maintained by
the developers or their successors.
      (7)   A specific schedule of the intended development and construction
details, including the phasing or timing of all proposed improvements.
      (8)   A draft of ownership and governance documents. These documents
shall include the following.
         (a)   Deeds of ownership.
         (b)   Warranties guaranteeing ownership conveyed and described in the
deeds.
         (c)   A list of covenants, conditions, and restrictions that are
conditions of ownership upon the purchasers and owners in the Planned
Development.
         (d)   Association by-laws (for example, condominium association by-
laws) which describe how the association is organized; the duties of the
association to operate, manage, and maintain common elements of the Planned
Development; and the duties of individual shareholders to manage and maintain
their own units.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
VARIANCES AND APPEALS
§ 154.450 INTENT; PURPOSE.
   (A)   Intent. The purpose of this subchapter is to provide guidelines and
standards to be followed by the Zoning Board of Appeals in considering requests
for variances and appeals, where the jurisdiction of the Board of Appeals has
been established by these regulations or by Public Act 207 of 1921, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.581 - 125.590, as amended.
   (B)   Purpose of variances and appeals.  
      (1)   Appeals. Generally, an appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of
Appeals by a person, or by any office, department, board, or bureau aggrieved
by a decision of the Planning Commission or any Administrative Official or body
charged with enforcement of these regulations.
      (2)   Variances. Where there are practical difficulties preventing a
property owner from conforming with the strict letter of this chapter, or where
strict enforcement of this chapter would create an unnecessary hardship, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to authorize variances from the
standards in this chapter, with such conditions and safeguards as it may
determine to be necessary so that the overall spirit and intent of this chapter
is observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.451 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.
   An appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the appealed action, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies
to the Zoning Board of Appeals, that by reason of the facts stated in the
appeal, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order granted by
the circuit court,
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.452 APPLICATION AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Variances and appeals for
which Zoning Board of Appeals action is sought shall be commenced by a person
filing an application to the Zoning Board of Appeals on forms as specified by
the Zoning Administrator and accompanied by required fees. The application
shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based and shall contain a
notarized signature of the property owner or owner's agent. Applications
involving a request for a variance shall specify the section number(s)
containing the standards from which a variance is sought and the nature and
extent of the variance.
   (B)   Plot plan requirements.  
      (1)   Applications involving a specific site shall be accompanied by a
plot plan drawn to scale that includes the following information, where
applicable.
         (a)   Applicant’s name, address, and telephone number.
         (b)   Property identification (sidwell) number, scale, northpoint, and
dates of submission and revisions.
         (c)   Zoning classification of petitioner’s parcel and of all abutting
parcels.
         (d)   Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas,
driveways and other improvements on the site and within 50 feet of the site.
         (e)   For variances from any dimensional standard of these
regulations, the plot plan shall include verified measurements of existing
conditions and the proposed dimensions or calculations regarding the specific
standards from which the variance is being sought.
         (f)   Any additional information required by the Zoning Administrator
or the Zoning Board of Appeals to make the determination requested herein.
      (2)   Where an application to the Zoning Board of Appeals involves a
variance sought in conjunction with a site plan review by the Planning
Commission, the application data requirements for site plan review, as set
forth in §
154.402, shall be followed.
   (C)   Review by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall forward the application, along with
any supporting materials and plans, to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator or the Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or variance request, give due
notice to the parties to whom real property within 300 feet of the premises in
question is assessed, and to occupants of one or two-family dwellings within
300 feet, and decide the appeal or variance within a reasonable time. At the
hearing, a party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
   (D)   Decision by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      (1)   The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board shall
be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of
the administrative official or body, or to decide in favor of the applicant any
matter upon which they are required to pass under, or to affect any variation
in an ordinance adopted pursuant to Public Act 207 of 1921, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.581 - 125.590, as amended.
      (2)   The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the order, requirement, decision, or determination, in accordance with the
guidelines set forth herein. To that end, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
have all the powers of the officer or body from whom the appeal was taken, and
may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. With an affirmative decision, the
Board may impose conditions pursuant to Section 4c(2)(a) of Public act 207 of
1921, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.581 - 125.590, as amended. The decision of the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final, but any person having an interest
affected by a decision of the Board may appeal to circuit court.
   (E)   Record of decision and order.
      (1)   The Zoning Beard of Appeals shall prepare and retain a record of
each appeal, and shall base its decision on this record. This record shall
include the following.
         (a)   The relevant administrative records and the administrative
orders issued thereon relating to the appeal.
         (b)   The notice of the appeal.
         (c)   Such documents, exhibits, plans, photographs, or written reports
as may be submitted to the Board for its consideration.
      (2)   The written findings of fact, the decisions, and the conditions
imposed by the Zoning Board of Appeals in acting on the appeal shall be entered
into the official record, after being signed by the secretary of the Board.
   (F)   Approval period. If construction has not commenced within 24 months
after the Zoning Board of Appeals grants a variance to permit the erection or
alteration of a building, then the variance becomes null and void. The period
of approval may be automatically extended by 12 months if the variance was
sought in conjunction with a site plan for which approval has been extended by
the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.453 STANDARDS.
   Variances and appeals shall be granted only in accordance with Public Act
207 of 1921, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.581 - 125.590, as amended, and based on the
findings set forth in this subchapter. The extent to which the following
criteria apply to a specific case shall be determined by the Board.
   (A)   Criteria applicable to variances.  
      (1)   Practical difficulties. Compliance with the strict letter of the
restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk, density, or
other dimensional provisions would create practical difficulties, unreasonably
prevent the use of the property for a permitted purpose, or render conformity
with such restrictions unnecessarily burdensome. The showing of mere
inconvenience is insufficient to justify a variance.
      (2)   Substantial justice. Granting of a requested variance or appeal
would do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other property
owners in the district; or as an alternative, granting of lesser variance than
requested would give substantial relief to the owner of the property involved
and be more consistent with justice to other property owners.
      (3)   Public safety and welfare. The requested variance or appeal can be
granted in such fashion that the spirit of these regulations will be observed
and public safety and welfare secured.
      (4)   Extraordinary circumstances. There are exceptional or extraordinary
circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved or to the
intended use of the property that do not apply generally to other properties or
other similar uses in the same zoning district. The conditions resulting in a
variance request cannot be self-created.
      (5)   Preservation of property rights. A variance is necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other
property owners in the same zoning district.
      (6)   No safety hazard. The granting of a variance or appeal will not
increase the hazard of fire or otherwise endanger public safety.
      (7)   No impact on land values. The granting of a variance or appeal will
not unreasonably diminish or impair the value of surrounding properties.
      (8)   Neighborhood character. The granting of a variance or appeal will
not alter the essential character of the neighborhood.
      (9)   Light and air. The granting of a variance or appeal will not impair
the adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property.
      (10)   Promotes orderly development. The size, character and location of
a development permitted after granting of a variance shall be in harmony with
the surrounding land use and shall promote orderly development in the zoning
district in which it is located.
      (11)   Traffic flow. A development permitted upon granting of a variance
shall make vehicular and pedestrian traffic no more hazardous than is normal
for the district in which it is located, taking into consideration vehicular
turning movements, adequacy of sight lines for drivers, location and
accessibility of off-street parking, provisions for pedestrian traffic, and
measures to reduce contact between pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
      (12)   No nuisance impacts. A development permitted upon granting of a
variance shall be designed so as to eliminate any dust, noise, fumes,
vibration, smoke, lights, or other undesirable impacts on surrounding
properties.
      (13)   Impact on adjacent properties. The location, design, and height of
buildings, structures, fences, or landscaping permitted upon granting of a
variance shall not interfere with or discourage the appropriate development,
continued use, or value of adjacent land or buildings.
      (14)   Relationship to adjacent land uses. The development permitted upon
granting of a variance shall relate harmoniously in a physical and economic
sense with adjacent land uses. In evaluating this criterion, consideration
shall be given to prevailing shopping patterns, convenience of access for
patrons, continuity of development, and the need for particu1ar services and
facilities in specific areas of the city.
   (B) Criteria applicable to use variances.
      (1)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not grant a use variance unless
it finds that an unnecessary hardship exists, in accordance with the following
criteria
         (a)   Reasonable use. The Zoning Board of Appeals must find that the
property in question cannot reasonably be put to a conforming use if used in
strict compliance with this chapter.
         (b)   Unique circumstances. The Zoning Board of Appeals must find that
the plight of the property owner is due to unique circumstances and not general
neighborhood conditions.
         (c)   Essential character of the area. The Zoning Board of Appeals
must find that the use variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the area or neighborhood.
         (d)   Self-created problem. The Zoning Board of Appeals must find that
the hardship upon which the use variance is based is not self-created.
      (2)   A use variance shall not be construed as a change in the zoning of
the property, nor shall it be construed as an addition to the uses permitted in
a district.
   (C)   Criteria applicable to appeals. The Board shall reverse an order of an
enforcement official only if it finds that the action or decision appealed:
      (1)   Was arbitrary or capricious;
      (2)   Was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact;
      (3)   Constituted an abuse of discretion;
      (4)   Was based on erroneous interpretation of the Zoning ordinance or
zoning law.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES
§ 154.465 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. A building permit or other appropriate permit shall
be required as follows.
      (1)   Prior to the erection, alterations repair, renovation, demolition
or removal of any building or structure.
      (2)   Prior to the installation, extension, or replacement of plumbing,
electrical, drainage, or similar utility systems.
      (3)   Prior to the establishment of a new use, whether the land is
currently vacant or if a change in land use is proposed.
      (4)   Prior to any change in use of an existing building or structure to
a different class or type.
   (B)   Definition of alteration and repair. For the purposes of this
subchapter, the terms ALTERATION and REPAIRED shall include any changes in
structural parts, stairway, type of construction, type, class or kind of
occupancy, light or ventilation, means of ingress and egress, or other changes
affecting or regulated by the adopted City Building Code, the Housing Law of
Michigan, Public Act 167 of 1917, as amended, being M.C.L.A. 125.401 et seq.,
these regulations or other applicable regulations of the city.
   (C)   Application requirements. 
      (1)   No permit shall be issued for construction, alteration, or
remodeling of any building or structure until an application has been
submitted, showing that the proposed improvements conform with the provisions
of these regulations and with the City Building Code.
      (2)   Applications for permits required by this subchapter shall be filed
with the Building Official on forms prescribed by that official. Each
application shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the proposed
improvements, and, if applicable, a plan of the site drawn to scale. Submitted
plans shall be of sufficient detail for the official to determine whether the
proposed improvements conform with these regulations, the Building Code, the
State Construction Code, Act Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501
- 125.1531 as amended, and other applicable laws and ordinances.
      (3)   A site plan submitted and approved by the Planning Commission in
accordance with these regulations shall satisfy the requirements of this
subchapter. At a minimum, the applicant must supply the following information.
         (a)   The location, dimensions and parcel identification (sidwell)
number of the land parcel.
         (b)   Existing buildings or structures, plus the shape, size, and
location of all buildings or structures to be erected, altered, or moved.
         (c)   The existing and intended use of the parcel.
         (d)   On residential parcels, the number of dwelling units contained
within each building.
         (e)   The name and address of all persons having an ownership interest
in the premises upon which the improvements are proposed, together with a
written statement from all such persons indicating knowledge of and agreement
with the proposal.
         (f)   All information required by the adopted city Building Codes.
         (g)   Any other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as
may be essential for determining whether the provisions of these regulations
will be complied with.
   (D)   Conformity with applicable ordinances and approved plans.
      (1)   A building permit shall be issued only if, after thorough
inspection of the application materials and plans, the Building Official finds
that the proposal conforms with these regulations, the State Construction Code
Act, Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 - 125.1531, as amended,
city adopted codes, and other applicable laws and ordinances, except where the
Building official receives written notice of a variance having been granted by
the Zoning Board of Appeals or Construction Board of Appeals.
      (2)   A building permit issued on the basis of a site plan approved by
the Planning Commission shall incorporate full compliance with the approved
site plan as a condition of the issuance of the permit. Modifications to an
approved site plan shall be in compliance with these regulations. Use, layout,
or construction at variance with approved plans or application materials shall
be deemed in violation of these regulations.
   (E)   Expiration of permits. A building permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of these regulation shall be consistent with the procedures stated
within the adopted Building Code of the city. Expiration and notification
requirements of the applicable code shall be followed.
   (F)   Inspection of completed work. The holder of any building permit issued
pursuant to the requirements in this subchapter shall notify the Building
Official for a final inspection and request a certificate of occupancy upon
completion of the work authorized by the permit and prior to occupancy.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.466 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
    A certificate of occupancy shall be required prior to occupancy or re-
occupancy of any use of land, building or structure. It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation to hereafter occupy or re- occupy, or for any
owner or agent to permit the occupation or re-occupation of any building or
addition thereto, or part thereof, for any use until a certificate of occupancy
has been issued by the Department of Building and Engineering. The following
guidelines shall apply to certificate of occupancy.
   (A)   General requirements.  
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of a certificate of occupancy is to permit the
occupancy or use of land, buildings, or structures. The certificate of
occupancy can be issued only upon the determination by the Zoning Administrator
and the Building Official that the site is in compliance with the provisions of
these regulations, the requirements of the adopted city Building and
Construction Codes, adopted city engineering standards, and that all
outstanding city fees or other charges have been paid.
      (2)   Certificates for new and existing buildings. Certificates of
occupancy shall be issued for new or existing buildings or structures, or parts
thereof, or for existing or new uses of land if, after inspection, the Building
Official finds that any alterations, extensions, repairs, or new construction
have been completed in conformity with the provisions of these regulations and
other regulations of the city, and provided further that the proposed use is
fully in compliance with these regulations. Failure to obtain a certificate of
occupancy prior to commencing the use of property shall constitute a violation
of these regulations.
      (3)   Temporary certificates. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be
issued by the Building Official, upon approval of the Zoning Administrator, for
a portion of a building, structure or premises prior to occupancy of the entire
building or structure, provided that such portion of the building, structure or
premises is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations and other
applicable regulations of the city, and provided further that no threat to
public safety exists. A performance guarantee may be required by an Enforcement
Official in accordance with §
154.036 as a condition of obtaining a temporary certificate. No temporary
certificate of occupancy shall be granted for a period in excess of six months.
The date of expiration shall be indicated on the temporary certificate; failure
to obtain a final certificate of occupancy within the specified time shall
constitute a violation of these regulations.
      (4)   Certificates for accessory buildings to dwellings. Buildings and
structures that are accessory to a dwelling shall not require a separate
certificate of occupancy, but may be included in the
certificate of occupancy for the principal use on the same parcel, provided the
accessory buildings or uses are shown on the plot plan and are completed at the
same time as the principal use.
   (B)   Period of validity. A final certificate of occupancy shall remain in
affect for the life of the building or structure, or part thereof, as long as
the specific operation conducted within the building or structure or use of the
land continues. A certificate of occupancy shall be required of any new
occupant upon a change in occupancy of the building, structure, or land.
   (C)   Records of certificates. A record of all certificates of occupancy
shall be kept in the office of the Building Official. Copies of certificates
shall be furnished upon request to a person or persons having a propriety or
tenancy interest in the property.
   (D)   Application requirements. An application for a certificate of
occupancy shall be made on forms supplied by the Building Official, and must be
accompanied by the fees specified. A certificate of occupancy may be processed
concurrently with an application for a building permit, if a building permit is
required. The Zoning Administrator shall determine if a nonresidential
occupancy change requires site plan review and approval by the Planning
Commission pursuant to §§
154.400 through
154.405.
   (E)   Issuance of certificate. The Enforcement Official shall inspect a
building or structure within 15 working days after notification by an applicant
of the completion of a building or structure or other improvements. The
Building Official and Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of
occupancy upon finding that the building or structure, or part thereof, or the
use of land, conforms with an approved site plan and the provisions of these
regulations. If the request for a certificate of occupancy is denied, the
applicant shall be notified in writing of the denial and the reasons for
denial.
   (F)   Failure to comply with an issued certificate. Failure to maintain and
comply with the specifically permitted use and any associated conditions of an
issued certificate of occupancy shall constitute a violation of these
regulations and shall revoke the permission to occupy or use the land,
buildings and/or structures. Such revocation shall allow the city to require
the immediate evacuation from the land, buildings, and structures of all
occupants and for all use of the land, buildings and structures to cease and
desist once the property owner and/or occupants have received written notice of
a failure to comply with the issued certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 21-004, passed 2-8-21)  Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.467 ZONING PERMITS.
   No structure or site shall be used erected, moved, enlarged, altered or
demolished until the owner or occupant has applied for and obtained a zoning
permit. No permit shall be issued to erect, move, enlarge, substantially alter,
or demolish a structure or site unless the request is in conformance with the
provisions of this section. Zoning permits shall be subject to the following:
   (A)   Building permit includes zoning permit approval. For purposes of this
section, building permits issued by the Building Department in accordance with
the State Construction Code enforced by the city shall also include any zoning
permit approval required under this section.
   (B)   Zoning permits. Wherever a provision of this section requires approval
of a permit for work not regulated by the State Construction Code enforced by
the city, zoning permit approval shall be required subject to the provisions of
this section. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to grant zoning
permits, and shall be responsible for consulting with the Building Official to
verify that no building permits are required for the proposed work under the
State Construction Code enforced by the city prior to issuing a zoning permit
under this section.
   (C)   Application. Zoning permit applications shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator and shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the proposed
improvements. Application materials shall include sufficient detail for the
Zoning Administrator to determine whether the proposed improvements conform to
the provisions of this section. The Zoning Administrator may require that
submittal of a permit application be accompanied by plans and specifications
drawn to scale and showing the following:
      (1)   The location, shape, area, and dimensions of the lot involved;
      (2)   The size, shape, dimensions, and location of any existing or
proposed structures to be situated on the parcel;
      (3)   The existing and proposed use of the parcel and all structures upon
it;
      (4)   The location and dimensions of any existing and proposed yard, open
space, and parking areas;
      (5)   Proposed setbacks of structures from property lines and other
structures; and
      (6)   Any other information deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator
or designated agent of the city for the proper enforcement of this section.
   (D)   Revocation. The Zoning Administrator may revoke a zoning permit in the
case of failure or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this
section, or in the case of any false statement or misrepresentation made in the
application for the permit. The Zoning Administrator or designated agent of the
city shall notify the owner of such revocation in writing.
(Ord. 10-014, passed 1-11-10)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.480 OVERVIEW.
   (A)   The City Council or its duly authorized representative as specified in
this subchapter is hereby charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of
this chapter. Accordingly, the administration of this chapter is hereby vested
in the following entities.
      (1)   City Council.
      (2)   Planning Commission.
      (3)   Zoning Board of Appeals.
      (4)   Zoning Enforcement Officials, including the Building Official
   (B)   The purpose of this part of the Zoning Ordinance is to set forth the
responsibilities and scope of authority of these entities.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.481 AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council shall have the following responsibilities and authority
pursuant to this chapter.
   (A)   Adoption of Zoning ordinance and amendments. In accordance with the
intent and purposes expressed in §
154.001, the Preamble to this chapter, and pursuant to the authority conferred
by Public Act 207 of 1921, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.581 - 125.590, as amended, the
City Council shall have the authority to adopt this chapter, as well as
amendments previously considered by the Planning Commission or at a hearing or
as decreed by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   Review and approval of plans.
      (1)   The City Council shall be given the opportunity to review and
approve all Special Land Uses, in accordance with §§
154.415 through
154.417.
      (2)   City Council review and approval shall be required for all Planned
Developments, in accordance with §§
154.430 through
154.438.
   (C)   Setting of fees. The City Council shall have the authority to set all
fees for permits, applications, and requests for action pursuant to the
regulations set forth in this chapter. In the absence of specific action taken
by the City Council to set a fee for a specific permit or application, the
appropriate administrative official shall assess the fee based on the estimated
costs of processing and reviewing the permit or application.
   (D)   Approval of Planning Commission members. In accordance with Public Act
285 of 1931, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.31 - 125.45, as amended, members of the
Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
City Council.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.482 AUTHORITY OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
   The Planning Commission shall have the following responsibilities and
authority pursuant to this chapter.
   (A)   Creation. The Planning Commission is created pursuant to Public Act
285 of 1931, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.31 - 125.45, as amended, the Municipal
Planning Act.
   (B)   Membership and operation.  
      (1)   Members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the City Council. The qualifications of members, the term
of each member, filling of vacancies, compensation of members, and operation of
the Planning Commission shall be in accordance with Act 285 of 1931, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.31 - 125.45, as amended.
      (2)   In accordance with § 4 of Act 285, the Planning Commission by
resolution shall determine the time and place of meetings. The Planning
Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, and shall keep a
public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations.
   (C)   Jurisdiction. The Planning Commission shall discharge the following
duties pursuant to this chapter.
      (1)   Formulation of Zoning ordinance and amendments. The Planning
Commission shall be responsible for formulation of the Zoning ordinance, review
of amendments to the Zoning ordinance, holding hearings on a proposed Zoning
ordinance or amendments, and reporting its findings and recommendations
concerning the Zoning ordinance or amendments to the City Council.
      (2)   Site plan review. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for
review of applications for site plan approval in accordance with §§
154.400 through
154.405. As provided for in §
154.403, the Planning Commission shall be responsible for either making a
determination to grant approval, approval subject to revisions, or denial of
site plan approval.
      (3)   Special land use review. The Planning Commission shall be
responsible for holding hearings and review of all applications for special
land use approval in accordance with §§
154.415 through
154.417, and making a recommendation to the City Council to grant approval,
approval subject to revisions, or denial of approval.
      (4)   Planned Development review. The Planning Commission shall be
responsible for holding hearings and review of all applications for Planned
Development in accordance with §§
154.430 through
154.438. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for making a
recommendation to the City Council to grant approval, approval with conditions,
or denial of a Planned Development proposal.
      (5)   Formulation of a Master Plan. The Planning Commission shall be
responsible for formulation and adoption of a Master Plan for the physical
development of the city, in accordance with Public Act 285 of 1931, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.31 - 125.45, as amended.
      (6)   Review of matters referred by the City Council. The Planning
Commission shall be responsible for review of plats or other matters relating
to land development referred to it by the City Council. The Planning Commission
shall recommend appropriate regulations and action on such matters.
      (7)   Report on operation of the Zoning ordinance. The Planning
Commission shall periodically prepare for the City Council a report on the
operations of the Zoning ordinance, including recommendations as to the
enactment of amendments or supplements to the ordinance.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.483 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals (hereinafter referred to as ZBA) shall have the
following responsibilities and authority pursuant to this chapter.
   (A)   Creation. The ZBA is created pursuant to Public Act 207 of 1921, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.581 - 125.590, as amended, the City-Village Zoning Act.
   (B)   Membership and operation. The ZBA shall consist of seven members who
shall be appointed in accordance with § 5 of Public Act 207 of 1921, as
amended, and as follows.
      (1)   ZBA members shall be citizens of the United States and residents of
the city for at least one year prior to their appointment.
      (2)   Members may be removed for cause by the Mayor, subject to approval
by the City Council, or as otherwise provided by state law, after consideration
of written charges and a public hearing.
      (3)   Vacancies on the ZBA shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor,
subject to approval by the City Council. Appointments shall be for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
      (4)   The compensation of the members of the ZBA shall be fixed by the
City Council.
      (5)   The City Council shall also appoint two alternate members for the
same term as regular members of the ZBA. Alternate members may be called on a
rotating basis to sit as regular members in the absence of a regular member. An
alternate member may also be called to serve in the place of a regular member
for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member
has abstained for reasons of a conflict of interest. The alternate member
having been appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision has been
made. The alternate member shall have the same voting rights as a regular
member of the Board of Appeals.
   (C)   Secretary of the ZBA. The City Clerk shall be the secretary of the
Board. The Clerk may designate a deputy clerk to act on his/her behalf.
   (D)   Meetings. Meetings of the ZBA shall be held in accordance with an
adopted schedule, or at the call of the Chairperson, or at such other times as
the ZBA may specify in its rules and procedures. The ZBA shall state the
grounds of each determination, and shall maintain a record of its proceedings,
which shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
   (E)   Concurring vote required. The concurring vote of a majority of the
members of the ZBA shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement,
decision, or determination of an administrative official or body; to decide in
favor of an applicant on any matter upon which the ZBA in required to act; or
to affect any variation to this chapter.
   (F)   Jurisdiction.  
      (1)   The ZBA shall act on all questions as they may arise in the
administration of this chapter, including the interpretation of the zoning
district map. The ZBA shall also hear and decide appeals from and review any
order, requirements, decision, or determination made by an administrative
official or body charged with enforcement of this chapter. The ZBA shall also
hear and decide matters referred to them or upon which they are required to
pass under this chapter. In doing so, the ZBA may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination as in
its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall have all
the powers of the officer or body from whom the appeal is taken and may issue
or direct the issuance of a permit. The ZBA shall not have the power to alter
or change the zoning district classification of any property. In acting on
appeals or requests for variances, the ZBA shall comply with the provisions of
§§
154.150 through
154.453. In the interest of complying with these requirements and furthering
the objectives of this section, the ZBA may take the following actions.
         (a)   Interpret the zoning districts where the street layout shown on
the map varies from actual conditions.
         (b)   Interpret the exact location of a boundary line between zoning
districts shown on the map.
         (c)   Grant variances from off-street parking or loading space
requirements, upon finding that the variances will not result in a parking or
leading space deficiency or otherwise be inconsistent with the intent of the
requirements.
         (d)   Grant variances from yard and bulk regulations, including
height, lot area, yard setback, floor area, and lot width regulations, where
there are unique circumstances on the lot such that the lot cannot reasonably
be put to a conforming use. In deciding upon variances, the ZBA shall first
determine that sufficient area exists for an adequate storm water drainage,
water supply, and septic system, if necessary.
         (e)   Grant variances from the site plan review requirements where the
ZBA finds that the requirements would cause practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardship do to the unique conditions on the site.
         (f)   Grant variances made necessary by the advances of technology
being put to use in new developments, but not anticipated by the provisions of
this chapter.
      (2)   The ZBA is not authorized to consider an appeal of any decision
concerning a planned development or special land use. Notwithstanding these
requirements, the ZBA shall have the power to consider variances associated
with a special land use site plan which relate to setbacks and dimensional
requirements.
   (G)   Decision final. The decision of the ZBA shall be final, but shall be
subject to review by the Circuit Court. The Circuit Court may order the ZBA to
rehear a case in the event that the Court finds that the record of the ZBA is
inadequate to make the proper review, or that there is additional evidence
which is material and with good reason was not presented to the ZBA.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.484 AUTHORITY OF ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.
   (A)   Overview. Certain actions necessary for the implementation of these
regulations shall be administered by the Community Development Director, the
Zoning Administrator, the Building Official, the City Clerk, the City Planner,
and other city officials and/or the duly authorized assistants or
representatives of these officials. In carrying out their designated duties,
all Enforcement Officers shall be required to administer the Zoning ordinance
precisely as it is written. No Enforcement Official shall make changes or vary
the terms of these regulations.
   (B)   Responsibilities of the Community Development Director. The Community
Development Director, or a duly authorized representative, shall be responsible
for overall administration of the Zoning ordinance. The Director shall
coordinate the implementation of these regulations among the City Council, the
City Manager, the Planning Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals, enforcement
officials, city consultants, applicants, and the general public. These general
administrative responsibilities shall include the following.
      (1)   Preparation and presentation of staffing plans to appropriate
policy makers.
      (2)   Preparation and administration of budgetary matters regarding the
implementation of these regulations.
      (3)   Resolution of problems occurring between applicants, staff, and the
general public.
      (4)   Periodically report to city policy makers on the status of city
zoning and planning administration.
   (C)   Responsibilities of the Zoning Administrator. In addition to specific
responsibilities outlined elsewhere in these regulations, the Zoning
Administrator or a duly authorized representative shall have the following
responsibilities.
      (1)   Provide citizens and public officials with information relative to
these regulations and related matters.
      (2)   Assist applicants in completing appropriate forms and following
procedures related to site plan review, rezoning, and other zoning matters.
      (3)   Review all applications for site plan review, special land use
review, and planned development, and take any action required under guidelines
stated within these regulations;
      (4)   In cooperation with the Building Official, issue certificates of
occupancy in accordance with these regulations when all provisions of these
regulations and other applicable ordinances and codes are met.
      (5)   Forward to the Planning Commission completed applications for site
plan review, special land use review, planned unit development proposals,
petitions for amendments to these regulations, and other matters that must be
reviewed by the Planning Commission.
      (6)   Forward to the Zoning Board of Appeals all materials related to
applications for appeals, variances, or other matters on which the Zoning Board
of Appeals in required to act.
      (7)   Forward to the City Council all recommendations of the Planning
Commission concerning matters on which action is either mandatory or
discretionary on the part of the Council.
      (8)   Periodically report to the Planning Commission on the status of
city's zoning and planning administration.
      (9)   Maintain the current official Zoning Map of the city and an up-to-
date Zoning ordinance text by recording all adopted amendments.
      (10)   Review and investigate permit applications to determine compliance
with the provisions of the Zoning ordinance.
      (11)   Initiate investigations into alleged violations of these
regulations and proceed with appropriate corrective measures as required.
      (12)   Perform other related duties required to administer these
regulations.
   (D)   Responsibilities of the Building Official. In addition to specific
responsibilities related to enforcement and administration of the adopted
Building Code, the Building Official or duly authorized assistants shall have
the following responsibilities.
      (1)   Provide citizens and public officials with information relative to
these regulations and related matters.
      (2)   Provide direction to applicants in determining and completing
appropriate procedures related to site plan review, rezoning, and other zoning
matters.
      (3)   Review applications for site plan review, special land use review,
and planned development, provide recommendations regarding the content of the
plans and take any action required under guidelines stated within these
regulations.
      (4)   Issue building or other appropriate permits when all provisions of
these regulations and other applicable ordinances as are met.
      (5)   In cooperation with the Zoning Administrator, issue certificates of
occupancy in accordance with these regulations when all provisions of these
regulations and other applicable ordinances and codes are met.
      (6)   Perform inspections of structures, and premises to ensure that the
land use or improvements to the land are and will remain in compliance with
these regulations.
      (7)   Initiate and perform investigations into alleged violations of
these regulations and proceed with appropriate corrective measures when
required, including issuance of violation notices, issuance of orders to stop
work, and revocation of permits.
      (8)   Maintain records as accurately as is feasible for all nonconforming
uses, structures, and lots that exist on the effective date of the zoning
ordinance, updating the record as conditions affecting nonconforming status of
such uses changes.
      (9)   Perform other related duties required to administer these
regulations.
   (E)   Responsibilities of the City Clerk. In addition to specific
responsibilities outlined elsewhere in these regulations, the City Clerk or
duly authorized representatives shall have the following responsibilities.
      (1)   Publish all notices required by these regulations.
      (2)   Record or cause to be recorded and prepare the official minutes of
all meetings of the Planning Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals.
      (3)   Maintain official records and file all official minutes and
documents in an orderly fashion.
      (4)   Perform other related duties required to administer these
regulations.
   (F)   Responsibilities of the City Planner. The City Planner may be a member
of city staff or a firm or organization retained on a consulting basis, or the
responsibilities may be shared by staff and a consultant. In addition to
specific responsibilities outlined elsewhere in these regulations, upon request
from the City Council, the Planning Commission, the City Manager, the Community
Development Director, an authorized department head, or other authorized city
body or official, the City Planner shall fulfill the following
responsibilities.
      (1)   Prepare and administer such plans and ordinances as are appropriate
for the city and its environs, within the scope of the appropriate state
planning and zoning enabling acts.
      (2)   Advise and assist the Planning Commission and be responsible for
carrying out the directives of the Planning Commission.
      (3)   Advise and assist the City Council, City Manager and other
authorized city bodies or officials and be responsible for carrying out their
directives.
      (4)   Provide citizens and public officials with information relative to
these regulations and related matters.
      (5)   At request of the city, review applications for site plan review,
special land use review, planned development proposals, and take any action
required under the guidelines stated in these regulations.
      (6)   At the request of the Planning Commission or City Council, draft
amendments to the Zoning ordinance and other ordinances to accomplish the
planning objectives of the city.
      (7)   Periodically report to the Planning Commission on the status of the
city's zoning and planning administration.
      (8)   Perform other related duties required to administer these
regulations.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.485 FEES.
   (A)   Any application for an amendment to this chapter, site plan review,
review of a special land use proposal, review of a planned development
proposal, request for a variance, request for inspection, request for a
building or zoning permit, request for a certificate of occupancy or other
request for other action pursuant to the regulations set forth in this chapter
shall be subject to and accompanied by a fee as established by the City
Council. Fees shall be collected in advance of any reviews, inspections, or
issuance of any permits or approvals. Upon notification of deficient payment of
fees, administrative officials charged with enforcement of this chapter shall
cause any permits to be suspended and reject applications for new permits
directly associated with the project.
   (B)   The assessment and payment of application fees does not affect the
requirements for a performance guarantee as specified in §
154.036.
   (C)   There shall be no fee in the case of applications filed in the public
interest by a municipal department or city official.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.486 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Public nuisance. Buildings erected, altered, razed or converted
(including tents, mobile homes, and trailer coaches), or uses carried on in
violation of any provision of these regulations are hereby declared to be a
nuisance per se, and shall be subject to abatement or other action by a court
of appropriate jurisdiction.
   (B)   Violation. Any person, firm, corporation, or agent, or any employee,
contractor, or subcontractor of same who fails to comply with any of the
provisions of these regulations or any of the regulations adopted in pursuance
thereof, or who impedes or interferes with the enforcement of these regulations
by an Enforcement Official, shall be deemed in violation of these regulations.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.487 COURT ACTION; OTHER REMEDIES.
   (A)   The City Manager or a duly authorized representative is hereby
empowered to commence and pursue any and all necessary and appropriate actions
or proceedings in the Circuit Court, or any other court having jurisdiction, to
restrain or prevent any noncompliance with or violation of any of the
provisions of these regulations, and to correct, remedy, or abate any
noncompliance or violation. Any person aggrieved or adversely affected by any
noncompliance or violation may institute suit or join the city in such an
action to abate the violation.
   (B)   Other remedies. The rights and remedies set forth above shall not
preclude the use of other remedies provided by law, including any additional
rights of the city to initiate proceedings in an appropriate court of law to
restrain or prevent any noncompliance with any provisions of these regulations,
or to correct, remedy, or abate any noncompliance.
   (C)   Rights and remedies preserved. Any failure or omission to enforce the
provisions of these regulations, and failure or omission to prosecute any
violations of these regulations, shall not constitute a waiver of any rights
and remedies provided by these regulations or by law, and shall not constitute
a waiver nor prevent any further prosecution of violations of these
regulations.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
§ 154.488 RECORDS.
   (A)   Permanent and current records of this chapter, including but not
necessarily limited to, all maps, amendments, variances, appeals, special land
uses, certificates of occupancy, and related applications, shall be maintained
in the office of the city administrative official having jurisdiction.
   (B)   Every rule or regulation, decision, finding of fact, condition of
approval, resolution, or other transaction of business of the Planning
Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals shall be duly recorded and filed in the
public records of the office of the City Clark.
   (C)   A copy of any application, permit certificate, transcript of a public
meeting, or other item of the public record may be obtained from the
appropriate city office upon payment of copying costs.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
CONDITIONAL REZONING
§ 154.520 INTENT.
   It is recognized that there are certain instances where it would be in the
best interests of the city, as well as advantageous to property owners seeking
a change in zoning boundaries, if certain conditions could be proposed by
property owners as part of a request for a rezoning. It is the intent of this
subsection to provide a process consistent with the provisions of § 4g of the
City and Village Zoning Act (M.C.L.A. § 125.584g) by which an owner seeking a
rezoning may voluntarily propose conditions regarding the use and/or
development of land as part of the rezoning request.
(Ord. 06-001, passed 8-29-05)
§ 154.521 APPLICATION AND OFFER OF CONDITIONS.
   (A)   An owner of land may voluntarily offer in writing conditions relating
to the use and/or development of land for which a rezoning is requested. This
offer may be made either at the time the application for rezoning is filed or
may be made at a later time during the rezoning process.
   (B)   The required application and process for considering a rezoning
request with conditions shall be the same as that for considering rezoning
requests made without any offer of conditions, except as modified by the
requirements of this subchapter.
   (C)   The owner's offer of conditions may not purport to authorize uses or
developments not permitted in the requested new zoning district.
   (D)   The owner's offer of conditions shall bear a reasonable and rational
relationship to the property for which rezoning is requested.
   (E)   Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that
would require a special land use permit under the terms of this subchapter may
only be commenced if all of the special land use requirements for the proposed
use or uses, as outlined in §§
154.415 through
154.417, are met.
   (F)   Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that
would require a variance under the terms of this subchapter may only be
commenced if a variance for such use or development is obtained from the Zoning
Board of Appeals, prior to the proposed conditional zoning, in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter.
   (G)   Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that
would require site plan approval under the terms of this subchapter may only be
commenced if site plan approval for such use or development is ultimately
granted in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (H)   The offer of conditions may be amended during the process of rezoning
consideration provided that any amended or additional conditions are entered
voluntarily by the owner. An owner may withdraw all or part of its offer of
conditions any time prior to final rezoning action of City Council provided
that, if such withdrawal occurs subsequent to the Planning Commission's public
hearing on the original rezoning request, then the rezoning application process
shall be terminated and the applicant shall re-file a new application.
(Ord. 06-001, passed 8-29-05)
§ 154.522 PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW.
   The Planning Commission, after public hearing and consideration of the
factors for rezoning, may recommend approval, approval with recommended
changes, or denial of the rezoning; provided, however, that any recommended
changes to the offer of conditions are acceptable to and thereafter offered by
the owner.
(Ord. 06-001, passed 8-29-05)
§ 154.523 CITY COUNCIL REVIEW.
   After receipt of the Planning Commission's recommendation, the City Council
shall deliberate upon the requested rezoning and may approve or deny the
conditional rezoning request. Council's deliberations shall include, but not be
limited to, a consideration of the factors for rezoning. Should Council
consider amendments to the proposed conditional rezoning advisable and if such
contemplated amendments to the offer of conditions are acceptable to and
thereafter offered by the owner, then Council shall, in accordance with § 4 of
the City and Village Zoning Act (M.C.L.A. § 125.584), refer such amendments to
the Planning Commission for a report thereon within a time specified by Council
and proceed thereafter in accordance with said statute to deny or approve the
conditional rezoning with or without amendments.
(Ord. 06-001, passed 8-29-05)
§ 154.524 APPROVAL.
   (A)   If City Council finds the rezoning request and offer of conditions
acceptable, the offered conditions shall be incorporated into a formal written
Statement of Conditions acceptable to the owner and conforming in form to the
provisions of this section. The Statement of Conditions shall be incorporated
by attachment or otherwise as an inseparable part of the ordinance adopted by
Council to accomplish the requested rezoning.
   (B)   The Statement of Conditions shall:
      (1)   Be in a form recordable with the Register of Deeds of the County in
which the subject land is located or, in the alternative, be accompanied by a
recordable affidavit or memorandum prepared and signed by the owner giving
notice of the Statement of Conditions in a manner acceptable to City Council.
      (2)   Contain a legal description of the land to which it pertains.
      (3)   Contain a statement acknowledging that the Statement of Conditions
runs with the land and is binding upon successor owners of the land.
      (4)   Incorporate by attachment or reference any diagram, plans or other
documents submitted or approved by the owner that are necessary to illustrate
the implementation of the Statement of Conditions. If any such documents are
incorporated by reference, the reference shall specify where the document may
be examined.
      (5)   Contain a statement acknowledging that the Statement of Conditions
or an affidavit or memorandum giving notice thereof may be recorded by the city
with the Register of Deeds of the county in which the land referenced in the
Statement of Conditions is located.
      (6)   Contain the notarized signatures of all of the owners and accessory
parties of the subject land, including all known potential buyers, preceded by
a statement attesting to the fact that they voluntarily offer and consent to
the provisions contained within the Statement of Conditions.
   (C)   Upon the rezoning taking effect, the Zoning Map shall be amended to
reflect the new zoning classification along with a designation that the land
was rezoned with a Statement of Conditions. The City Clerk shall maintain a
listing of all lands rezoned with a Statement of Conditions.
   (D)   Upon the rezoning taking effect, the use of the land so rezoned shall
conform thereafter to all of the requirements regulating use and development
within the new zoning district as modified by any more restrictive provisions
contained in the Statement of Conditions.
   (E)   The approved Statement of Conditions, affidavit, or memorandum giving
notice thereof shall be filed by the city for recording with the Wayne County
Register of Deeds.
(Ord. 06-001, passed 8-29-05)
§ 154.525 COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Any person who establishes a development or commences a use upon land
that has been rezoned with conditions shall continuously operate and maintain
the development or use in compliance with all of the conditions set forth in
the Statement of Conditions. Any failure to comply with a condition contained
within the Statement of Conditions shall constitute a violation of this
subchapter and be punishable accordingly. Additionally, any such violation
shall be deemed a nuisance per se and subject to judicial abatement as provided
by law.
   (B)   No permit or approval shall be granted under this subchapter for any
use or development that is contrary to an applicable Statement of Conditions.
(Ord. 06-001, passed 8-29-05)
§ 154.526 TIME PERIOD FOR ESTABLISHING DEVELOPMENT OR USE.
   Unless another time period is specified in the ordinance rezoning the
subject land, the approved development and/or use of the land pursuant to
building and other required permits must be commenced upon the land within 12
months after the rezoning took effect and thereafter proceed diligently to
completion. This time limitation may upon written request be extended by City
Council if: (1) it is demonstrated to Council's reasonable satisfaction that
there is a strong likelihood that the development and/or use will commence
within the period of extension and proceed diligently thereafter to completion;
and (2) Council finds that there has not been a change in circumstances that
would render the current zoning with Statement of Conditions incompatible with
other zones and uses in the surrounding area or otherwise inconsistent with
sound zoning policy.
(Ord 06-001, passed 8-29-05)
§ 154.527 REVERSION OF ZONING.
   If approved development and/or use of the rezoned land does not occur within
the time frame specified under §
154.526, then the land shall revert to its former zoning classification as set
forth in M.C.L.A. § 125.584g. The reversion process shall be initiated by City
Council requesting that the Planning Commission proceed with consideration of
rezoning of the land to its former zoning classification. The procedure for
considering and making this reversionary rezoning shall thereafter be the same
as applies to all other rezoning requests.
(Ord. 06-001, passed 8-29-05)
§ 154.528 SUBSEQUENT REZONING OF LAND.
   When land that is rezoned with a Statement of Conditions is thereafter
rezoned to a different zoning classification or to the same zoning
classification but with a different or no Statement of Conditions, whether as a
result of a reversion of zoning pursuant to §
154.527 or otherwise, the Statement of Conditions imposed under the former
zoning classification shall cease to be in effect. Upon the owner's written
request, the City Clerk shall record with the Register of Deeds of the county
in which the land is located a notice that the Statement of Conditions is no
longer in effect.
(Ord. 06-001, passed 8-29-05)
§ 154.529 AMENDMENT OF CONDITIONS.
   (A)   During the time period for commencement of an approved development or
use specified pursuant to §
154.527 above or during any extension thereof granted by City Council, the city
shall not add to or alter the conditions in the Statement of Conditions.
   (B)   The Statement of Conditions may be amended thereafter in the same
manner as was prescribed for the original rezoning and Statement of Conditions.
(Ord. 06-001, passed 8-29-05)
§ 154.530 CITY RIGHT TO REZONE.
   Nothing in the Statement of Conditions nor in the provisions of this
subchapter shall be deemed to prohibit the city from rezoning all or any
portion of land that is subject to a Statement of Conditions to another zoning
classification. Any rezoning shall be conducted in compliance with this
subchapter and the City and Village Zoning Act (M.C.L.A. § 125.581).
(Ord. 06-001, passed 8-29-05)
§ 154.531 FAILURE TO OFFER CONDITIONS.
   The city shall not require an owner to offer conditions as a requirement for
rezoning. The lack of an offer of conditions shall not affect an owner's rights
under this subchapter.
(Ord. 06-001, passed 8-29-05)
§ 154.532 FEE SCHEDULE.
   The city may establish a fee schedule for the application, processing and
implementation of a request for rezoning under this subchapter.
(Ord. 06-001, passed 8-29-05)
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 154.600 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds that signs and other visual outdoor advertising are
necessary to the commerce, health, safety, and general welfare of the residents
of the city. Further, it finds that failure to regulate their size, location,
and construction may lead to poor identification of individual businesses,
deterioration of the business and residential areas of the city,
intensification of the conflicts between different types of land use, reduction
in the effectiveness of traffic-control devices, and safety hazards to
pedestrians and motorists.
(Ord. 10-013, passed 1-11-10)
§ 154.601 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate signs and outdoor advertising
in a manner that will minimize their harmful effect while permitting latitude
for creative and effective advertising and identification. It is intended by
this subchapter to give recognition to the legitimate needs of
business,industry and other activities, through appropriate guidelines, in
attaining their identification and informational objectives. It is a basic
tenet of this subchapter that unrestricted signage does not benefit the
community, or individual businesses, or property owners. To achieve this
purpose, this subchapter has the following objectives:
   (A)   Regulate the construction, alteration, repair and maintenance of all
signs with respect to structural and fire safety, location, type of sign,
dimensions, height, and method of illumination;
   (B)   Seek removal of illegal signs, and encourage the replacement or
removal of nonconforming signs that are incompatible with the purpose of this
subchapter;
   (C)   Preserve the appearance of the city by preventing the placement of
oversized and non-accessory signs that are out of scale with surrounding
buildings and structures;
   (D)   Keep the number of signs and sign messages at a reasonable level
necessary to identify a business and its products; and
   (E)   Avoid visual clutter that confuses or misleads traffic, obstructs
vision and is potentially harmful to property values, business opportunities
and community appearance.
(Ord. 10-013, passed 1-11-10)
§ 154.602 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign accessory to or associated with a use that has been
discontinued or terminated for more than 30 days.
   BILLBOARD OR NON-ACCESSORY SIGN. A sign that does not pertain to the primary
use of the premises, or that advertises one or more businesses, products,
services, facilities or events not sold, distributed or furnished on the
premises on which the sign is located.
   BUILDING FRONTAGE. Where sign area is based on the lineal feet of building
frontage, the measurement shall be taken from the façade of the building facing
the main roadway and shall be measured from exterior side-wall to exterior side
wall of the building or in the case of a tenant space from interior side wall
to interior side wall.
   BUILDING-MOUNTED SIGN. Display sign that is painted on, adjacent to or
attached to a building wall, door, and window or related architectural feature.
Such signs would include, but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   BUILDING DIRECTORY. A wall sign where individual occupants of a
building may display information directing visitors to their portion of the
building.
      (2)   CANOPY SIGN. A sign that is painted on or attached to an awning or
canopy.
      (3)   NAMEPLATE. A wall sign denoting the name of the occupant in a
residential dwelling unit or denoting only the name and profession of the
occupants in a commercial, public or other institutional building.
      (4)   PROJECTING SIGN or MARQUEE SIGN. A display sign attached to or hung
from a structure projecting from and supported by the building and extending
beyond the building wall, building line or street right-of-way line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2845.jpg]
      (5)   WALL SIGN. A display sign that is painted on or attached to a
building wall, door, window or related architectural feature and projecting not
more than 18 inches from the wall.
      (6)   WINDOW SIGN. A sign affixed to a window or so as to be observable
from the opposite side of the window to which such sign is located or affixed.
   CLEARANCE. The vertical distance between the surface grade beneath the sign
and the lowest point of the sign, including framework and embellishments.
   DAMAGED SIGN. A sign or supporting structure that is torn, defaced, dented,
smashed, broken, vandalized or destroyed.
   DECORATIVE DISPLAY. A decorative, temporary display designed for the
entertainment or cultural enrichment of the public and having no direct or
indirect sales or advertising content.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign that uses arrows or words like “enter” and “exit”
to regulate on-site traffic and parking.
   ENTRANCE SIGN/ENTRY FEATURE WITH SIGNAGE. A sign located at the entrance to
the development from a thoroughfare or collector road and bearing the name,
management organization or contact information for a residential subdivision,
apartment community, condominium development, mobile home park, or office,
business or industrial park.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2848.jpg]
 
   FRONT FACE AREA. The area of the front wall, including doors and windows, of
the principal building facing a public street where the address or primary
public entrance is located. Buildings on corner parcels may have up to two
front faces if each face satisfies the above criteria. If the building is
devoted to two or more uses or businesses, the FRONT FACE AREA for each use or
business shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator based upon the
proportionate share of the building occupied by each use or business.
   GARAGE SALE SIGN. A temporary sign for the sale of used tangible personal
property and household personal belongings of the householder, conducted on an
individual lot.
   GROUND SIGN/MONUMENT SIGN. A freestanding sign extending up from a base or
supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces in the ground surface.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2851.jpg]
 
   ILLEGAL SIGN. A sign for which no valid permit was issued by the city at the
time such sign was erected, or a sign that is not in compliance with the
current zoning chapter and does not meet the definition of a nonconforming
sign.
   NONCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL. Any material that will not ignite at or below a
temperature of 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow
at that temperature.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign for which the city issued a permit at the time
such sign was erected, but which is not in compliance with current ordinance
provisions for signs. Such signs must be located outside of any existing right-
of-way, away from any public or private easement and wholly upon the parcel to
which it is associated. Such signs must have all necessary structural and
decorative parts, including, but not limited to supports, sign box or enclosure
and electrical equipment. The sign face or sign copy area must be intact and
illuminated signs must be capable of immediate illumination.
   OPINION SIGN. A sign that addresses issues or otherwise expresses an opinion
or point of view, but does not advertise any products, goods, services, or
businesses.
   PARCEL. For the purpose of this subchapter, a parcel shall consist of the
main building or structure; included in a main building shall be a group of
stores owned by one or more owners or individual tenant spaces connected by
common walls. The main building or structure may occupy more than one city lot.
   POLE SIGN. A type of freestanding sign that is elevated above the ground on
poles or braces.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2854.jpg]
 
   PORTABLE SIGN. A sign and sign structure that is not attached to a building
and is capable of being moved within the zoning lot on which it is located or
from one zoning lot to another (i.e. including but not limited to an A-frame,
T-frame, or trailer sign).
   ROOF SIGN. A display sign that is erected, constructed and maintained on or
above the roof of the building, or that extends above the roofline.
   SIGN. Any surface, fabric, device, display or visual medium, including the
component parts, which bears writing, representations, emblems, logos,
pictorial forms, sculptured matter or any figures of similar character,
together with any frame, tower, or other materials, color or internally-
illuminated area forming an integral part of the display to convey information
or attract attention.
   SIGN AREA. The gross surface area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of all sign copy or surface of any internally-
illuminated sign, awning or canopy.
   SIGN COPY. Writing, representations, emblems, logos, pictorial forms,
sculptured matter or any figures of similar character, together with any frame,
tower, or other materials, color or internally-illuminated area forming an
integral part of a display to convey information or attract attention.
      (1)   ANIMATED COPY. Sign copy that flashes, moves, revolves, cycles or
is otherwise altered or changed by mechanical or electrical means.
      (2)   CHANGEABLE COPY. Moveable letters or other forms of sign copy, not
including animated copy that can be altered by natural, mechanical or
electrical means without replacing the sign copy area.
   SIGN HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average grade at the
sign location to the highest point of the sign.
   TEMPORARY/EVENT SIGN. Display signs, banners, balloons, festoons or other
advertising devices constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plastic or other
light temporary material, with or without a structural frame, or any other sign
intended for a limited period of display, but not including decorative displays
for holidays or public demonstration.
      (1)   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A temporary sign identifying architects,
contractors, subcontractors and material suppliers for a development, or
advertising available parcels or buildings in a new development.
      (2)   FESTOONS. A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags or pinwheels.
      (3)   POLITICAL SIGN. A temporary sign that announces the candidacy of
persons running for public office, addresses issues to be voted upon at an
election, or otherwise expresses an opinion or point of view, but does not
advertise any products, goods, services or businesses.
      (4)   REAL ESTATE SIGN. Signs advertising the rental, sale or lease of
the property upon which they are located.
   UNSAFE SIGN. A sign that is not properly secured; is in danger of falling or
has otherwise been found to be in a condition that is hazardous to the public
health, safety or welfare by the Building Inspector.
(Ord. 10-013, passed 1-11-10; Am. Ord. 17-001, passed 7-10-17; Am. Ord. 19-003,
passed 2-25-19)
§ 154.603 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   If there is a conflict between the requirements for signage in the CBD,
Central Business District in § 154.356(D)(4) and this subchapter, the CBD
district standards will apply. The following general standards shall apply to
signs in all zoning districts.
   (A)   Standards of measurement. Dimensional standards and measurements for
signs shall be subject to the following:
      (1)   Sign height. The distance from the average level of the ground or
pavement directly below the sign to the highest point of the sign structure,
including any supportive or decorative elements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2859.jpg]
 
      (2)   Sign setback. Setbacks shall be measured from the closest road
right-of-way or front lot line to the nearest edge of the sign.
      (3)   Sign area. The surface area of a sign shall include the total area
within any regular geometric figure (circle, triangle, rectangle, and the like)
enclosing the extreme limits of letters, symbols or other material forming an
integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the
background against which it is placed.
         (a)   Where two sign faces with identical sign areas are placed back
to back no more than 18 inches apart, then the sign area shall equal the area
of one face.
         (b)   Where two sign faces with different sign areas are placed back
to back no more than 18 inches apart, then the sign area shall equal the area
of the larger face.
         (c)   Where two sign faces are placed more than 18 inches apart at any
point, then the sign area shall equal the total area of all sign faces.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2864.jpg]
 
   (B)   Construction and maintenance.
      (1)   All signs shall be constructed or installed in compliance with the
State Construction Code, and other applicable building, fire, and electrical
codes enforced by the city; shall be maintained in good repair and working
order; and shall present a neat and orderly appearance and a professional
appearance. Non-galvanized or corrosion-prone materials shall be painted as
necessary to prevent corrosion.
      (2)   All sign faces shall be smooth, and no nails, tacks or wires shall
be permitted to protrude from any sign. This shall not exclude the use of block
letters, decorative elements or other devices that may extend over the top or
in front of the sign structure.
   (C)   Placement requirements. The following placement standards shall apply
to all signs:
      (1)   No sign may extend above any parapet or be placed upon any roof
surface. For purposes of this subchapter, roof surfaces constructed at an angle
of 75 degrees or more from horizontal (such as mansard roofs) shall be regarded
as wall space.
      (2)   No sign attached to a building, other than a permitted awning sign,
marquee sign, or projecting sign, may project more than 18 inches from the
building wall.
      (3)   Signs shall not be located within nor extend over any road right-
of-way, or corner clearance area, except where specifically authorized by this
subchapter.
      (4)   All signs shall be located at least ten feet from any utility pole,
overhead wire, transformer or streetlight, except where specifically authorized
by this subchapter.
      (5)   All signs shall comply with the setback requirements for the
district in which they are located, except as otherwise permitted in this
subchapter.
   (D)   Hazards and obstructions. Signs shall not be designed or maintained in
a manner that would confuse or mislead motorists or pedestrians, create traffic
or pedestrian hazards. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe,
fire escape or other means of ingress or egress.
   (E)   Use. Signs shall not impair the use of adjacent properties. All signs
shall be accessory to the principal use of the parcel where the sign is
located, unless specifically permitted by this subchapter as a non-accessory
sign. Any sign permitted by this subchapter may contain a non-commercial
message. A changeable copy area shall be allowed as part of a permitted sign,
provided that the changeable copy area shall not exceed 50% of the total sign
area.
(Ord. 10-013, passed 1-11-10; Am. Ord. 17-001, passed 7-10-17)
§ 154.604 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following types of signs are prohibited in all districts:
   (A)   Any sign not expressly permitted by this subchapter;
   (B)   Signs that resemble and could be confused with an official highway,
traffic or government sign, signal or traffic control device; or that obscure a
sign, signal or traffic control device displayed by public authority to provide
traffic instruction, direction or public information;
   (C)   Signs painted on or attached to trees, utility poles, fences or
streetlights;
   (D)   Signs placed upon or across any public right-of-way or upon any city
property, except as otherwise provided for in this subchapter;
   (E)   Signs that incorporate string lights; flashing, moving or intermittent
lights of changing degrees or intensity; exposed incandescent bulbs; animation;
or unshielded luminous tube lighting unless explicitly approved by this
subchapter;
   (F)   Exterior string lights accessory to a non-residential use unless
explicitly permitted in §
154.030, other than holiday decoration or when used as an embellishment to
landscape plant materials;
   (G)   Signs that have any visible moving parts, mechanical movement,
rotation or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical or
mechanical means or by action of normal wind currents; and signs that discharge
any audible sound, odor or visible matter;
   (H)   Roof signs and inflatable signs;
   (I)   Building-mounted signs/wall signs that obstruct window or door
openings, inhibit ingress or egress, or interfere with building ventilation;
   (J)   Signs displayed without required permits or outside of permitted size,
location or time period limitations;
   (K)   Abandoned or unlawful signs; and
   (L)   Displays of obscene material.
(Ord. 10-013, passed 1-11-10; Am. Ord. 17-001, passed 7-10-17)
§ 154.605 SIGNS PERMITTED WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   The following non-illuminated signs shall be permitted accessory to a
permitted use in any zoning district, without obtaining a sign permit prior to
installation. Such signs shall be subject to all other applicable conditions
and standards set forth in this subchapter.
   (A)   Historic designation. Historic signs designating site recognized by
the State Historical Commission or local governmental body or agency.
   (B)   Address numbers and nameplate. All principal buildings shall display
their assigned road number in a manner legible from the road right-of-way. In
addition, one nameplate shall be permitted per principal building to provide
for the further identification of the building, use or occupants. The nameplate
shall not exceed two square feet in area, and shall be attached flat against
the building wall.
   (C)   Regulatory. Traffic safety and control signs that conform to the
requirements of the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   (D)   Building markers. Memorial signs, tablets or markers, and historical
plaques cut into any masonry surface or constructed of bronze or other
incombustible material and shall not exceed one square foot in area.
   (E)   Directional. Signs used to direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic to
parking areas, loading area, subject to the following:
      (1)   Directional signs shall not contain logos or other forms of
advertising; and
      (2)   Directional signs shall not exceed two square feet in area or four
feet in height.
   (F)   Real estate. One temporary sign advertising the rent, sale, or lease
of a parcel or building not exceeding eight square feet of sign face and six
feet in height. Such sign shall not be placed in the public right-or-way and
shall be removed within 30 calendar days from the date of rental, lease, or
sale.
   (G)   Community event. Decorations or displays celebrating traditional
holidays or events, school or community events that are erected on the property
of the sponsor of the display or event. Signs shall not exceed 32 square feet
and eight feet in height. A permit shall be required if the sign is displayed
over 14 calendar days in a calendar year.
   (H)   Political. Non-illuminated temporary signs promoting political
parties, candidates or proposals. Temporary political signs shall not exceed
eight feet in height. All political signs must follow the city’s policy on
local campaign guidelines.
   (I)   Governmental. Signs of duly constituted governmental body; signs
required to be maintained by law or governmental order, rule or regulation;
signs identifying public access, municipal facilities and similar official
markers; and incidental signs displayed for the direction, safety or
convenience of the public.
   (J)   Changeable copy. Changes to sign copy within an approved changeable
copy area.
   (K)   Window signs. Temporary or permanent window signs shall not exceed 25%
of the total surface area of the facade windows.
   (L)   Sign repair. Painting, servicing, cleaning or minor repairs to an
existing sign, provided that the sign is restored to its original design and
all work is in compliance with applicable structural and electrical codes, and
the requirements for such signs specified in this subchapter.
   (M)   Pennants. Pennants installed with the permission of City Council, or
their designated agent, on or over public roads for aesthetic or promotional
purposes. Pennants used to advertise or attract attention to a use or event
shall be considered a temporary sign for the purposes of the subchapter.
   (N)   “No signs”. Posting of not more than one “no trespassing,” “no
dumping,” “no skateboarding,” and other similar signs per side of a parcel when
posted on private property. Each sign shall not exceed three square feet in
area.
   (O)   Incidental signs. Incidental signs on vehicles, trailers, trucks, and
similar vehicles used for transport in the normal course of business, provided
that the primary use of shall not be for the purpose of advertising on the
premises where the vehicle is parked.
   (P)   Garage sale signs.  A temporary sign that must be removed within 24
hours after the end of the sale.
      (1)   Sign not to exceed four square feet.
      (2)   One sign permitted on the premises of the sale; two additional
signs (not to exceed four square feet per sign) within ½ mile of the sale
location and may be placed in the city rights-of way.
      (3)   Signs must be freestanding and not attached to any poles, trees,
fences, and the like.
   (Q)   Time/temperature/message signs. Time/temperature/message signs shall
be permitted in commercial districts and for institutional uses, i.e. churches,
schools, government office, and the like, subject to the following:
      (1)   Frequency of message change.  The message change shall not be more
frequent than once every 30 seconds;
      (2)   Size. The area of types of signs shall be included within the
maximum sign area permitted on the site;
      (3)   Number. One such sign shall be permitted per street frontage; and
      (4)   Illumination. See illumination standards in §
154.604(F).
(Ord. 10-013, passed 1-11-10)
§ 154.606 SIGNS PERMITTED WITH A PERMIT.
   The following signs shall be permitted accessory to a permitted use in any
non-residential zoning district, unless permitted by this subchapter, subject
to the following:
   (A)   Entry features with signage. Architectural features with signage may
be erected at each entrance to a residential subdivision, apartment community,
condominium development, mobile home park or office, business or industrial
park or similar development from a major street, subject to the following.
      (1)   Number of signs. Maximum of one sign on each side of the entrance
from a major street.
      (2)   Sign area. Maximum sign face area shall not exceed 36 square feet.
      (3)   Height. Maximum height of a ground sign shall not exceed six feet
from grade.
      (4)   Setbacks. Site entry features with signage shall be located outside
of any street setback area or corner clearance area, and shall further comply
with the following minimum setback requirements:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0a91b4d39cf44c57b3e13e5d6fbca7a3d7182936/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2873.jpg]
 
         (a)   Ten feet from any street setback or right-of-way;
         (b)   Ten feet from the curb line of any internal access driveway; and
         (c)   Five feet from any sidewalk or paved path.
      (5)   Planning Commission review. The location and design of each site
entry feature with signage shall be subject to review and approval by the
Planning Commission.
   (B)   Building directory. Where a single building on a parcel is occupied by
more than one business, dwelling or other use above the street level façade
(such as a multiple-story office or commercial building), a building directory
sign may be erected on the street level façade for these uses, subject to the
following:
      (1)   The building directory shall be separate from any permitted signs
accessory to the uses occupying the street level façade; and
      (2)   The maximum sign area of the building directory shall not exceed 5%
of the allowable wall sign area of the building (5% of 1.5 feet of sign area
per linear foot of building frontage).
BUILDING DIRECTORY
NAME SUITE
BUILDING DIRECTORY
NAME             SUITE
Terry’s Bakery 101
Cannon Insurance 102
Dr. Wiedermeyer  201
Dr. Ishmael, DDS 202
Mr. Jim Smith    301
Ms. Janet Doe    302
 
   (C)   Flags. Flags bearing the official design of a nation, state,
municipality, educational institution, award or non-profit organization, not to
exceed two flag poles per parcel. Flags used to advertise or attract attention
to a use or event shall be considered a temporary sign for the purposes of the
subchapter. Flag poles are allowed in all zoning districts, subject to the
following.
      (1)   Location. Flagpoles shall be located in manner that prevents
displayed flags from projecting into the street right-of-way or over adjacent
properties at full extension. Flagpoles shall not be located on the roof of a
building.
      (2)   Height. A flagpole shall be considered a structure, as defined by
this subchapter, and shall conform to the height restrictions and setback
requirements for structures in the district where it is located.
   (D)   Gasoline sale signs. Gasoline signs in addition to other allowable
permitted signage shall be subject to the following.
      (1)   Area. Price signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and shall
be counted as part of the total allowable signage. Price signs may be in the
form of a message sign.
      (2)   Canopy. Corporate identification signs of less than five square
feet each may be affixed to three sides of a canopy providing coverage to pump
islands.
   (E)   Canopy and awnings. Signs on canopies and awnings in non-residential
districts shall be permitted, subject to the following.
      (1)   Coverage. The total area of the lettering and logo shall not exceed
25% of the total area of the canopy or awning that is visible from the street.
      (2)   Size requirements compliance. The area of signs on awnings and
canopies shall be counted as part of the building's total allowable wall
signage.
      (3)   Color. Signs attached to a canopy or awning shall be one color in
contrast to the background color.
      (4)   Location. Canopies shall not project more than eight feet beyond a
building façade or other architectural feature nor be closer that six feet to
the curb line. A minimum under clearance of eight feet shall be maintained.
   (F)   Construction signs. Temporary construction signs shall be subject to
the following.
      (1)   Number of signs. Maximum of one sign per street frontage or
entrance from a major street.
      (2)   Sign area, height and location. The maximum sign area shall not
exceed 16 square-feet, and the maximum sign height shall not exceed six feet.
Placement shall be wholly within the property boundaries to which the sign
pertains.
      (3)   Display period. For non-residential construction projects, the sign
shall not be erected prior to issuance of a permit for the proposed
construction project, and shall be removed upon issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. For residential construction projects, the sign shall not be erected
prior to approval of the site plan or final preliminary plat, and shall be
removed upon completion of the final phase of the project.
   (G)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs, other than those listed elsewhere in
this subchapter, shall be subject to the following.
      (1)   Number of permitted signs. Individual operations and organizations
shall be allowed a maximum of one temporary sign per postal address. All such
addresses and locations shall be noted on the permit.
      (2)   Maximum sign area. The total sign area of any permitted temporary
sign shall not exceed 24 square feet.
      (3)   Maximum sign height. The maximum height of such signs shall be six
feet.
      (4)   Sign removal. A removal agreement or security bond requested by the
Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator may be required to guarantee removal
of such signs. Signs must be removed within seven days after completion of the
activity for which they were erected.
      (5)   Display period. 
         (a)   Such signs shall be temporarily displayed for the specific time
period defined on the approved permit. One permit may be issued for multiple
display periods over one calendar year. The total display period for such signs
on a single parcel shall not exceed 60 days per calendar year.
         (b)   City Council or its designated agent may waive the requirements
of this section of temporary signs based on the following:
            1.   The temporary signage is in support of a non-profit
organization or entity;
            2.   The temporary signage advertises or supports the City of
Garden City, its agencies, or activities; and/or
            3.   Sign area and height are in compliance with §
154.604(D)(2) and (D)(3).
      (6)   Event signs. Grand opening, going out-of business, and one event
temporary banner or sign shall be permitted, subject to the following.
         (a)   Location.  The temporary banner/sign may be located on the
structure or outside of the required setback area; provided that the sign does
not obstruct the vision of drivers or detract from the visibility of any
traffic sign or traffic control device.
         (b)   Size. The sign area shall not exceed 12 square feet in sign face
or four feet in height.
         (c)   Number of signs. Maximum of one sign per road frontage of the
parcel.
         (d)   Display period. The sign or banner shall not be erected prior to
approval of a sign permit, and shall be removed within 30 calendar days of
issuance of the permit. Only two such permits may be applied for in any
calendar year by the business and/or property owner.
      (7)   Portable signs. Portable signs may be placed at the public
entrances to businesses. Only in the CBD District may portable signs be located
on the public sidewalk adjacent to the main entrance. All portable signs must
be in accordance with the following:
         (a)   No sign shall be placed within ten feet of a fire hydrant, or in
any location where it would imperil public safety, as determined by the
Building Inspector, or the city designee, or interfere with the function of the
Fire Department;
         (b)   The portable sign in the CBD District shall be located within
four feet of the business and its location shall comply with the Americans With
Disabilities Act (ADA) and not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular
circulation;
         (c)   Each sign is permitted outside only during daylight hours that
the business is open to the public;
         (d)   Design requirements:
            1.   Portable signs shall not have more than two sign faces;
            2.   Height shall not exceed 48 inches and a width of 24 inches;
and
            3.   Portable signs shall be professional in appearance; and
         (e)   Display period. The sign or banner shall not be erected prior to
approval of a sign permit, and shall be removed within 30 calendar days of
issuance of the permit. Only two such permits may be applied for in any
calendar year by the business and/or property owner.
   (H)   Building-mounted signs. The following shall apply to all building
mounted signs accessory to a business/industrial use in any non-residential
zoning district.
      (1)   Sign area. A wall sign shall be allowed at one and one-half square
feet per one foot of lineal building frontage. Side wall signs shall be allowed
at one-half the permitted front face wall signage if the building wall is
adjacent to a parking lot; or in the case of a corner lot, each side of a
building that faces a street shall be allowed a wall sign that meets the front
or main road allowable sign area. The total allowable sign area of all
building-mounted signs shall not exceed 150 square feet.
 
                  Type of Sign
                  Wall             Awning        Projecting     Window
Permit required   Yes              Yes           Yes            No
Maximum number of
sign faces per    1                1             2              1
sign
Minimum height
above ground                       8 feet        10 feet
(feet)
May be            Yes              Yes           Yes            No
illuminated
                  11/2 square feet
                  per linear feet  25% of canopy 15 square feet 25% of window
Sign face area    of building or   area          per sign face  area
                  tenant space
                  length
 
      (2)   Painted wall signs. Signs applied with paint or similar substance
on an exterior surface of the structure shall be considered a building-mounted
sign subject to the standards of this subchapter and included in the total
allowable sign area. Prior to painting a sign on a wall, the wall surface shall
be freshly painted with a continuous base color.
      (3)   Projecting signs. signs shall be secured to the building by metal
anchors, bolts, supports, rods or braces, and shall be limited to 15 square
feet of sign area per sign face and shall not extend more than six feet from
the wall to which it is attached.
      (4)   Location. Building-mounted signs shall be located entirely within
the street level façade(s) of a building.
      (5)   Second public entrance signs. Where a side street entrance or a
back entrance from a parking lot is open to the public, additional sign area
over the entrance is allowed. This extra area is limited to 25% of the sign
area on the building front or main street entrance. This sign is included as
part of the total building mounted sign area allowed.
   (I)   Ground sign/monument signs. The following shall apply to all ground
signs accessory to a business/industrial use in any non-residential zoning
district.
      (1)   Maximum number of sign faces per sign. Ground signs shall be
limited to a maximum of two sign faces placed back to back not more than three
feet apart.
      (2)   Maximum number of signs per parcel. A maximum of one ground sign or
one pole sign shall be permitted per parcel.
      (3)   Maximum sign height. The maximum allowable sign height for a ground
sign shall be six feet.
      (4)   Maximum sign area. The allowable sign area for ground or monument
signs shall not exceed 48 square feet per sign face.
      (5)   Setbacks. Ground signs shall be located outside of any street
setback area or corner clearance area and must be setback ten feet from any
internal access driveway.
   (J)   Pole signs. The following shall apply for all pole signs accessory to
a business/industrial use in any non-residential zoning district.
      (1)   Number of pole signs. One pole sign or one ground sign is allowed
per parcel.
      (2)   Maximum sign height. A pole sign shall not exceed 20 feet in
height.
      (3)   Maximum sign face area. A pole sign shall not exceed 48 square feet
per sign face.
      (4)   Location. A pole sign shall not overhang the public road right-of-
way or a public sidewalk.
(Ord. 10-013, passed 1-11-10; Am. Ord. 19-011, passed 9-23-19)
§ 154.607 BILLBOARDS.
   (A)   Findings. The city has made the following determinations related to
billboard signs:
      (1)   Billboard signs are not appropriate in areas zoned for residential
uses (R-1, R-2, R-3, and PD), because the intense commercial nature of the
advertising activity would be harmful to residential property values and
incompatible with the quality of life in residential areas;
      (2)   Billboard signs are not appropriate in the city’s commercial
districts (C-1, C-2, C-3, CBD, and VP) and industrial districts (M-1), because
such signs would be out-of-scale with the structures and commercial/industrial
character of the districts, incompatible with abutting residential uses, and
harmful to the promotion of commerce in the district;
      (3)   Billboard signs are not appropriate in Public Recreation District
(PRD) that are intended to provide for passive and active recreational needs of
the residents and not designed for billboard signs that could create visual
clutter, compete for the visual attention of motorists, and increase hazards
for motorists and pedestrians; and
      (4)   The placement of new billboard signs in the city is contrary to the
purpose of this subchapter.
   (B)   Billboards prohibited. In accordance with the above findings, new
billboard signs are hereby prohibited within the city.
   (C)   Existing billboards. Billboard signs lawfully existing in the city on
the date of adoption of this subchapter shall be permitted to continue, subject
to the provisions of §
154.609, Nonconforming Signs. The Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator
shall be responsible for maintaining an inventory of the location and condition
of all existing billboard signs in the city.
(Ord. 10-013, passed 1-11-10; Am. Ord. 22-001, passed 1-24-22)
§ 154.608 PERMITS.
   No person shall erect, alter or relocate a sign without first obtaining
appropriate permits from the Building Inspector. The following information
shall be provided with any permit application:
   (A)   Name, address and telephone numbers for the applicant, property owner,
sign owner and sign contractor or person, firm, corporation or association
erecting the sign;
   (B)   Street address, parcel identification number or location of the
property on which the sign is to be located;
   (C)   Type of sign, as defined in this subchapter;
   (D)   Plot plan. A plot plan shall include a parcel survey, easements,
dimensions, locations of all structures, and location all proposed and existing
signs on the parcel. Elevation drawings of all buildings on the site shall be
provided showing the location of all existing and proposed building-mounted
signs;
   (E)   Construction drawings. Plans, specifications, materials, designs,
dimensions, structural supports, electrical components, methods of construction
and type of illumination for each sign;
   (F)   License and insurance. Every person who engages in the business of
erecting, altering or dismantling signs in the city shall first submit proof of
appropriate licenses and a liability insurance policy that indemnifies the
city, and its prior, present and future officials, representatives and
employees from all damage suits or actions of every nature brought or claimed
against the erector for injuries or damages to persons or property sustained by
any person or persons through any act of omission or negligence of said
erector, his servants, agents or employees. The policy shall contain a clause
whereby it cannot be canceled or changed until after written notice has been
filed with the City Clerk at least 30 days prior to the date of cancellation;
   (G)   Removal agreement or bond. The Building Inspector or Zoning
Administrator may require a signed removal agreement, bond or other acceptable
surety to guarantee the future removal of a sign;
   (H)   Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the structure is
designed in accordance with applicable dead load and wind pressure standards.
The Building Inspector may require approval of the structural design by a
registered architect or engineer; and
   (I)   Written and notarized consent of the property or sign owner, or their
agent or manager, to perform the proposed work.
(Ord. 10-013, passed 1-11-10)
§ 154.609 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   Nonconforming signs shall be permitted to continue as such until removed or
altered, provided that such signs are maintained in accordance with the
following.
   (A)   General standards. Nonconforming signs of shall be maintained in
accordance with the requirements for all signs specified in § 154.603 (General
Standards).
   (B)   Expansion or relocation prohibited. Nonconforming signs shall not be
expanded or relocated.
   (C)   Servicing. Painting, servicing, cleaning or minor repairs to a
nonconforming sign shall be permitted, provided that the sign is restored to
its original design and all work is in compliance with applicable structural
and electrical codes and the requirements for all signs specified in § 154.603
(General Standards).
   (D)   Alterations. Alterations to a nonconforming sign, including changes to
the sign frame, sign copy area, panels or structural elements shall be subject
to the following conditions:
      (1)   The sign shall be brought into compliance with the requirements for
all signs specified in §154.603 (General Standards);
      (2)   The sign shall be brought into compliance with all applicable sign
height and sign area standards for the type of sign, as specified in this
subchapter;
      (3)   Nonconformities caused by inadequate ground sign setback at a
ground sign’s current location may be permitted to continue so that the
existing support structure and wiring may be re-used, provided that permitted
alterations will not increase this nonconformity, and provided that the ground
sign is located entirely outside of all street rights-of-way and corner
clearance areas; and
      (4)   Approval of appropriate permits by the Building Inspector.
(Ord. 10-013, passed 1-11-10)
§ 154.610 VARIANCES.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall have the authority to grant a
variance from the strict application of these regulations provided that such
relief may be granted without substantially impairing the intent of this
subchapter. Application and consideration of sign variances shall be in
accordance with the following procedures and standards.
   (A)   Application and review procedures. Any party who has been denied a
permit for a proposed sign may file an application for a variance to this
subchapter within 21 calendar days of the decision. Applications shall be
considered by the ZBA per the procedures in §154.450, Variances and Appeals.
   (B)   Variance standards for signs. The ZBA shall consider the following
standards while reviewing any application for an variance from provisions of
this subchapter.
      (1)   Obstructions. Construction of a conforming sign would obstruct the
vision of    motorists or otherwise endanger public health or safety.
      (2)   Visibility. A conforming sign would be blocked from the sight of
passing motorists due to existing buildings, trees, or other obstructions.
      (3)   Site features. Construction of a conforming sign would require
significant tree removal or extensive topographic changes.
      (4)   Scale. A sign that exceeds the allowable height or area standards
of this subchapter would be more appropriated in scale to the building or site
frontage.
      (5)   Aesthetics. The variance shall not adversely impact the character
or appearance of the building or parcel or the neighborhood.
      (6)   Minimal. The variance shall be the minimum necessary to allow
reasonable use, visibility or readability of the sign.
      (7)   Intent. The variance shall not significantly impair the intent and
purpose of this subchapter.
   (C)   Findings and conditions.  In a motion granting or denying a sign
variance, the ZBA shall state the specific grounds for the decision, which
shall be supported by specific findings of fact. The ZBA may attach conditions
to a sign variance approval in accordance with the intent and purpose of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 10-013, passed 1-11-10)
§ 154.611 SIGN REMOVAL BY CITY ACTION.
   (A)   Abandoned and illegal signs. The Building Inspector/Code Enforcement
Officer shall make a determination as to whether the sign is an abandoned and/
or illegal sign, as defined in this subchapter. Written notification of the
determination and any order for removal shall be provided to said owner,
operator or person having beneficial use of the property upon which the sign is
located. Abandoned and/or illegal signs shall be removed within 30 days of the
determination. When there is a question or dispute over the building officer/
code enforcement officer's determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
have the authority to hear such a challenge and, make such determinations and
to require the removal of abandoned and/or illegal signs in the city, subject
to the following procedure.
      (1)   Public hearing. Such action may be taken only after a public
hearing has been held in accordance with M.C.L. § 125.3103 of PA 110 of 2008,
as amended, at which time the owner, operator or person having beneficial use
of the property upon which the sign is located shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence as to whether the sign is abandoned and/or illegal, and
whether the sign should be removed.
      (2)   Removal. If the Zoning Board of Appeals orders the abandoned and/or
illegal signs to be removed, the signs shall be removed within 30 days of the
determination and order for removal by the Zoning Board of Appeals. All sign
copy and component parts shall be completely removed, and the area where the
sign was located shall be restored as nearly as possible to its original
condition. Failure to remove the sign shall constitute grounds for the city to
seek Circuit Court approval to remove the sign at the expense of the owner of
the property upon which the sign is located. The city may then place a lien on
the property, adding necessary removal expenses to the tax bill for the
property.
   (B)   Damaged signs. Signs determined to be in a damaged condition by the
Building Inspector shall be repaired, replaced or removed to the satisfaction
of the Building Inspector by the owner, operator or person having beneficial
use of the property upon which the sign is located. If the owner does not take
such action within ten days, such signs may be repaired or removed by the city
at the expense of the owner of the property upon which the sign is located. The
city may then place a lien on the property, adding necessary removal expenses
to the tax bill for the property.
   (C)   Nonconforming signs. The elimination of nonconforming signs in the
city is hereby declared to be for a public purpose and for a public use. The
City Council shall have the authority to institute and prosecute proceedings
for the condemnation of nonconforming signs determined to be in violation of
the requirements for such signs specified in §
154.609 (Nonconforming Signs), under the power of eminent domain and in
accordance with the General Law City Act, Public Act 3 of 1895, as amended. For
the purpose of removal, the City Council may, at its discretion, acquire and
remove nonconforming signs by purchase, condemnation or otherwise with the cost
paid from general funds.
   (D)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs erected or displayed within a street
right-of-way or corner clearance area, or without a valid permit, or after the
expiration of a permit, may be removed by the city without notice. Signs
removed shall be held by the city for a five day reclamation period, after
which the sign shall be deemed abandoned and shall be discarded.
   (E)   Unsafe signs. Signs determined to be unsafe by the Building Inspector
shall be immediately removed or repaired to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector by the owner, operator or person having beneficial use of the
property upon which the sign is located. If the owner does not take such action
within 24 hours, such signs may be removed by the city, at the expense of the
owner of the property upon which the sign is located. The city may then place a
lien on the property, adding necessary removal expenses to the tax bill for the
property.
(Ord. 10-013, passed 1-11-10; Am. Ord. 19-003, passed 2-25-19)
§ 154.612 TABLE OF ALLOWABLE SIGNAGE.
Type of Sign*          Zoning      Area (sq. ft.)  Height (ft.) Permit Required
                       Districts
Address number         All         2                            No
Animated               Not allowed
Billboards             Not allowed
Building directory §  CBD,        5% of sign area              Yes
154.606(B)             commercial
Building markers       All         1                            No
Canopy, awning §      CBD,
154.606(E)             commercial/                 8            Yes
                       industrial
                       CBD,        Part of sign
Changeable copy        commercial/ area                         No
                       industrial
Community event        All         32              8            Yes, if event
                                                                is over 14 days
Construction §        All         16              6            Yes
154.606(F)
                       CBD,
Directional            commercial/ 2               4            No
                       industrial
Entry sign §          All         36              6            Yes
154.606(A)
 
Type of Sign*        Zoning      Area (sq. ft.)        Height (ft.) Permit
                     Districts                                      Required
                     CBD,
Event signs          commercial/ 12                    4            Yes
                     industrial
Flags                All         (See §                            No
                                 154.605(M))
Garage sale          Residential 4                                  No
Gasoline sales       Commercial/ (See §                            Yes
                     industrial  154.606(D))
Governmental         All                                            No
Historic             All                                            No
Holiday displays     All                                            No
Incidental           All                                            No
                     CBD,
Message boards       commercial/ Included in area                   Yes
                     industrial
Monument             All         48                    6            Yes
Nameplate            All         2                                  No
“No” signs       All         3                                  No
Pole                 Commercial/ 48                    20           Yes
                     industrial
Political            All                               8            No
Portable §          CBD,
154.606(G)(7)        commercial/                       4            Yes
                     industrial
                     CBD,
Projecting           commercial/ 24                                 Yes
                     industrial
Real estate          All         8                     6            No
Roof                 Not allowed
Rear/side public     CBD,
entry                commercial/ 25% of front signage               Yes
                     industrial
String lights        Not allowed
Temporary sign       All         24                    6            Yes
Time/temperature §  CBD,
154.605(Q)           commercial/                                    No
                     industrial
Traffic control      All                                            No
Wall §              CBD,        1½ sq. ft./ building
154.606(H)           commercial/ frontage                           Yes
                     industrial
                     CBD,        ½ permitted front
Wall - side          commercial/ sign                               Yes
                     industrial
                     CBD,
Window               commercial/ 25%                                No
                     industrial
 
* Commercial and industrial zoning districts are allowed one freestanding sign,
i.e. ground/monument sign or pole sign in additional to allowable wall signage.
(Ord. 10-013, passed 1-11-10)
§ 154.613 CHANGEABLE MESSAGE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Where permitted and maximum allowed. Signs with changeable copy are
permitted on lawful ground/monument signs, pole signs, and wall signs, provided
not more than one changeable copy sign is permitted per address.
   (B)   Maximum changeable message area. The changeable copy area of a sign
shall not exceed 50% of that sign's area.
   (C)   Frequency of message changes.  The message change cycle of a
changeable message sign shall not exceed one change per eight seconds.
   (D)   Message change process. The message change cycle of a changeable
message sign must be completed instantaneously in one second or less. Any
animation or movement, which includes flashing, scrolling, fading, dissolving,
osculating, spinning, twirling, video display, or other type of motion, is
prohibited.
   (E)   Illumination of changeable copy signs. The illumination of changeable
copy signs shall meet the requirements of §
154.614 and §
154.030.
(Ord. 17-001, passed 7-10-17)
§ 154.614 ILLUMINATION OF SIGNS.
   Internal and external sign illumination shall be permitted in the C-1, C-2,
C-3, CBD, and M-1 districts, subject to the following:
   (A)   External sign illumination. External illumination of signs shall be
permitted, provided that the light source(s) shall be nonglare, fully shielded,
directed towards the sign face, and designed to concentrate all light on the
sign copy area.
   (B)   Internal sign illumination. Signs may be internally illuminated,
provided that the light display must be equipped with a photocell and dimming
mechanism that automatically adjusts the brightness in response to ambient
light conditions. These signs must also be equipped with a means to immediately
turn off the display or lighting if it malfunctions. The following brightness
standards must be met:
      (1)   No sign may be brighter than is necessary for clear and adequate
visibility;
      (2)   No sign shall be of such intensity or brilliance that is interferes
with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device, or signal, as
determined by the Police Chief or his designee; and
      (3)   The maximum luminance level of an internally illuminated sign shall
not exceed 5,000 nits, except that the luminance level shall not exceed 1,250
nits from 30 minutes before dusk until dawn, as determined by the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Association (NOAA).
   (C)   Awning illumination. Internal illumination of awnings shall be limited
to one single-tube fixture (fluorescent, LED, or equivalent), provided that the
fixture is recessed and the awning material is opaque except for any permitted
sign copy area.
   (D)   Other limitations. Sign illumination shall be further limited as
follows:
      (1)   Sign illumination shall be provided solely by electrical means or
devices, and shall not be of a flashing, intermittent, moving or animated type;
and
      (2)   Luminous tube lighting (neon, fluorescent or similar) shall not be
directly visible from any road right-of-way or adjacent parcel. Such lighting
may be used as an indirect light source, or if shielded by translucent panels
or similar methods.
   (E)   Temporary signs. Illumination of temporary signs shall be prohibited.
   (F)   String lights, tube lights, and other similar lighting around windows
and architectural building features. In addition to the regulations of this
Subchapter, string lights, tube lights, and other similar lighting around
windows and architectural building features are regulated in §
154.030.
(Ord. 17-001, passed 7-10-17; Am. Ord. 22-001, passed 1-24-22)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of these regulations shall constitute a misdemeanor
except as specified in division (B), below. Any person who is convicted shall
be subject to punishment by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment not
exceeding 90 days for each offense, or both, at the discretion of the court.
Each day a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any person who violates §§
154.001 through
154.488, inclusive, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and
subject to the civil fines set forth in §
41.06.
   (C)   Furthermore, the owner or tenant of any building, structure, premise,
or part thereof, and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, or
other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains any
violation of these regulations, may each be found guilty of a separate offense
and may be subject to the penalties provided herein. The cost of prosecution
shall also be assessed against the violator.
   (D)   The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offense from
meeting compliance with the requirements of these regulations.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 18-016, passed 3-19-18)
APPENDIX A: SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
                     Maximum Height of     Minimum Setback
         Lot Minimum StructuresC           Requirements           Minimum
                                           (in feet)              Usable
                                                 Side Yards       Floor   Maximum
                                                                  Area    Coverage
District Area  Width              Front                           Per     of Lot by
         (Sq.  in    In      In   Elevatio Front Least Total Rear Unit    All
         Ft.)A Feet  Stories Feet (in      Yard  One   of    Yard (Sq.    Buildings
                                  Feet)                Two        Ft.)
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
                     Maximum Height of     Minimum Setback
         Lot Minimum StructuresC           Requirements            Minimum
                                           (in feet)               Usable
                                                 Side Yards        Floor   Maximum
                                                                   Area    Coverage
District Area  Width              Front                            Per     of Lot by
         (Sq.  in    In      In   Elevatio Front Least Total Rear  Unit    All
         Ft.)A Feet  Stories Feet (in      Yard  One   of    Yard  (Sq.    Buildings
                                  Feet)                Two         Ft.)


R-1      7,200 60B   2½     35   25       30D   3D,E  12D,E 35D   F       30%
R-2      9,000 75    2½     35   25       30D   10D,E 20D,E 35D   925F    30%
R-3      G     100   2½     35   25       30H,I 20H,I 40H,I 35H,I F, J    30%
C-1      K     K     2½     35   --       0     L, M  L, M  L, N  --      --
C-2      K     K     2½     35   --       0     L, M  L, M  L, N  --      --
C-3      K     K     2½     35   --       0     L, M  L, M  L, N  --      --
M-1      --    100   2½     40   --       30    5P    10P   30P   --      --
PD       Q     Q     Q       Q    Q        Q     Q     Q     Q     Q       Q
VP       --    --    --      --   --       R     R, L  R, L  R, L  --      --
PR       S     S     2½     35   --       0     S     S     S     --      --
 
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 10-001, passed 7-13-09; Am. Ord. 18-019,
passed 7-23-18; Am. Ord. 22-001, passed 1-24-22; Am. Ord. 24-008, passed 8-26-
24)
FOOTNOTES TO THE SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
   (A)   Lot area. Net lot area, as defined in §
154.005, shall be used to determine compliance with lot area requirements.
   (B)   Lot proportions. Lot depths of newly created lots in the R-1 district
shall be no greater than four times the lot width.
   (C)   Exceptions to height standards. The height standards shall not apply
to certain structures listed in §
154.034.
   (D)   Minimum setbacks for nonresidential uses. Permitted nonresidential
uses shall comply with setback requirements set forth in §§
154.135 through
154.162 for specific uses. Where setback requirements are not specified in §§
154.135 through
154.162, permitted nonresidential uses shall comply with the minimum setback
requirements set forth in the Schedule of Regulations, except that the minimum
side yard shall be 20 feet.
   (E)   Setback on side yards facing a street. On corner lots there shall be
maintained a front yard along each street frontage, except that the minimum
setback on side yards facing a street where no other housing units in the block
face the side street shall be nine feet.
   (F)   Floor area requirements. Single-family detached dwellings shall comply
with the following minimum floor area requirements:
   Dwellings without basement    1,250 square feet
   Dwellings with basement    1,100 square feet
   First floor of 2-story or tri-level   550 square feet
   (G)   Lot requirements. Single-family dwellings shall comply with the lot
standards for the R-1 district. Two-family dwellings shall comply with the lot
standards for the R-2 district. Multiple-family dwellings shall comply with the
following minimum lot area standards.
   Minimum Lot Area Per Unit
   First dwelling unit    3,000 square feet
   Each additional unit    2,500 square feet
   (H)   Setbacks in R-3 district. Single-family dwellings shall comply with
the setback standards for the R-1 district. Two-family dwellings shall comply
with the setbacks for the R-2 district. The minimum distance between any two
multiple-family structures erected on the same parcel shall be as follows.
 
Orientation of Building 1-Story Buildings 1½ or 2-Story Buildings
Front to front          30 feet           60 feet
Front to rear           30 feet           60 feet
Rear to rear            30 feet           60 feet
End to end              20 feet           20 feet
End to front            30 feet           30 feet
End to rear             30 feet           30 feet
   (I)   Parking setback adjacent to residential district. Off-street parking
shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from any residential district boundary.
   (J)   Minimum floor space in the R-3 district.  
 
Number of bedrooms Required Floor Area (square feet)
0                  500
1                  500
2                  700
3                  900
4                  1,000
Each additional    100
   (K)   Lot area and width in Commercial districts. Lot area and width
requirements in the commercial and office districts shall be based on
compliance with the setback and lot coverage standards.
   (L)   Side or rear yard setback along interior lot lines in Commercial
districts. The maximum side or rear yard setback shall be zero where all
abutting or facing walls are composed of fireproof materials and contain no
windows, doors, or other openings. Where any walls are not of fireproof
construction or where any walls contain openings, a side or rear yard setback
shall be provided as follows.
 
Building Height Minimum Side or Rear Yard Setback
1 story         5 feet
2 stories       8 feet
3 stories       10 feet
   (M)   Side yard setback on corner lots in Commercial districts. No side yard
setback in required except where the side street abuts an interior residential
lot, in which case the side yard setback shall be equal to the minimum front
yard setback for the district in which the building is located.
   (N)   Rear yard setback on through-lots in Commercial districts. The rear
yard setback on lots which extend through from street to street shall be equal
to the minimum front yard setback for the district in which the building is
located.
   (O)   Reserved.
   (P)   Minimum setback adjacent to a residential use. Buildings in the
industrial districts shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any
residential district boundary.
   (Q)   Planned Development regulations. See §§
154.330 though 154.336 for development standards in the PD, Planned Development
District.
   (R)   VP District Regulations. Off-street parking in the VP District shall
comply with the requirements in §§
154.370 through
154.372.
   (S)   Buildings in PR district. Any construction of buildings within the PR,
Public Recreation District, shall be required to meet minimum standards by use
established in footnotes (K), (L), (M) and (N) when applicable.
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92; Am. Ord. 97-004, passed 8-18-97; Am. Ord. 22-001,
passed 1-24-22; Am. Ord. 24-008, passed 8-26-24)
   APPENDIX B: ILLUSTRATIONS
Section
   
1.   Building Height Requirements
   
2.   Building Line
   
3.   Floor Area of Commercial, Office similar nonresidential uses
   
4.   Lot Width and Setbacks
   
5.   Basic Structural Terms
   
6.   Basement and Story
   
7.   Yard Terms
   
8.   Yards
   
9.   Unobstructed Sight Distance
   
10.   Lighting Requirements
   
11.   Parking Lot Requirements
   
12.   Privacy Screen
1. BUILDING HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
[Click_to_view_a_PDF_of_the_image]
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
2. BUILDING LINE
[Click_to_view_a_PDF_of_the_image]
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)  
3. FLOOR AREA OF COMMERCIAL, OFFICE AND SIMILAR NONRESIDENTIAL USES
[Click_to_view_a_PDF_of_the_image]
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
4. LOT WIDTH AND SETBACKS
[Click_to_view_a_PDF_of_the_image]
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
5. BASIC STRUCTURAL TERMS
[Click_to_view_a_PDF_of_the_image]
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
6. BASEMENT AND STORY
[Click_to_view_a_PDF_of_the_image]
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
7. YARD TERMS
[Click_to_view_a_PDF_of_the_image]
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
8. YARDS
[Click_to_view_a_PDF_of_the_image]
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
9. UNOBSTRUCTED SIGHT DISTANCE
[Click_to_view_a_PDF_of_the_image]
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
10. LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS
[Click_to_view_a_PDF_of_the_image]
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
11. PARKING LOT LAYOUTS
[Click_to_view_a_PDF_of_the_image]
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
12. PRIVACY SCREEN
[Click_to_view_a_PDF_of_the_image]
(Ord. 92-005, passed 2-17-92)
CHAPTER 155: VACANT PROPERTIES
Section
   
155.01   Purpose
   
155.02   Definitions
   
155.03   Scope
   
155.04   Registry of vacant properties
   
155.05   Registry information requirements
   
155.06   Annual registration and inspection fee
   
155.07   Required inspections
   
155.08   Maintenance and safety requirements
   
155.09   Fire damaged property
   
155.99   Penalties; municipal civil infraction
§ 155.01 PURPOSE.
   Purpose and intent. It is the intent of this subchapter is to help protect
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens to prevent blight, protect
property values and neighborhood integrity, to avoid the creation and
maintenance of nuisances and to ensure the safe and sanitary maintenance of
dwellings and commercial and industrial buildings. Due to economic conditions,
mortgage foreclosures, and bankruptcies, homes, buildings and properties have
become vacant and unsupervised. This has caused properties to become nuisances,
decrease private investment and to invite unwanted activity. Such unwanted
activities have included an increase in instances of unsecured or open doors
and windows, broken water pipes, flooded basements, theft of metals and other
materials, overgrowth of grass, weeds, shrubs, and bushes, illegal dumping,
vermin activity, foul odors, and façade decay at vacant properties. These
vacant properties have a negative impact on surrounding properties and causes
deterioration in neighborhoods and commercial areas. The city also needs to be
able to contact owners for utility shutoff, fire safety and police reasons.
(Ord. 19-005, passed 4-22-19)
§ 155.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms shall apply to this chapter as written unless context
indicates or requires different meaning:
   EVIDENCE OF VACANCY. Any condition that on its own, or combined with other
conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property
is vacant. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to, overgrown
and/or dead vegetation; unshoveled snow from sidewalks; accumulation of
newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail; past due utility notices and/or
disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris; boarded-up
windows; abandoned vehicles, auto parts or materials; the absence of window
coverings such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters; the absence of furnishings
and/or personal items consistent with habitation or occupancy; statements by
neighbors, passersby, delivery agents or utility agents, including city
employees, that the property is vacant.
   OWNER. The person or legal entity who has legal title and/or the right to
possess, use, transfer or convey property, i.e., the owner or successor to
title by foreclosure, sheriff's sale or by court order.
   VACANT PROPERTY. A lot, property, building, or structure that is not legally
or currently occupied. Vacant property does not mean property that is
temporarily unoccupied while the residents are away on vacation, tending to
personal matters or business, or property that is not intended by the owner to
be left vacant.
(Ord. 19-005, passed 4-22-19)
§ 155.03 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing vacant land and
structures including, but not limited to, residential, commercial and
industrial structures. This article does not relieve any person from compliance
with all other city ordinances, the state building code, and all other laws,
rules and regulations.
(Ord. 19-005, passed 4-22-19)
§ 155.04 REGISTRY OF VACANT PROPERTIES.
   (A)   Creation of registry. There is hereby created in the City of Garden
City a registry of vacant properties and structures.
   (B)   Vacant properties to be registered annually. Owners of real property
are required to register all vacant properties within 60 days of the vacancy
and to reregister the properties annually thereafter. Structures that are
vacant at the time of the enactment of this ordinance must register within 60
days.
(Ord. 19-005, passed 4-22-19)
§ 155.05 REGISTRY INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Required information. Owners of vacant properties required to register
their properties pursuant to this article shall submit a completed vacant
property registration form, as provided by the city or its designee containing
the following information:
      (1)   The name of the owner of the property.
      (2)   A mailing address where mail may be sent that will be acknowledged
as received by the owner. If certified mail/return receipt requested is sent to
the address and the mail is returned marked “refused” or “unclaimed,” or if
ordinary mail sent to the address is returned for whatever reason, then such
occurrence shall be prima facie proof that the owner has failed to comply with
this requirement.
      (3)   The name of an individual responsible for the care and control of
the property. Such individual may be the owner, if the owner is an individual,
or may be someone other than the owner with whom they have contracted.
      (4)   A current address, phone number, fax, and email address (if fax and
email addresses are available) where communications may be sent that will be
acknowledged as received by the owner or individual responsible for the care
and control of the property. If certified mail/return receipt requested is sent
to the address and the mail is returned marked “refused” or “unclaimed,” or if
ordinary mail sent to the address is returned for whatever reason, then such
occurrence shall be prima facie proof that the owner has failed to comply with
this requirement.
      (5)   An acknowledgment that property subject to this chapter that is
left open and/or accessible shall be subject to entry by the city in order to
ensure that the property has not become an attractive nuisance and to ensure
that the property is locked and/or secured.
   (B)   Required information update. If at any time the information contained
in the registration form is no longer valid, the property owner shall within
ten days file a new registration form containing current information. There
shall be no fee to update the current owner's information.
   (C)   Removal of occupied property from registry. Prior to reoccupation of
property that is subject to this article, the owner shall notify the city or
its designee that the property has been sold or rented, and to whom. There
shall be no fee to remove a property from the registry.
(Ord. 19-005, passed 4-22-19)
§ 155.06 ANNUAL REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION FEE.
   (A)   Creation of fee. An annual registration and vacant property inspection
fee shall be set by the city in the city's administrative fee resolution to
offset the cost of processing the form, conducting the safety and maintenance
inspections and maintaining the records.
   (B)   Payment of fee. The fee established in division (A) above shall be
submitted with the registry information outlined in §
155.05. In addition, in the case where the owner has failed to register, the
owner shall be assessed the added cost of the city's, or its designee's,
expense in having to determine ownership, which may include, but is not limited
to, title search and legal expenses.
   (C)   Unpaid fees; assessment. All fees herein that remain unpaid after 14
days’ written notice to the owner/management company shall be assessed against
the property as a lien and placed on the tax roll.
(Ord. 19-005, passed 4-22-19)
§ 155.07 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Initial inspection. Owners of vacant properties who are required to
file an owner's registration form under this section shall be subject to an
initial inspection by the city or its designee to ensure the safety and
maintenance of the vacant property by insuring compliance with all applicable
codes and ordinances, including but not limited to the International Property
Maintenance Code,
Chapter 151 Building Regulations and
Chapter 154 Zoning.
   (B)   Annual inspection. Any vacant property included on the vacant property
registry of §
155.04 shall be subject to an annual inspection to insure continued compliance
with all applicable codes and ordinances, including but not limited to the
International Property Maintenance Code,
Chapter 151 Building Regulations and
Chapter 154 Zoning.
   (C)   Compliance with inspection violations. Any vacant property that is
found to be in violation of any applicable city code or ordinance shall obtain
the necessary permits, make required repairs and obtain any follow-up
inspections from the city or its designee to ensure the building is safe,
secure and maintained. The owner or the owner's agent shall certify by
affidavit that all water, sewer, electrical, gas, HVAC, plumbing systems,
roofing, structural systems, foundations, and drainage systems are sound,
operational, or properly disconnected.
   (D)   (1)   In a nonemergency situation where the owner or occupant demands
a warrant for inspection of the premises, the enforcing agency shall obtain a
warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. The enforcing agency shall
prepare the warrant, stating the address of the building to be inspected, the
nature of the inspection, as defined in this or other applicable acts, and the
reasons for the inspection. It shall be appropriate and sufficient to set forth
the basis for inspection (e.g. complaint, area or recurrent violation basis).
The warrant shall also state that it is issued pursuant to this section, and
that it is for the purposes set forth in this chapter and applicable state law.
      (2)   If the court finds that the warrant is in proper form and in accord
with this section, it shall be issued forthwith.
      (3)   In the event of an emergency no warrant shall be required.
(Ord. 19-005, passed 4-22-19)
§ 155.08 MAINTENANCE AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Vegetation and debris removal. Properties subject to this section
shall be kept free of weeds; grass more than six inches high; dry brush; dead
vegetation; trash; junk; debris; building materials; any accumulation of
newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state
or local law; discarded items including, but not limited to, furniture,
clothing, large and small appliances, printed material, signage, containers,
equipment, construction materials, or any other items that give the appearance
that the property is abandoned including the illegal outside storage of
vehicles. Property subject to this chapter must comply with the security
fencing, barrier and maintenance requirements of the International Property
Maintenance Code and any other applicable city ordinances.
   (B)   Graffiti removal. Property subject to this ordinance shall be
maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar markings by removal or painting
over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the
structure.
   (C)   Landscaping maintenance. All visible front and side yards of property
subject to this chapter shall be landscaped and properly maintained.
Landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes,
shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark designed and
maintained in an appropriate manner. Landscaping does not include weeds,
gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed materials, plastic sheeting,
indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material. Maintenance includes, but is not
limited to, regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of
required landscaping and removal of all trimmings.
   (D)   Pool maintenance. Pools, spas, and other water features shall be kept
in working order to ensure the water remains clear and free of pollutants and
debris or drained and kept dry and free of debris. In either case, properties
with pools and/or spas must comply with the security fencing, barrier and
maintenance requirements of the International Property Maintenance Code and any
other applicable city ordinances.
   (E)   Odor. Properties shall be free of offensive odors meaning any smell,
condition or thing that is foul or offensive to the senses, including all
disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions,
substances or causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such
odors and stenches. Offensive odor shall not be allowed to escape into the
atmosphere in concentrations which are offensive to the public or to adjoining
property owners or occupants, and can become injurious and dangerous to the
health, comfort, or property of individuals, or of the public and creates a
public nuisance or which could be detrimental to human, plant, or animal life.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the
creation or maintenance of conditions which give rise to the emission or
generation of an offensive odor.
   (F)   Exterior Façade. Properties shall be free of broken or cracked window
panes; windows not fully glazed or containing inserts/patches, or openings
boarded up for more than 30 days. Wood surfaces must be clean, stained or
painted with no chipping or peeling paint. Exterior surfaces shall be free of
dirt or grime, and siding and roof shall be clean and in good repair with no
missing, damaged or deteriorated materials including shingles, siding, fascia
boards, trim, shutters, porch skirting, etc. Awnings shall not be faded, torn
or in disrepair. Roof and roof shingles shall be in good condition and not
covered with tarp in excess of 30 days if repairs are being made. Porches and
stairs shall be stable and free of cracked boards or block.
   (G)   Exterior furniture. Properties shall be free of storage, display or
use of upholstered or other furniture or discarded automobile seats/parts on
porches, patios or in yards not designed, manufactured, sold or intended for
use as outdoor furniture.
   (H)   Security. Properties subject to this section shall be maintained in a
secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. Secure manner
includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors
(walk-through, sliding and garage), gates and any other opening of such size
that it may allow a child to access the interior of the property and/or
structure(s). Broken windows must be repaired or replaced within 14 days.
Boarding up of open or broken windows is prohibited except as a temporary
measure for no longer than 14 days. Properties subject to this section shall be
maintained and secured to comply with the minimum-security fencing, barrier and
maintenance requirements of the International Property Maintenance Code.
   (I)   Compliance with inspection violations.  The owner or the owner's agent
shall demonstrate that all water, sewer, electrical, gas, HVAC, plumbing
systems, exterior finishes and walls, concrete surfaces, accessory buildings,
roofing, structural systems, foundations, drainage systems, gutters, doors,
windows, parking areas, signage, driveway apron(s), service walk(s), sidewalk
(s), and other public areas are sound and operational, or properly
disconnected.
   (J)   Local property management. If the property is owned by a corporation
and/or the beneficiary/trustee/owner is located more than 30 miles away, a
local property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly
inspections to verify that the requirements of this section, and any other
applicable laws, are being met.
   (K)   Property management signage. Vacant commercial/industrial property
shall be posted with name and 24-hour contact phone number of the property
management company located within 30 miles of the subject property. The posting
shall be no less than 18 inches by 24 inches and shall be of a 72-point Arial
font and shall contain along with the name and 24-hour contact number, the
words “THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY” and “TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS, CALL.”
The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the front of the
property and visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the
building/structure on the front of the property so it is facing and visible
from the street or if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to
support the posting in a location that is visible from the street to the front
of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting must be
constructed of and printed with weather resistant materials.
(Ord. 19-005, passed 4-22-19)
§ 155.09 FIRE DAMAGED PROPERTY.
   If an occupied building is damaged by fire, the owner must, within 90 days
from the date of the fire, apply for a permit to start construction or
demolition. The City Manager may grant additional 90-day extensions, upon the
owner demonstrating substantial progress towards completion of repairs. Failure
to do so will result in the property being deemed vacant and subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 19-005, passed 4-22-19)
§ 155.99 PENALTIES; MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION.
   (A)   Failure to timely register a vacant property or any other violation of
this chapter shall be a municipal civil infraction. The requirements of this
article are in addition to, and not in lieu of all other city ordinances, state
law and/or any other rules and regulations as well as the requirements of MCL
125.539(i), which allows for demolition of vacant structures, or nuisance
abatement by the city.
   (B)   The first offense or any subsequent offense shall be subject to the
procedures and fine schedule in Chapter 41 and any other costs authorized by
the court pursuant to MCL 600.8727, MCL 600.8335, or state law. As authorized
by MCL 600.8731, in the event such fines and costs are not timely paid, then
such fines and costs may become a lien on the property and be placed on the tax
roll, or result in a suit for collection of judgment.
(Ord. 19-005, passed 4-22-19)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
      
II.   ZONING CHANGES
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
97-005   8-18-97     Granting an extension of the franchise with Comcast
                     Cablevision Inc. to January 31, 1998.
98-004   2-23-98     Granting an extension of the franchise with Comcast
                     Cablevision Inc. to July 31, 1998.
98-015   8-31-98     Granting an extension of the franchise with Comcast
                     Cablevision Inc. to January 31, 1999.
                     Granting Michigan Consolidated Gas Company the right,
01-006   6-4-01      power and authority to do gas business in the city for a
                     period of 30 years.
02-010   7-15-02     Granting an extension of the franchise with Comcast
                     Cablevision Inc. to December 31, 2002.
03-006   1-6-03      Granting an extension of the franchise with Comcast
                     Cablevision Inc. to June 30, 2003.
03-013   6-30-03     Granting an extension of the franchise with Comcast
                     Cablevision Inc. to January 31, 2004.
04-001   2-2-04      Granting an extension of the franchise with Comcast
                     Cablevision Inc. to June 1, 2004.
04-005   6-28-04     Granting an extension of the franchise with Comcast
                     Cablevision Inc. to January 31, 2005.
05-001   1-31-05     Granting an extension of the franchise with Comcast
                     Cablevision Inc. to July 31, 2005.
05-004   5-9-05      Renewing a cable franchise with Comcast Cablevision Inc.
 
TABLE II: ZONING CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date     Description
No.  Passed
99-           Changing the zoning classification of that part of the southeast corner of
006  7-19-99  section 14, beginning at the south ¼ corner of section 14 T2S R9E from R-3 to O-
              1.
99-           Changing the zoning classification of the east 110 feet of Lots 27 and 28,
047  5-1-00   except the east 30 feet of Lots 27 and 28, also except the north 43 feet of lot
              28, Assessors Folkers Little Farms Subdivisions, from R-3 to R-1.
01-  3-26-01  Changing the zoning classification of Lot 13C1B1 and Lot 1790, Folker’s Garden
002           City Acres Subdivision No. 11 from PD to C-3.
01-           Changing the zoning classification of 6921 - 2945 Merriman Road, Lots 3267 to
003  4-9-01   3273 and E½ ADJ VAC Alley, Folker’s Garden City Acres Subdivision No. 21 from R-
              1 to O-1.
02-  2-4-02   Changing the zoning classification of Lots E1A2 and F1A2, part of the southwest
004           quarter of section 10 T2S R9E from M-1 to R-3.
              Changing the zoning classification of: Lots 97, 98, the north 9.28 feet of Lot
02-  4-8-02   99 except the east 27 feet, and the north 200 feet of Lots 100 and 101; the
006           north 200 feet of Lots 102 and 103; and Lot 103 except the north 200 feet,
              Folker’s Full Acre Farm Subdivision from R-1 to PD.
02-  6-10-02  Changing the zoning classification of part of the northeast quarter of section
008           15, T2S, R9E from R-1 to C-3.
03-  9-23-02  Changing the zoning classification of Lots 271 through 274, Folker’s Full Acre
002           Farm Subdivision No. 2 from C-2 to PD.
03-  9-8-03   Changing the zoning classification of 31438, 31452, 31466, and 31480 Pardo, of
014           Folker’s Garden City Acres No. 5, from R-1 to C-2.
04-  6-28-04  Changing the zoning classification of Lots a1a2,b (except the north 120 feet),
006           64, and 65 of Folker’s Full Acre Farm Subdivision, from C-2 and R-2 to R-1.
              Establishing the Straight Farmhouse Historic District, described as: Folker's
05-  4-25-05  Garden City Acres Subdivision Number 18, T2S R9E L54 P56 WCR, 10b283 to 2845
003           Lots 2838 to 2844 including E 1/2 Adj Vac Alley also Lot 2845 and w 1/2 Adj Vac
              Alley.
05-           Changing the zoning classification of Lots 390 through 400 of the Westwood Park
005  6-27-05  Subdivision, including the eastern 1/2 of the vacated alleyway, T2S R9E, from C-
              1 to C-3.
07-           Changing the zoning classification of unimproved land on the west side of
002  12-11-06 Inkster Road, north of Marquette, known as the parcel west of 1139 Inkster Road,
              from R-1 to O-1.
09-           Changing the zoning classification of a vacant piece of property located on the
001  12-8-08  west side of Inkster Road and south of John Hauk, known as 1847 Inkster Road,
              Lots 1664 to 1671 of Folker’s Garden City Acres No. 11, from R-1 to O-1.
              Changing the zoning classification of the property located on the northwest
10-  9-14-09  corner of Cherry Hill and Merriman Roads, commonly known as 31450 Cherry Hill
003           Road, 31464 Cherry Hill Road, and vacant Cherry Hill, from R-1 One-Family
              Residential and C-1 Local Business to C-2 Local Business.
10-           Changing the zoning classification of property located to the east of Middlebelt
008  10-5-09  Road and south of Bridge Avenue, commonly known as 29233 Bride Avenue, from R-
              1 One-Family Residential to C-2 Community Business.
11-           Changing the zoning classification for a property located to the north of Cherry
011  9-12-11  Hill and south of Harrison Road, more commonly known as 28482 Cherry Hill Road,
              from O-1 Office to C-1 Local Business.
13-           Changing the zoning classification for a property located to the north of Cherry
001  2-11-13  Hill and west of Venoy Road, more commonly known as 32940 Cherry Hill Road, from
              O-1 Office to C- 1 Local Business.
13-           Changing the zoning classification for a property located on the south side of
002  2-11-13  Ford Road between Shotka and Dillion, more commonly known as 30759 Road, from C-
              2 Community Business to C-3 General Business.
13-           Changing the zoning classification for property located at 31492, 31506 and
006  7-15-13  31520 Cherry Hill Road from R-1 One Family Residential District to C-1 Local
              Business District.
13-           Changing the zoning classification for property commonly known as 843 through
007  7-15-13  879 Inkster Road from C-1 Local Business District to C-2 Community Business
              District.
14-           Changing the zoning classification for property commonly known as 5662 Gilman
003  10-6-14  Avenue from R-1 One Family Residential District to VP Vehicular Parking
              District.
14-           Changing the zoning classification for property commonly known as 30247 and
004  10-27-14 30259 Ford Road from C-2 Community Business District to C-3 General Business
              District.
14-  12-8-14  Changing the zoning classification for property commonly known as 31850 Ford
005           Road from C-2 Community Business District to C-3 General Business District.
15-  3-9-15   Changing the zoning classification for property commonly known as 30414 Cherry
001           Hill from O-1 Office to C-1 Local Business.
16-           Changing the zoning classification for the vacated alley portion of property
001  2-8-16   commonly known as 31450 Ford Road and 31441 and 31433 Krauter Avenue from R-
              3 Multiple-Family Residential to C-3 General Business.
17-  10-23-17 Changing the zoning classification for property identified as 203 through 225
003           Middlebelt Road from C-1 Local Business to C-2 Community Business.
17-           Changing the zoning classification of 1724 Middlebelt Road and the eastern 132
004  10-23-17 feet of Parcel 35-013-01-0054-001 from O-1 Office District to R-1 Single Family
              Residential District.
18-  1-8-18   Changing the zoning classification of 28680 Cherry Hill Road from R-1 One Family
001           Residential to R-3 Multiple Family Residential District.
18-           Changing the zoning classification of a vacant lot at the northwest corner of
003  3-19-18  Merriman Road and Bridge Street from O-1 Office District to C-2 Community
              Business.
22-           Changing the zoning classification of property located at the northeast corner
004  7-11-22  of Arcola Avenue and Cherry Hill Road from C-1 Local Business District and C-
              2 Community Business District to R-3 Multiple Family Residential District.
22-           Changing the zoning classification of property located at the northwest corner
005  7-25-22  of Pardo and Rahn Avenues from R-1 Single Family Residential District to
              conditional C-1 Local Business District.
              Changing the zoning classification of property located at 6985 Merriman Road
              From O-1 Office to C-2 Community Business, property located at 6755 and 6721
24-           Merriman Road, and 30260 and 27676 Cherry Hill Road from O-1 Office to C-1 Local
001  2-19-24  Business, property located at 6251 and 6237 Merriman Road from O-1 Office to R-
              1 One Family Residential, and property located at 123 and 155 Inkster Road from
              C-3 General Business and R-3 Multiple Family Residential to C-3 General
              Business.
              Changing the zoning classification of property located at 1858, 1740, 1724,
              1715, 1658 and 1244 Middlebelt Road from O-1 Office to C-1 Local Business,
              property located at 29233 John Hauk Road and 29235 Hennepin Avenue from O-
24-           1 Office to R-1 One-Family Residential, property located at 2041 Middlebelt Road
002  5-6-24   and Parcel #35-016-01-0039-302 from R-2 Two-Family Residential to CBD Central
              Business District, and property located at 1258 Middlebelt Road from O-1 Office,
              R-1 One-Family Residential and R-3 Multiple Family Residential and Parcel #35-
              013-01-0168-001 from R-3 Multiple Family Residential to R-1 One Family
              Residential.
24-  6-3-     Changing the zoning classification of a 2.24 acre portion of 32000 Ford Road,
006  24    Parcel #35-004-99-0026-300 C-3 General Business to M-1 Light Industrial.
              Changing the zoning classification of 1769, 1757, 1753, 1749, 1211, 1139, 1061,
              1049, 1035, and 1021 Inkster Road from O-1 Office to C-1 Local Business,
24-           property described as the east 240 feet of 1647 Inkster Road from O-1 Office to
007  6-3-24   C-1 Local Business, property located at 1501 Inkster Road from O-1 Office and R-
              1 One Family Residential to R-1 One Family Residential, and property described
              as the north 125 feet of 975 Inkster Road from VP, Vehicular Parking to C-
              1 Local Business.
25-           Changing the zoning classification of 31406 Ford Road from C-2 Community
001  1-13-25  Business, and 5651 Merriman Road from R-3 Multiple Family Residential to C-
              3 General Business.
25-  6-23-25  Changing the zoning classification of 29317, 29299, and 29217 Ford Road from CBD
004           Central Business District to PD Planned Development.
25-  8-18-25  Changing the zoning classification of Parcel #35-013-01-0022-001 from CBD
006           Central Business District to PD Planned Development.
             
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated
References to 1983 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS ANNOTATED
M.C.L.A. Section Code Section
M.C.L.A. Section    Code Section
15.231 et seq.      33.306
                    33.167,
15.231 - 15.246     33.265,
                    122.04,
                    122.17
15.243(1)(g)        154.118
15.261 - 15.275     33.167,
                    33.265
15.324 et seq.      33.300 -
                    33.311
24.201 et seq.      70.01
28.601 - 28.616     31.013
29.1 et seq.        91.20
38.1132 et seq.     36.69
38.1701 et seq.     36.51
46.171 - 46.185     53.04
Ch. 117             33.121
117.3(k)            136.01
117.5c              33.150
123.71 et seq.      53.04
123.301 - 123.310   54.21
124.21 - 124.49     121.04
124.501 et seq.     52.02
                    33.002,
125.31 - 125.45     152.002,
                    154.481,
                    154.482
125.74              150.35
125.74 et seq.      150.38
125.401 et seq.     154.465
125.539(i)          155.99
125.581             154.530
                    154.001,
                    154.005,
                    154.036,
                    154.051,
                    154.196,
                    154.211,
125.581 - 125.590   154.416,
                    154.432,
                    154.450,
                    154.452,
                    154.453,
                    154.481,
                    154.483
125.584             154.523
125.584g            154.520,
                    154.527
125.651 et seq.     33.075,
                    33.076
125.1351 et seq.    154.067
125.1352            71.03,
                    71.04
125.1501 - 125.1531 154.465
125.1651 et seq.    33.165,
                    33.166
125.1654            33.167
125.1655(1)         33.169
125.2301 et seq.    154.005,
                    154.159
125.3103            154.005,
                    154.611
125.3206            154.241
141.101 - 141.138   53.06
211.1 - 211.57      10.99,
                    33.106
211.28(2)           33.106
211.30(5)           33.108
211.60              10.99
257.1 et seq.       70.02
257.1 - 257.82      70.02
257.1 - 257.923     70.08
257.1d              91.65
257.8b              91.65
257.79              132.11
257.223             70.02
257.225             70.02
257.226b            70.02
257.228             70.02
257.243             70.02
257.244             70.02
257.252a-g          70.02
257.255             70.02
257.256             70.02
257.310e            70.02
257.311             70.02
257.312             70.02
257.312a            70.02
257.312e            70.02
257.315             70.02
257.319             132.11,
                    135.04
257.319d            70.02
257.321a            133.31
257.324             70.02
257.325             70.02
257.326             70.02
257.328             70.02
257.403             135.04
257.601 - 257.601b  70.02
257.601a            70.49
257.602 - 257.606   70.02
257.610             70.02
257.611 - 257.616   70.02
257.617a - 257.622  70.02
257.624a - 257.624b 70.02
257.625             70.02,
                    133.31
257.625(1)(c)       70.05
257.625a            70.02
257.625c            70.02
257.625m            70.02
257.626 - 257.626b  70.02
257.627             70.07
257.627 - 257.627b  70.02
257.627a            70.07
257.628             70.02
257.629b            70.02
257.631 - 257.632   70.02
257.634 - 257.645   70.02
257.647 - 257.655   70.02
257.656             70.02
257.656 - 257.662   70.02
257.667 - 257.675d  70.02
257.676 - 257.682b  70.02
257.683 - 257.710e  70.02
257.716 - 257.724   70.02
257.726             70.02
257.726a            70.02
257.726b            70.02
257.732             133.31
257.819             133.31
257.904 - 257.904a  70.02
257.904e            70.02
257.905             70.02
287.286a            90.30
299.402 et seq.     54.23
320a                133.31
324.3101 et seq.    52.02
                    150.01,
324.9101 et seq.    150.02,
                    150.05
324.11101 et seq.   54.21
331.501 et seq.     154.143
                    124.70,
333.2591 et seq.    124.71,
                    124.99
333.6103            135.04
333.6107            135.04
333.7101 et seq.    135.08
333.7301            136.01
333.7451            136.20
333.12601 et seq.   39.01,
                    39.02
333.12605           39.05
333.26421 et seq.   124.01
333.26423 et seq.   154.005,
                    154.164
333.27101 et seq.   154.005
338.1051 - 338.1079 116.070
                    124.44,
380.1 - 380.1853    124.74,
                    154.165
                    124.44,
388.1601 - 388.1772 124.74,
                    154.165
397.201 et seq.     33.017
421.1 et seq.       37.01
435.1101 et seq.    135.04
435.1703            135.04
436.1101 et seq.    135.04
436.1101 - 436.2303 135.04
436.1105            135.08
436.1701            135.08
436.1701(1)         135.04
436.1703            133.31
436.1801(2)         135.04
474.101 - 474.141   70.06
480.11 - 480.22     70.03
                    70.06,
                    70.35,
480.11 - 480.19     70.37 -
                    70.39,
                    70.47 -
                    70.49
484.2102            122.03
484.2251            122.04
488.3               132.43
503                 154.158
559.101 - 559.272   154.005,
                    154.404
                    152.002,
                    152.035,
560.101 - 560.293   152.036,
                    152.076,
                    154.005
600.101 et seq.     41.01
600.8101 et seq.    130.05
600.8335            155.99
600.8396            41.01
600.8701 et seq.    10.03,
                    10.99
600.8707(6)         41.01
600.8727            155.99
600.8801 - 600.8835 133.31
600.8827            133.31
624a                133.31
624b                133.31
712A - 712A.32      135.04
712A.2 et seq.      135.06
722.1 - 722.6       135.04
722.111 - 722.128   154.005
722.641             135.09
750.50 et seq.      90.02
750.72              132.14
750.73              132.14
750.113             132.04
750.114             132.02
750.131(2)          132.38
750.167             131.01
750.168             131.01
750.221             132.36
750.302(1)          134.02
750.303(1)          134.02
750.304             134.02
750.356d            132.24
750.359             132.21
750.360             132.24
750.364             132.20
750.367             132.01
750.381             132.06
750.474             136.01
750.535             132.23
750.552             132.39
752.362             112.51
764.15a             131.02
770.9a              124.01
                    
 
REFERENCES TO 1983 CODE
1983 Code Section 2002 Code Section
1983 Code Section 2002 Code Section
10.01             10.01
10.02             10.02
10.03             10.03
10.04             10.04
10.05             10.05
10.06             10.06
10.07             10.07
10.08             10.08
10.09             10.09
10.10             10.10
10.11             10.11
10.12             10.12
10.13             10.13
10.99             10.99
11.01             11.01
30.35             30.01
30.36             30.02
30.37             30.03
31.01             31.001
31.05             31.010
31.06             31.011
31.07             31.012
31.08             31.010
31.10             31.014
31.11             31.013
31.12             31.010
31.20             31.025
31.22             31.026
31.23             31.027
31.24             31.026
31.25             31.026
31.26             31.026
31.27             31.026
31.28             31.025
31.29             31.028
31.31             31.026
31.32             31.029
31.40             31.040
31.42             31.040
31.43             31.040
31.44             31.040
31.45             31.041
31.46             31.041
31.47             31.042
31.48             31.043
31.52             31.097
31.60             31.055
31.61             31.056
31.62             31.056
31.65             31.070
31.66             31.070
31.67             31.071
31.75             31.095
31.76             31.096
32.01             32.01
32.02             32.02
32.03             32.03
32.04             32.04
32.05             32.05
32.06             32.06
32.07             32.07
32.08             32.08
32.09             32.09
32.14             32.10
32.15             32.11
32.20             32.12
33.001            33.001
33.002            33.001
33.003            33.001
33.004            33.003
33.005            33.004
33.006            33.002
33.011            33.165
33.013            33.017
33.020            33.030
33.021            33.031
33.022            33.031
33.023            33.032
33.025            33.045
33.026            33.045
33.027            33.046
33.028            33.047
33.029            33.048
33.045            33.075
33.046            33.075
33.047            33.076
33.048            33.077
33.049            33.078
33.071            33.105
33.072            33.106
33.073            33.107
33.074            33.108
33.080            33.121
33.081            33.121
33.082            33.120
33.083            33.122
33.084            33.121
33.090            33.135
33.091            33.136
33.092            33.137
33.093            33.137
33.094            33.138
33.095            33.139
33.097            33.139
33.100            33.150
33.101            33.150
33.102            33.151
33.103            33.152
33.110            33.166
33.112            33.167
33.113            33.168
33.114            33.169
33.115            33.170
33.116            33.165
33.117            33.171
33.118            33.172
33.119            33.173
33.120            33.173
33.125            33.185
33.126            33.186
33.127            33.187
33.128            33.187
33.129            33.187
33.130            33.188
33.131            33.188
33.132            33.188
34.01             34.01
34.02             34.02
34.03             34.03
34.04             34.04
34.05             34.04
34.06             34.04
34.07             34.07
34.08             34.06
34.09             34.08
34.10             34.07
34.11             34.07
34.12             34.07
34.13             34.08
34.14             34.09
36.01             36.01
36.02             36.02
36.03             36.02
36.05             36.65
36.07             36.66
36.08             36.67
36.09             36.67
36.10             36.68
36.11             36.68
36.15             36.03
36.16             36.03
36.20             36.15
36.21             36.16
36.22             36.15
36.25             36.17
36.26             36.18
36.27             36.18
36.29             36.20
36.31             36.21
36.35             36.35
36.36             36.36
36.37             36.36
36.38             36.37
36.39             36.37
36.40             36.38
36.45             36.50
36.46             36.51
36.47             36.52
36.48             36.53
36.49             36.54
36.50             36.55
36.55             36.69
36.56             36.04
36.57             36.05
36.58             36.70
36.59             36.71
37.01             130.05
38.01             37.01
38.02             37.02
38.03             37.05
38.04             37.05
38.05             37.03
38.06             37.04
38.07             37.06
38.08             37.07
38.09             37.05
38.10             37.09
38.11             37.08
38.12             37.08
38.13             37.10
38.14             37.10
38.15             37.11
38.16             37.12
38.17             37.13
38.18             37.14
40.01             39.01
40.02             39.02
40.03             39.03
40.04             39.04
40.05             39.05
40.99             39.99
41.01             41.01
41.02             41.02
41.03             41.03
41.04             41.04
41.05             41.05
41.06             41.06
53.01             54.01
53.02             54.02
53.03             54.03
53.04             54.04
53.05             54.04
53.06             54.05
53.07             54.06
53.08             54.06
53.09             54.06
53.10             54.07
53.11             54.08
53.12             54.09
54.01             52.01
54.02             52.02
54.03             52.03
54.03             52.04
54.04             52.50
54.05             52.35
54.06             52.51
54.07             52.16
54.07(A)          52.15
54.07(B)          52.17
54.07(D)          52.18
54.07(E)          52.19
54.07(F)          52.20
54.07(G)          52.21
54.07(H)          52.22
54.07(I)          52.23
54.08             52.36
54.09             52.37
54.10             52.38
54.11             52.52
54.12             52.53
54.13             52.54
54.99             52.99
55.01             54.20,
                  54.21
55.03             54.22
55.04             54.23
70.07             70.20
70.09             70.21
70.10             70.22
71.01             72.01
71.05             72.15
71.06             72.16
71.07             72.17
71.10             72.30
71.11             72.31
71.12             72.32
71.13             72.32
71.14             72.32
71.15             72.32
71.16             72.99
71.20             72.02
90.10             90.15
90.11             90.16
90.12             90.17
90.13             90.18
90.14             90.19
90.15             90.21
90.16             90.22
90.18             90.24
90.19             90.25
90.21             90.26
90.22             90.27
90.23             90.28
90.25             90.29
90.30             90.40
90.31             90.41
90.42             90.42
90.99             90.99
91.01             91.15
91.02             91.16
91.03             91.17
91.04             91.18
91.05             91.19
91.06             91.35
91.07             91.36
91.08             91.37
91.09             91.20
91.10             91.21
91.11             91.01
91.20             92.15
91.21             92.15
91.25             91.50
91.26             91.51
91.27             91.51
91.28             91.51
91.29             91.52
92.01             92.01
92.02             92.02
92.03             92.03
92.04             92.03
92.05             92.03
92.06             92.03
92.07             92.03
92.08             92.03
92.09             92.04
92.10             92.05
92.22             92.16
92.23             92.17
92.24             92.18
92.30             92.30
92.31             92.31
92.32             92.32
92.33             92.33
92.34             92.34
92.99             92.99
93.01             93.01
93.02             93.02
93.03             93.03
93.04             93.04
93.05             93.05
93.06             93.06
93.07             93.07
93.08             93.08
93.09             93.09
93.10             93.10
93.11             93.11
94.01             94.01
94.02             94.10
94.03             94.11
94.05             94.11
94.05             94.11
94.06             94.12
94.07             94.13
94.08             94.14
94.09             94.14
94.10             94.15
94.11             94.16
94.12             94.17
94.13             94.18
94.14             94.19
94.15             94.19
94.16             94.19
94.17             94.20
94.18             94.22
94.19             94.19
94.20             94.21
94.21             94.21
94.22             94.19
94.30             94.35
94.31             94.35
94.32             94.36
94.33             94.37
94.34             94.35
94.35             94.35
94.36             94.35
94.37             94.38
94.38             94.35
94.40             94.39
95.01             95.01,
                  95.02
95.02             95.03
95.03             95.04
95.04             95.04
95.05             95.04
95.07             95.04
95.08             95.05
95.09             95.05
95.10             95.06
95.11             95.07
95.12             95.07
95.13             95.08
95.14             95.11
95.15             95.07
95.16             95.07
95.17             95.07
95.18             95.09
95.19             95.10
96.01             92.45
96.02             92.46
96.99             92.99
98.01             96.01
98.02             96.02
98.06             95.04
98.20             71.01
98.21             71.02
98.22             71.03
98.23             71.04
99.01             112.60
99.02             112.61
99.03             112.62
99.04             112.62
99.05             112.62
99.06             112.63
99.07             112.64
99.08             112.64
100.01            40.01
100.02            40.02
100.03            40.02
100.04            40.02
100.05            40.03
100.06            40.03
100.07            40.03
100.08            40.04
100.09            40.04
100.10            40.05
100.11            40.06
100.12            40.06
100.13            40.06
100.14            40.07
100.15            40.07
100.16            40.07
100.17            40.08
100.18            40.08
100.19            40.08
100.20            40.09
100.21            40.10
110.01            110.01
110.02            110.02
110.03            110.03
110.04            110.04
110.05            110.05
110.06            110.06
110.07            110.07
110.08            110.08
110.09            110.09
110.10            110.10
110.11            110.11
110.12            110.12
110.13            110.13
110.15            110.14
111.01            111.001
111.02            111.003
111.03            111.004
111.04            111.002
111.05            111.008
111.06            111.004
111.07            111.004
111.08            111.004
111.09            111.004
111.10            111.005
111.11            111.006
111.12            111.004
111.13            111.007
111.15            111.020
111.16            111.020
111.17            111.024
111.18            111.024
111.19            111.024
111.20            111.022
111.21            111.023
111.25            111.035
111.26            111.036
111.27            111.037
111.28            111.038
111.29            111.039
111.30            111.040
111.31            111.041
111.35            111.055
111.36            111.056
111.37            111.057
111.38            111.058
111.39            111.059
111.40            111.060
111.41            111.061
111.45            111.075
111.46            111.076
111.47            111.076
111.48            111.077
111.49            111.078
112.01            112.01
112.02            112.02
112.03            112.03
112.04            112.04
112.05            112.05
112.06            112.06
112.07            112.07
112.08            112.08
112.09            112.09
112.10            112.10
112.15            112.20
112.16            112.21
112.17            112.22
112.18            112.23
112.19            112.24
112.20            112.25
112.25            112.35
112.26            112.36
112.27            112.37
112.28            112.37
112.29            112.38
112.30            112.39
112.35            112.50
112.36            112.51
112.37            112.52
112.38            112.52
112.39            112.52
112.40            112.52
112.41            112.52
112.42            112.52
112.43            112.52
112.44            112.53
112.45            112.54
113.01            113.01
113.02            113.02
113.03            113.03
113.04            113.04
113.05            113.04
113.06            113.04
113.10            113.15
113.11            113.16
113.12            113.16
114.01            114.01
114.02            114.02
114.03            114.03
114.04            114.04
114.05            114.05
114.06            114.05
114.07            114.04
114.08            114.06
114.09            114.06
114.10            114.06
114.11            114.07
114.12            114.08
114.13            114.09
114.14            114.08
114.15            114.10
114.16            114.11
114.17            114.12
114.18            114.13
114.19            114.14
115.01            115.01
115.02            115.02
115.03            115.03
115.04            115.04
116.01            116.001
116.02            116.002
116.03            116.003
116.04            116.004
116.05            116.005
116.06            116.004
116.07            116.006
116.08            116.007
116.10            116.008
116.15            116.020
116.16            116.021
116.17            116.021
116.18            116.022
116.19            116.022
116.20            116.023
116.21            116.024
116.22            116.025
116.23            116.026
116.30            116.040
116.35            116.050
116.36            116.051
116.37            116.052
116.38            116.053
116.55            116.065
116.56            116.072
116.57            116.066
116.58            116.067
116.59            116.067
116.60            116.073
116.61            116.068
116.62            116.069
116.63            116.070
116.64            116.071
116.65            116.074
116.66            116.075
116.67            116.076
116.80            116.090
116.81            116.091
116.82            116.092
116.85            116.105
116.86            116.106
116.87            116.107
116.88            116.108
117.01            117.01
117.02            117.02
117.03            117.03
117.99            117.99
118.01            118.01
118.02            118.02
118.03            118.07
118.04            118.03
118.05            118.04
118.06            118.04
118.07            118.05
118.08            118.06
118.09            118.08
119.01            94.46
119.02            94.45
119.03            94.47
119.04            94.48
119.05            94.49
119.06            94.50
120.05            120.04
120.13            120.10
121.01            119.01
121.02            119.02
121.03            119.03
121.04            119.03
121.05            119.04
121.06            119.05
121.07            119.06
121.08            119.07
122.01            120.01
122.02            120.02
122.03            120.03
122.04            120.04
122.06            120.05
122.07            120.05
122.08            120.06
122.09            120.07
122.10            120.08
122.11            120.09
122.12            120.09
122.14            120.11
122.15            120.12
123.01            121.01
123.02            121.02
123.03            121.03
123.04            121.04
123.05            121.05
123.06            121.06
123.07            121.07
123.08            121.08
123.09            121.09
123.10            121.10
123.11            121.10
123.12            121.12
123.13            121.13
123.14            121.14
123.15            121.15
123.16            121.16
123.17            121.17
123.18            121.18
123.19            121.18
123.20            121.19
123.21            121.20
123.22            121.99
123.23            121.21
123.25            121.22
123.26            121.23
123.27            121.24
123.40            121.35
123.41            121.35
123.50            121.50
123.51            121.51
123.52            121.52
123.53            121.53
123.54            121.54
123.55            121.55
123.56            121.56
123.57            121.57
123.58            121.58
123.59            121.59
123.60            121.60
123.61            121.61
123.62            121.62
123.63            121.63
123.64            121.64
123.65            121.65
123.66            121.66
130.01            130.01
130.02            130.02
130.03            130.03
130.04            130.04
130.06            136.05
130.07            136.06
130.99            130.99
131.01            131.01
131.02            131.02
131.03            131.03
131.04            131.04
131.05            131.05
131.06            131.06
131.07            131.07
131.08            131.07
131.09            131.08
132.01            132.01
132.02            132.02
132.03            132.03
132.04            132.04
132.05            132.05
132.06            132.06
132.07            132.07
132.08            132.08
132.09            132.09
132.10            132.10
132.15            132.20
132.16            132.20
132.17            132.21
132.18            132.22
132.19            132.23
132.20            132.24
132.25            132.35
132.26            132.36
132.27            132.37
132.28            132.38
132.29            132.39
132.30            132.40
133.01            133.01
133.02            133.02
133.03            133.03
133.04            133.04
133.05            133.04
133.06            133.04
133.07            133.05
133.08            133.06
133.09            133.06
133.10            133.06
133.11            133.07
133.12            133.08
134.01            134.01
134.02            134.02
134.03            134.02
134.04            134.02
134.05            134.03
134.06            134.04
135.01            135.01
135.02            135.02
135.03            135.03
135.04            135.04
135.05            135.05
135.06            135.04
135.07            135.06
135.08            135.06
135.09            135.07
135.10            135.08
135.11            135.09,
                  135.99
135.12            135.10,
                  135.99
136.01            136.01
136.02            136.02
136.03            136.03
136.04            136.04
136.05            136.05
136.08            136.01
136.09            136.07
136.20            136.20
136.21            136.21
136.22            136.21
136.23            136.22
136.24            136.23
136.25            136.24
137.01            137.01
137.02            137.01
137.03            137.01
137.04            137.02
137.05            137.03
137.06            137.04
137.10            137.15
137.11            137.16
137.12            137.17
137.13            137.18
137.15            91.65
137.20            137.20
151.01            152.001
151.02            152.002
151.023           152.038
151.03            152.003
151.04            152.004
151.05            152.005
151.10            152.015
151.11            152.016
151.12            152.017
151.13            152.018
151.14            152.019
151.15            152.20
151.16            152.021
151.20            152.035
151.21            152.036
151.22            152.037
151.24            152.039
151.30            152.050
151.31            152.051
151.32            152.052
151.33            152.053
151.34            152.054
151.35            152.055
151.36            152.056
151.37            152.057
151.38            152.058
151.39            152.059
151.40            152.060
151.45            152.070
151.46            152.071
151.47            152.072
151.48            152.073
151.49            152.074
151.50            152.075
151.51            152.076
151.55            152.090
151.56            152.091
151.57            152.092
151.60            152.105
151.61            152.106
151.62            152.107
155.01            150.35
155.02            150.36
155.05            150.37
155.06            150.38
156.01            150.01
156.02            150.02
156.03            150.03
156.04            150.04
156.05            150.05
156.06            150.06
162.01            150.20
162.02            150.21
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.       Date Passed Code Section
                           152.001 -
                           152.005,
                           152.015 -
                           152.021,
                           152.035 -
                           152.039,
70-008         7-27-70     152.050 -
                           152.060,
                           152.070 -
                           152.076,
                           152.090 -
                           152.092,
                           152.105,
                           152.106
70-009         10-12-70    93.11
                           119.01 -
71-004         3-26-71     119.04,
                           119.07
71-011         5-3-71      114.06
71-012         5-17-71     91.35,
                           91.36
71-013         6-21-71     90.24
71-017         7-19-71     72.01,
                           72.15
71-018         7-19-71     135.03
71-020         10-18-71    93.09,
                           93.10
71-002         12-6-71     116.107
71-022         12-6-71     116.106
72-001         1-3-72      119.06
                           135.01,
72-002         1-17-72     135.06,
                           135.07
73-004         2-7-72      119.05
72-007         5-1-72      152.107
72-008         5-15-72     94.35
72-009         6-5-72      33.105
72-010         6-19-72     112.25
72-017         8-7-72      90.28
72-020         9-5-72      120.01 -
                           120.12
72-023         9-18-72     94.16
72-025         9-18-72     91.01
72-029         10-2-72     135.06
                           90.18,
                           90.19,
72-016-A       10-16-72    90.22,
                           90.24,
                           90.27,
                           90.28
                           90.26,
72-016-B       10-16-72    90.40,
                           90.41
72-016-C       10-16-72    90.16
72-033         12-4-72     31.027
73-005         3-12-73     110.12
73-008         4-16-73     90.19,
                           110.14
73-012         6-4-73      116.007
73-016         10-15-73    32.01
73-019         12-17-73    72.02
74-001         3-25-74     33.030
74-007         9-23-74     96.01,
                           96.02
74-010         11-25-74    131.01
74-011         12-23-74    37.01 -
                           37.14
74-012         12-23-74    150.01 -
                           150.06
75-001         1-3-75      37.05
75-005         4-14-75     91.15
75-006         4-14-75     32.12
75-008         12-22-75    33.045
75-009         12-22-75    33.001
75-011         12-22-75    33.017
76-013         11-1-76     132.20
76-014         12-20-76    112.60 -
                           112.64
77-002         3-7-77      37.05
77-003         3-21-77     37.05
77-004         3-21-77     36.15
77-006         4-4-77      33.120 -
                           33.122
77-008         5-2-77      136.01
77-012         6-6-77      70.01 -
                           70.02
77-017         8-15-77     36.03
                           33.135 -
77-019         10-17-77    33.139,
                           33.150 -
                           33.152
77-021         11-7-77     32.02
78-009         4-3-78      95.07
                           92.45,
78-011         5-1-78      92.46,
                           92.99
78-012         5-1-78      40.01 -
                           40.09
78-016         8-7-78      31.041
78-019         11-6-78     114.07
79-002         2-5-79      92.16,
                           92.18
79-013         9-4-79      114.07
79-015         9-4-79      112.62
79-017         9-4-79      112.05
79-019         9-4-79      116.090
79-022         11-5-79     132.10
80-002A        2-18-80     32.11
80-007         7-21-80     31.041
80-008         7-21-80     31.042
80-009         9-8-80      93.11
81-003         2-18-81     33.165 -
                           33.171
81-007         3-2-81      31.041
81-008         3-21-81     31.042
81-009         4-13-81     93.11
                           54.01 -
81-010         5-4-81      54.05,
                           54.07,
                           54.08
81-011         5-18-81     114.07
81-013         5-18-81     90.24
81-014         5-18-81     90.17
                           54.01 -
81-08B         8-3-81      54.05,
                           54.07,
                           54.09
81-017A        7-20-81     71.01 -
                           71.04
81-018A        7-20-81     70.01 -
                           70.02
81-024         9-8-81      110.05
81-025         9-21-81     116.106,
                           116.107
82-001         1-4-82      110.13
82-006         1-18-82     33.017
82-013         5-3-82      150.20,
                           150.21
82-015         5-3-82      121.35
82-018         5-3-82      135.05
                           121.01 -
82-036         6-21-82     121.24,
                           121.99
82-040         8-16-82     94.20
72-024         9-18-82     54.04
82-042         10-18-82    94.48 -
                           94.50
82-044         10-18-82    90.17
82-045         11-1-82     116.091
82-046         12-20-82    90.17
83-005         6-23-83     31.041
83-006         6-20-83     33.106 -
                           33.108
83-011         11-21-83    33.172,
                           33.173
83-012         11-21-83    132.39
84-002         5-21-84     131.08
84-003         5-21-84     131.08
84-006         9-17-84     132.40
85-002         4-9-85      91.01
85-003         10-7-85     92.15
85-004         11-18-85    92.15
86-003         2-3-86      131.06
86-004         4-21-86     135.08
86-06          5-19-86     33.135 -
                           33.137
86-007         8-18-86     33.173
                           39.01 -
87-002         - -87       39.05,
                           39.99
87-004         3-2-87      136.20 -
                           136.24
87-006         8-17-87     116.065 -
                           116.076
88-016         4-4-88      116.065 -
                           116.076
88-017         5-16-88     33.185 -
                           33.188
88-018         6-6-88      94.35
88-020         6-6-88      94.39
88-021         6-20-88     54.09
88-022         6-20-88     90.24
88-023         6-20-88     110.12
88-034         9-19-88     114.07
89-001         1-16-89     132.24
                           72.30 -
89-002         5-1-89      72.32,
                           72.99
89-003         5-15-89     111.020 -
                           111.024
89-004         6-19-89     152.107
89-007         8-21-89     92.03
                           52.01 -
                           52.04,
                           52.15 -
                           52.23,
89-009         8-21-89     52.35 -
                           52.38,
                           52.50 -
                           52.54,
                           52.99
90-003         4-16-90     137.20
90-006         5-7-90      54.09
91-002         5-6-91      92.15,
                           92.16
91-004         6-3-91      54.09
91-005         6-3-91      94.35
91-013         7-1-91      110.12
91-016         12-2-91     116.007
                           154.001 -
                           154.006,
                           154.020 -
                           154.039,
                           154.050 -
                           154.054,
                           154.065 -
                           154.070,
                           154.080 -
                           154.086,
                           154.100,
                           154.101,
                           154.135 -
                           154.163,
                           154.175 -
                           154.185,
                           154.195 -
                           154.200,
                           154.210 -
                           154.212,
                           154.225 -
                           154.227,
                           154.240 -
                           154.242,
                           154.270 -
92-005         2-17-92     154.272,
                           154.285 -
                           154.287,
                           154.300 -
                           154.302,
                           154.315 -
                           154.317,
                           154.330 -
                           154.336,
                           154.370 -
                           154.372,
                           154.400 -
                           154.405,
                           154.415 -
                           154.417,
                           154.430 -
                           154.438,
                           154.450 -
                           154.453,
                           154.465,
                           154.466,
                           154.480 -
                           154.488,
                           154.999,
                           Ch. 154, App. A;
                           Ch. 154, App. B, §§ 1 - 12
92-006         3-2-92      93.07
                           135.09,
92-007         4-21-92     135.10,
                           135.99
                           90.22,
92-008         6-15-92     90.24 -
                           90.26
92-010         12-7-92     96.02
92-01          12-21-92    91.01
93-001         1-4-93      54.20 -
                           54.23
93-011         4-19-93     70.20 -
                           70.22
93-012         4-19-93     91.50 -
                           91.52
93-013         4-19-93     54.23
93-014         5-3-93      90.29,
                           90.99
93-015         6-7-93      33.106
93-016         7-6-93      154.022
93-021         11-9-93     54.09
                           110.02,
                           110.05 -
94-001         4-11-94     110.07,
                           110.11,
                           110.12
94-003         7-5-94      154.022
94-004         7-5-94      154.053
94-009         9-6-94      10.03
94-010         9-26-94     10.99
94-011         9-26-94     41.01 -
                           41.06
94-012         10-17-94    154.286
94-013         10-17-94    154.286,
                           154.301
95-01          7-17-95     92.16
96-01          1-15-96     154.162
96-002         2-19-96     40.10
                           121.01 -
                           121.24,
96-003         4-1-96      121.50 -
                           121.66,
                           121.99
96-005         5-13-96     112.39
                           154.301,
97-006         7-1-96      154.401,
                           154.403
96-008         12-2-96     154.350 -
                           154.357
96-007         12-16-96    70.07
97-001         4-7-97      154.163,
                           154.301
97-002         6-16-97     154.115 -
                           154.121
97-004         8-18-97     Ch. 154, App. A
97-005         8-18-97     T.S.O. I
97-007         12-1-97     154.385 -
                           154.387
97-008         12-1-97     10.99,
                           154.316
98-001         1-5-98      133.20 -
                           133.30
                           70.60 -
98-002         1-5-98      70.62,
                           70.99
                           70.06,
98-003         1-5-98      70.35 -
                           70.49
98-004         2-23-98     T.S.O. I
98-006         6-29-98     154.005
98-006         6-29-98     154.037
98-008         6-29-98     92.16
98-009         6-29-98     92.33
98-010         6-29-98     93.09
98-011         6-29-98     93.11
98-012         6-29-98     96.03
98-013         6-29-98     96.04
98-014         6-29-98     71.01
98-015         8-31-98     T.S.O. I
98-018         9-21-98     91.01
98-022         9-21-98     150.38,
                           151.99
98-023         9-21-98     154.037
99-003         2-8-99      154.005
99-004         4-12-99     121.35
99-006         7-19-99     T.S.O. II
                           50.01 -
                           50.08,
                           50.20 -
                           50.23,
                           51.001 -
                           51.005,
                           51.015 -
99-007         8-2-99      51.023,
                           51.035 -
                           51.037,
                           51.050,
                           51.051,
                           51.999,
                           53.01 -
                           53.07
99.008         8-30-99     53.04
99-016         11-29-99    35.01 -
                           35.09
99-017         2-28-00     135.04
99-020         2-28-00     135.04
99-021         2-28-00     133.31
99-023         2-28-00     132.22
99-024         2-28-00     132.26
99-025         2-28-00     132.24
99-026         2-28-00     132.25
99-027         2-28-00     132.04
99-028         2-28-00     132.10
99-029         2-28-00     132.12
99-030         2-28-00     132.11
99-031         2-28-00     131.09
99-032         2-28-00     132.23
99-033         2-28-00     132.41
99-034         2-28-00     132.14
99-035         2-28-00     131.02
99-036         2-28-00     132.13
99-037         2-28-00     132.38
99-038         2-28-00     132.42
99-039         2-28-00     132.43
99-040         2-28-00     132.44
99-041         2-28-00     132.45
99-042         2-28-00     132.46
99-043         2-28-00     132.47
99-044         2-28-00     132.48
99-045         2-28-00     132.49
99-047         5-1-00      T.S.O. II
00-001         7-17-00     53.03,
                           53.04
00-002         10-2-00     154.356
01-002         3-26-01     T.S.O. II
01-003         4-9-01      T.S.O. II
01-004         4-9-01      154.352
01-005         5-21-01     154.005
01-006         6-4-01      T.S.O. I
01-007         7-2-01      53.03,
                           53.04
02-003         11-5-01     150.38
02-004         2-4-02      T.S.O. II
02-005         4-8-02      Adopting Ordinance
02-006         4-8-02      T.S.O. II
                           36.01 -
                           36.03,
                           36.16 -
02-007         5-13-02     36.18,
                           36.51,
                           36.53,
                           36.68,
                           36.69
02-008         6-10-02     T.S.O. II
02-009         7-1-02      154.158
02-010         7-15-02     T.S.O. I
02-011         8-5-02      154.025
02-012         8-5-02      154.005
02-013         8-5-02      154.272
02-014         8-5-02      154.287
02-015         8-5-02      154.302
02-016         8-5-02      154.357
03-001         9-9-02      52.03,
                           52.04
03-002         9-23-02     T.S.O. II
03-003         10-28-02    122.01 -
                           122.21
03-004         11-18-02    92.35
03-006         1-6-03      T.S.O. I
03-007         1-6-03      Adopting Ordinance
03-008         2-3-03      70.01,
                           70.02
03-009         2-3-03      70.08
03-010         2-24-03     36.65
03-011         4-7-03      36.03
03-012         6-2-03      53.03,
                           53.04
03-013         6-16-03     53.04
03-013         6-30-03     T.S.O. I
03-014         9-8-03      T.S.O. II
04-001         2-2-04      T.S.O. I
04-002         4-4-04      154.027
04-003         4-4-04      154.022
A-04-004       6-7-04      12.01
A-04-005       6-7-04      12.01
04-005         6-28-04     T.S.O. I
04-006         6-28-04     T.S.O. II
05-001         1-31-05     T.S.O. I
05-002         3-7-05      53.03,
                           53.04
05-004         5-9-05      T.S.O. I
A-05-010       6-27-05     12.01
06-001         8-29-05     154.520 -
                           154.532
06-002         12-19-05    154.117
06-003         12-19-05    154.386
06-004         2-13-06     154.036
06-005         2-13-06     154.403
06-006         2-27-06     54.01
06-007         2-27-06     54.04
06-008         2-27-06     54.09
06-009         4-24-06     90.17
06-010         5-22-06     33.167
06-011         6-5-06      53.03,
                           53.04
05-005         6-27-05     T.S.O. II
Res. -         4-10-06     11.01
                           90.55 -
07-001         8-28-06     90.59,
                           90.99
07-002         12-11-06    T.S.O. II
07-003         1-22-07     33.173
07-004      4-2-07      50.10
A-07-007       6-21-07     12.01
A-08-002       8-20-07     53.03,
                           53.04
08-001         8-20-07     53.06
08-002         11-5-07     36.35
08-003         11-5-07     91.03,
                           91.99
                           154.005,
                           154.040,
                           154.067,
                           154.136,
08-004         11-5-07     154.162,
                           154.163,
                           154.301,
                           154.352,
                           154.357
08-005         5-19-08     123.01,
                           123.99
08-006         6-23-08     53.03,
                           53.04
09-001         12-8-08     T.S.O. II
Res. 09-07-129 - -         Charter § 11.09
09-002         2-9-09      90.17
09-003         2-23-09     35.02-
                           35.08
09-004         3-5-09      154.032
09-005         3-5-09      154.241,
                           154.242
09-006         4-20-09     154.037
09-007         4-20-09     154.005,
                           154.164
09-008         4-20-09     154.403
A09-009        5-15-09     53.03,
                           53.04
                           154.390 -
10-001         7-13-09     154.392;
                           Ch. 154 App. A
10-002         8-24-09     30.02
10-003         9-14-09     T.S.O. II
10-004         9-21-09     91.22,
                           91.99
10-008         10-5-09     T.S.O. II
                           154.066 -
10-009         10-5-09     154.068,
                           154.070
                           124.01 -
10-010         10-26-09    124.12,
                           124.99
                           154.005,
10-011         10-26-09    154.163,
                           154.301
                           35.01 -
10-012         12-21-09    35.09,
                           35.99
10-013         1-11-10     154.600 -
                           154.612
10-014         1-11-10     154.025,
                           154.467
10-015         4-12-10     154.350 -
                           154.356
                           154.005,
10-016         6-7-10      154.164,
                           154.316
10-017         10-25-10    33.205 -
                           33.265
10-018         11-8-10     153.01 -
                           153.07
11-001         1-10-11     154.164
11-002         1-10-11     154.166
11-003         2-14-11     151.01
11-004         4-11-11     154.071
11-005         4-11-11     154.006
                           90.01,
                           90.02,
11-006         4-25-11     90.15 -
                           90.30,
                           90.40 -
                           90.42
11-007         6-20-11     53.03,
                           53.04
11-008         6-20-11     54.09
11-009         7-25-11     33.001 -
                           33.004
11-010         7-25-11     92.15
11-011         9-12-11     T.S.O. II
11-012         9-12-11     40.11
11-013         10-10-11    97.01
12-001      4-2-12      33.173
12-002         4-16-12     35.10
12-004         6-25-12     53.03,
                           53.04
12-006         7-9-12      110.12
12-007         8-27-12     91.65,
                           91.99
12-008         11-19-12    154.286,
                           154.301
12-009         11-19-12    154.211
                           154.005,
12-010         11-19-12    154.167,
                           154.271,
                           154.352
13-001         2-11-13     T.S.O. II
13-002         2-11-13     T.S.O. II
13-004         5-20-13     154.145,
                           154.352
13-005         5-20-13     154.286
13-006         7-15-13     T.S.O. II
13-007         7-15-13     T.S.O. II
                           53.02 -
13-008         8-12-13     53.05,
                           53.99
13-009         8-12-13     71.05
13-010         8-12-13     137.01
13-011         8-12-13     132.39
13-013         8-12-13     70.01 -
                           70.05
                           154.036,
13-014         9-9-13      154.416,
                           154.432
13-015         9-9-13      154.032
13-016         12-16-13    136.01
14-001         1-13-14     151.01
14-002         6-9-14      53.02 -
                           53.05
14-003         10-6-14     T.S.O. II
14-004         10-27-14    T.S.O. II
14-005         12-8-14     T.S.O. II
14-006         12-8-14     154.068
15-001         3-9-15      T.S.O. II
15-002         6-1-15      53.02 -
                           53.05
15-003         6-29-15     154.032
                           54.02 -
15-004         6-29-15     54.04,
                           54.08,
                           54.20
16-001         2-8-16      T.S.O. II
16-002         4-18-16     154.352
16-003         6-6-16      53.02 -
                           53.05
Res. -         11-8-16     Charter, §
                           2.03
Res. -         11-8-16     Charter, §
                           2.05
                           154.602 -
17-001         7-10-17     154.604,
                           154.613,
                           154.614
17-002         9-25-17     154.005,
                           154.165
17-003         10-23-17    T.S.O. II
17-004         10-23-17    T.S.O. II
17-005         10-23-17    154.030
18-001         1-8-18      T.S.O. II
18-002         2-5-18      154.165
18-003         3-19-18     T.S.O. II
18-004         3-19-18     41.02 -
                           41.06
18-005         3-19-18     54.03 -
                           54.08
18-006         3-19-18     70.05
18-007         3-19-18     71.05
                           72.01,
18-008         3-19-18     72.02,
                           72.15 -
                           72.17
18-009         3-19-18     90.99
18-010         3-19-18     92.99
18-011         3-19-18     93.09
18-012         3-19-18     94.16
18-013         3-19-18     94.45 -
                           94.50
18-014         3-19-18     151.01,
                           151.99
18-015         3-19-18     153.02
18-016         3-19-18     154.999
                           35.02 -
18-017         4-23-18     35.05,
                           35.07
                           53.03,
18-018         5-7-18      53.04,
                           53.99
                           154.241,
18-019         7-23-18     154.242,
                           Ch. 154 App. A
18-020         8-6-18   154.005,
                           154.030
18-022         9-24-18     154.165
              11-6-18     Charter §
                           2.03
              11-6-18     Charter §
                           2.09
18-024         12-3-18     154.165
19-001         1-7-19      41.06
19-002         1-7-19      131.02
19-003         2-25-19     154.602,
                           154.611
19-004         3-25-19     124.99
                           155.01 -
19-005         4-22-19     155.09,
                           155.99
19-006         5-6-19      138.01,
                           138.99
                           135.09 -
19-007         5-6-19      135.11,
                           135.99
19-008         5-20-19     53.03,
                           53.04
19-009         8-5-19      53.04
                           154.022,
                           154.037,
19-011         9-26-19     154.352,
                           154.354,
                           154.606
-              11-5-19     Charter §
                           4.051
-              11-5-19     Charter §
                           4.052
20-002         5-4-20   53.03,
                           53.04
                           154.005,
                           154.006,
                           154.163,
                           154.271,
                           154.286,
                           154.301,
20-003         7-6-20      154.316,
                           154.390 -
                           154.392,
                           154.401,
                           154.403,
                           154.406,
                           154.416
20-004         8-10-20     93.11,
                           93.12
20-005         11-23-20    91.03
20-006         11-23-20    41.06
                           154.066,
20-007         11-23-20    154.067,
                           154.165
20-008         12-21-20    124.01 -
                           124.12
                           31.025 -
                           31.028,
                           31.055,
                           31.056, 35.10,
                           50.05,
                           50.10,
                           50.20,
                           51.001,
                           51.021,
21-001         1-25-21     51.050,
                           51.062,
                           51.064,
                           51.066 -
                           51.068,
                           51.070 -
                           51.073,
                           52.35,
                           53.01,
                           53.02,
                           54.01 
                           91.01,
                           91.15 -
                           91.17,
                           91.22,
                           91.51,
                           91.65,
                           91.99,
                           93.06,
                           93.13,
                           93.14,
                           94.01,
21-002         2-8-21      94.10,
                           94.11,
                           94.16,
                           94.35,
                           94.36,
                           95.01,
                           96.02,
                           110.05,
                           110.06,
                           112.20,
                           116.090 -
                           116.092
                           154.005,
21-004         2-8-21      154.024,
                           154.159,
                           154.466
                           132.15,
                           133.01,
                           133.02,
21-005         2-22-21     133.06,
                           137.05,
                           151.16,
                           153.08
21-006         5-17-21     53.03,
                           53.04
21-007         6-21-21     152.107
21-008         7-12-21     150.07
21-009         8-9-21      111.080 -
                           111.088
                           154.005,
                           154.158,
                           154.167 -
                           154.169,
                           154.195,
                           154.271,
22-001         1-24-22     154.301,
                           154.332,
                           154.340 -
                           154.343,
                           154.355,
                           154.607,
                           154.614,
                           Ch. 154, App. A
                           55.01 -
22-002         4-11-22     55.26,
                           55.99
22-003         5-9-22      53.03,
                           53.04
22-004         7-11-22     T.S.O. II
22-005         7-11-22     T.S.O. II
23-001         1-9-23      53.04
23-002         5-8-23      53.03,
                           53.04
                           41.06,
                           90.02,
                           90.03,
                           90.15 -
                           90.17,
23-005         12-18-23    90.19,
                           90.24,
                           90.42,
                           91.03,
                           91.35 -
                           91.37,
                           132.15
23-001         1-9-23      53.04
23-002         5-8-23      53.03,
                           53.04
                           41.06,
                           90.02,
                           90.03,
                           90.15 -
                           90.17,
23-005         12-18-23    90.19,
                           90.24,
                           90.42,
                           91.03,
                           91.35 -
                           91.37,
                           132.15
24-001         2-19-24     T.S.O. II
24-002         5-6-24      T.S.O. II
24-003         5-20-24     33.300 -
                           33.311
                           53.03,
24-004         5-20-24     53.04,
                           53.99
24-006         6-3-24   T.S.O. II
24-007         6-3-24      T.S.O. II
                           154.005,
                           154.022,
24-008         8-26-24     154.025,
                           154.069,
                           Ch. 154, App. A
                           124.01 -
                           124.12,
                           124.40 -
24-009         10-28-24    124.46,
                           124.70 -
                           124.76,
                           124.99
                           154.005,
24-010         10-28-24    154.165,
                           154.316
25-001         1-13-25     T.S.O. II
25-002         3-17-25     116.090 -
                           116.093
25-003         6-23-25     53.03,
                           53.04
25-004         6-23-25     T.S.O. II
25-005         7-21-25     154.165
25-006         8-18-25     T.S.O. II
25-007         9-22-25     124.74
25-008         10-20-25    111.082 -
                           111.086
                          
 
