Comprehensive Ordinance List
Publisher's Note: The following table lists all ordinances passed by the City
of Grand Blanc. The table includes links to the ordinances, as maintained in
PDF format. For other legislation, including ordinances passed prior to 2023,
please contact the City of Grand Blanc.
 
Ordinances that amend the Code and are not yet effective have their
identifiying information highlighted in yellow. Changes made by those
ordinances are not incorporated into the text of the Code until the amending
ordinances are effective. Ordinances that do not affect the code have been
grayed out.
 
Jump to:
2023 Ordinances
2024 Ordinances
2025 Ordinances
2026 Ordinances
2023 Ordinances
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                     Repealing Chapter 1064: Trees
2305-01  6-14-2023    
                     Sections affected:
                     Chapter 1064
                     Repealing Chapter 1484: Smoke Detectors
2305-02  6-14-2023    
                     Sections affected:
                     Chapter 1484
                     Collection of Delinquent Charges
2305-03  6-14-2023    
                     Sections affected:
                     1042.08
                     Loitering
2305-04  6-14-2023    
                     Sections affected:
                     Repeal 666.01: Disorderly Conduct
2305-05  6-14-2023    
                     Sections affected:
                     666.01
2306-01  7-12-2023   Adopting Ordinance
                    
 
2024 Ordinances
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                     Cost recovery for emergency services related to traffic
                     violations
2406-01  7-10-2024    
                     Sections affected:
                     1066.01
                     Cost recovery for fire runs and general emergency services
2406-02  7-10-2024    
                     Sections affected:
                     1066.02
                     Repealing Ch. 1066: Cost Recovery of Emergency Services
2406-03  7-10-2024    
                     Sections affected:
                     Chapter 1066
                     Amending Ch. 232 regarding Mayor
2406-04  7-10-2024    
                     Sections affected:
                     232.01, 232.02
                     Repeal Ch. 1060 re: Vacant Dwellings
2407-01  8-14-2024    
                     Sections affected:
                     Chapter 1060
                     Amending code re: odor causing nuisance
2410-01  11-13-2024   
                     Sections affected:
                     676.08
                     Amending code re: property maintenance
2410-02  11-13-2024   
                     Sections affected:
                     676.09
                     Amending Sec. 336 re: Solar Panels
2412-01  1-8-2025     
                     Sections affected:
                     Chapter 1240, App. A
                     Amending Sec. 100 re: prohibited uses in Central Business
                     District (CBD)
2412-02  1-8-2025     
                     Sections affected:
                     Chapter 1240, App. A
                     Amending Sec. 1201 re: Permitted uses in B-2 Business
                     District
2412-04  1-8-2025     
                     Sections affected:
                     Chapter 1240, App. A
                     Amending Art. XX re: schedule of regulations for principal
                     buildings: residential districts
2412-05  1-8-2025     
                     Sections affected:
                     Chapter 1240, App. A
                     Amending Sec. 2904 re: Standards for Variances and Appeals
                     to amend the review criteria for dimensional variances
2412-06  1-8-2025     
                     Sections affected:
                     Chapter 1240, App. A
                    
 
 
2025 Ordinances
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                     To control, prohibit and deter fighting on school property
                     amongst students and others and in order to promote the
                     school environment as a safe place for learning, to deter
2502-02  3-12-2025   violence, and promote public health, safety and welfare
                      
                     Sections affected:
                     666.07
                     To define and delineate certain acts as Municipal Civil
                     Infractions to protect and promote the public health,
                     safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Grand
2502-03  3-12-2025   Blanc and to provide penalties for violations thereof.
                      
                     Sections affected:
                     202.98, 410.99, 666.01, 676.04
                     Amending licensing.
2504-01  5-14-2025    
                     Sections affected:
                     850.03
                     Amending garbage and rubbish.
2504-02  5-14-2025    
                     Sections affected:
                     1060.02
                     Amending use of water, inspections, fire hydrants
2505-01  7-9-2025     
                     Sections affected:
                     1042.05
                     Amending Ch 1480 regarding Signs
2511-01  12-10-2025   
                     Sections affected:
                     1480.02
                     Amending Art. X: CBD: Central Business District regarding
                     permitted and special land uses
2511-02  12-10-2025   
                     Sections affected:
                     Chapter 1240, App. A, 1001
                    
 
 
2026 Ordinances
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                     Amending Ch. 676 re: Long Grass and Weeds
2512-01  1-14-2026    
                     Sections affected:
                     676.01
                     Amending Art. XXIV: Site Plan Review Approval re: Building
                     Permits
2512-02  1-14-2026    
                     Sections affected:
                     2409
                     Amending Art. XXVII code re: certificates
2512-03  1-14-2026    
                     Sections affected:
                     2704
                     Amending code re: Application for Site Plan Review
2512-04  1-14-2026    
                     Sections affected:
                     2406
                     Amending code re: Licensing of Businesses
2512-05  1-14-2026    
                     Sections affected:
                     Chapter 802
                     Amending Ch. 850 re: do-not-knock registry
2512-06  1-14-2026    
                     Sections affected:
                     Adding 850.19
                     Amending Ch. 1060 re: garbage and rubbish collection and
                     disposal
2512-07  1-14-2026    
                     Sections affected:
                     1060.01, 1060.04, 1060.05
                     Amending code re: annual leaf collection and semiannual
                     chipper collection and disposal charges
2512-08  1-14-2026    
                     Sections affected:
                     Ch. 1060
                    
                    
 
 
GRAND BLANC, MICHIGAN
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-2 Supplement contains local legislation current through
Ord. 2512-08, passed 1-14-2026
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
ADOPTED ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2306-01
   ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF GRAND BLANC
   To Enact a Code of Ordinances for the City of Grand Blanc,
   Revising, Amending, Restating, Codifying and Compiling
   Certain Existing General Ordinances
The City of Grand Blanc hereby ordains:
Purpose:
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances are inadequately arranged
and classified and are insufficient in form and substance for the complete
preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the
municipality and for the proper conduct of its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Michigan empower and
authorize the City of Grand Blanc to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile
any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or
published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form;
and
WHEREAS, the City Council for the City of Grand Blanc has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of Grand
Blanc and publication of such ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
Adopting Code of Ordinances of the City of Grand Blanc, State of Michigan:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City of Grand Blanc as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the City of Grand Blanc, State
of Michigan.”
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 herein shall
consist of the following Titles:
   PART TWO: ADMINISTRATION CODE
         TITLE TWO - General Provisions
            Chap. 202.   Codified Ordinances.
            Chap. 204.   Official Standards.
            Chap. 206.   Wards and Boundaries.
            Chap. 208.   Policies.
         TITLE FOUR - Legislation
            Chap. 220.   Council.
            Chap. 222.   Ordinances and Resolutions.
         TITLE SIX - Administration
            Chap. 230.   Mayor.
            Chap. 232.   City Manager.
            Chap. 234.   City Clerk.
            Chap. 236.   City Treasurer.
            Chap. 238.   City Assessor.
            Chap. 240.   City Attorney.
            Chap. 242.   Building and Zoning Administrator.
            Chap. 244.   City Engineer.
            Chap. 246.   Department of Public Works.
            Chap. 248.   Police Department.
            Chap. 250.   Fire Department.
            Chap. 252.   Employees Generally.
         TITLE EIGHT - Boards, Commissions and Committees
            Chap. 270.   Board of Health.
            Chap. 272.   Sign Review Committee.
            Chap. 274.   Local Officers Compensation Commission.
            Chap. 276.   Board of Review.
            Chap. 278.   Planning Commission.
            Chap. 280.   Board of Zoning Appeals.
            Chap. 282.   Building Code Board of Appeals.
            Chap. 284.   Downtown Development Authority.
            Chap. 286.   Fire Commission. (Repealed)
         TITLE TEN - Judiciary
            Chap. 290.   District Court and Circuit Court.
   PART FOUR: TRAFFIC CODE
            Chap. 410.   Uniform Traffic Code and Michigan Vehicle Code.
            Chap. 440.   Parking Violations Bureau.
            Chap. 450.   Parking Generally.
            Chap. 480.   Miscellaneous Regulations.
   PART SIX: GENERAL OFFENSES
            Chap. 606.   Alcoholic Beverages.
            Chap. 610.   Animals.
            Chap. 618.   Drugs.
            Chap. 660.   Offenses Relating to Persons.
            Chap. 662.   Offenses Relating to Property.
            Chap. 666.   Peace Disturbances.
            Chap. 672.   Railroads.
            Chap. 676.   Safety, Sanitation and Health.
            Chap. 680.   Sex Related Offenses.
            Chap. 692.   Weapons and Explosives.
            Chap. 694.   Law Enforcement.
   PART EIGHT: BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE
         TITLE TWO - Business Regulation
            Chap. 802.   Businesses in General.
            Chap. 806.   Cable Communications Systems.
            Chap. 810.   Drive-In Restaurants.
            Chap. 812.   Mobile Food Vehicle Vendors.
            Chap. 818.   Garage Sales.
            Chap. 850.   Peddlers.
            Chap. 852.   Public Gatherings.
            Chap. 860.   Precious Metal and Gem Dealers.
            Chap. 870.   Taxicabs.
            Chap. 872.   Open-Air Markets.
            Chap. 874.   Marihuana Establishments.
         TITLE FOUR - Taxation
            Chap. 882.   Real Estate Tax.
   PART TEN: STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICE CODE
         TITLE TWO - Street and Sidewalk Areas
            Chap. 1020.   Improvements and Special Assessments.
            Chap. 1022.   Sidewalk Construction and Repair.
            Chap. 1024.   Obstructions of Public Rights-of-Way.
            Chap. 1026.   Trees.
         TITLE FOUR - Utilities
            Chap. 1040.   Sewers. (Repealed)
            Chap. 1042.   Water.
            Chap. 1044.   Wells.
            Chap. 1046.   Storm Water Management.
         TITLE SIX - Other Public Services
            Chap. 1060.   Garbage and Rubbish Collection and Disposal.
            Chap. 1062.   Parks.
            Chap. 1066.   Cost Recovery of Emergency Services.
   PART TWELVE: PLANNING AND ZONING CODE
         TITLE TWO - Planning
            Chap.1220.   Planning Commission.
            Chap.1222.   Planning Generally.
            Chap. 1224.   Subdivision Regulations.
            Chap. 1226.   Road and Utility Requirements and Specifications for
Proposed Plats and Condominiums and Land Divisions.
         TITLE FOUR - Zoning
            Chap. 1240.   Zoning.
   PART FOURTEEN: BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE
         TITLE TWO - Building Standards
            Chap. 1410.   Michigan Building Code.
            Chap. 1412.   Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code
Act.
            Chap. 1414.   Property Maintenance Code.
            Chap. 1416.   Electrical Code, Mechanical Code and Plumbing Code.
         TITLE FOUR - Miscellaneous Building Regulations
            Chap. 1440.   Flood Damage Prevention.
            Chap. 1456.   Licensing of Residential Builders.
            Chap. 1460.   Numbering of Buildings.
            Chap. 1480.   Signs.
            Chap. 1484.   Smoke Detectors.
            Chap. 1486.   Telecommunications Systems and Services.
            Chap. 1488.   Blight.
         TITLE SIX - Housing
            Chap. 1490.   Supplied Facilities, Maintenance and Occupancy of
Dwellings and Dwelling Units. (Repealed)
   PART SIXTEEN: FIRE PREVENTION CODE
            Chap. 1610.   International Fire Code.
            Chap. 1612.   Interference with Fire Suppression Forces;
Emergencies.
            Chap. 1614.   Fireworks.
            Chap. 1616.   Open Burning and Recreational Fires.
   PARALLEL REFERENCES
            References to Michigan Compiled Statutes Annotated
            References to Resolutions
            References to Ordinances
   INDEX
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the City of Grand Blanc and the Clerk of the City of Grand
Blanc is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6 of this Ordinance, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts
and places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and
regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is
properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings
and notices thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6.   This ordinance shall take effect twenty (20) days after the
adoption hereof.
This ordinance was adopted by the City Council at a regular meeting on the 12th
of July, 2023.
                      /s/ Susan Soderstrom
                     Susan Soderstrom, Mayor
                      /s/ Mary B. Hopkins
                     Mary B. Hopkins, City Clerk
CHARTER
OF THE CITY OF
GRAND BLANC, MICHIGAN
Editor’s note:
   The Charter of the City of Grand Blanc was approved by Fred W. Green,
Governor of the State of Michigan, on September 26, 1929, after having been
approved by the Charter Commission of the City of Grand Blanc, and was adopted
by the voters of the city on March 4, 1930. Dates appearing in parentheses
following a chapter heading in the Table of Contents, and following a section
in the text, indicate that the chapter and section were amended or enacted on
the date given.
   TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREAMBLE
CHAPTER 1.   Names, Boundaries and Wards.
CHAPTER 2.   General Powers, Rights and Liabilities. (11-7-2000)
CHAPTER 3.   Registration.
CHAPTER 4.   Elections, Officers, Terms of Office, Compensation. (11-5-1968;
11-6-1984)
CHAPTER 5.   Nominations. (4-7-1941; 3-10-1971)
CHAPTER 6.   Recall.
CHAPTER 7.   Initiative and Referendum.
CHAPTER 8.   Ordinances.
CHAPTER 9.   Mayor and Appointments.
CHAPTER 10.   City Clerk.
CHAPTER 11.   City Treasurer.
CHAPTER 12.   Legal Department.
CHAPTER 13.   City Assessor.
CHAPTER 14.   The Council.
CHAPTER 15.   Pounds.
CHAPTER 16.   Cemetery.
CHAPTER 17.   Public Health.
CHAPTER 18.   Justices of the Peace.
CHAPTER 19.   City Finances.
CHAPTER 20.   General Taxation.
CHAPTER 21.   Special Assessment.
CHAPTER 22.   Public Utilities.
CHAPTER 23.   Franchise and Public Utilities.
CHAPTER 24.   Vacancy.
CHAPTER 25.   Amendments to Charter.
CHAPTER 26.   Condemnation and Appropriation of Property.
CHAPTER 27.   General Powers and Provisions.
____________________
PREAMBLE
   We, the people of the City of Grand Blanc,  County  of Genesee, State of
Michigan, pursuant to the authority granted by the Constitution, and the
Statutes of the State of Michigan, in order to establish a City Government, and
to provide for and maintain the essential interest and welfare of all our
people, do hereby ordain and establish this Charter of the City of Grand Blanc,
Michigan.
CHAPTER 1
Names, Boundaries and Wards
   Section 1.   The municipal corporation heretofore created under the name of
the “City of Grand Blanc,” shall be a body corporate and politic, and as such
shall have, exercise and enjoy such powers as are conferred by the Constitution
and laws of the State of Michigan and this Charter.
   Section 2.   The City of Grand Blanc shall include all the territory
embraced within the limits of the territory described as follows:
   The east half of Section 16, the west three quarters of Section 15, the
southeast quarter of Section 9 and the west half of the southwest quarter of
Section 10, all in Town 6 North, Range 7 East.
   Section 3.   The City shall consist of one ward.
CHAPTER 2
General Powers, Rights and Liabilities
   Section 1.   The said City of Grand Blanc shall be a body corporate and
politic, shall have perpetual succession, shall have a corporate seal, may sue
and be sued and may contract and be contracted with.
   Section 2.   The City shall have the power:
   (1)   To acquire for a public use or purpose within the scope of its powers,
and to hold, manage, control, lease and sell property or any interest therein,
within the corporate limits and also without the corporate limits to the full
extent permitted by law. To sell a piece of real property a public hearing and
approval of a two-thirds majority of City Council members be required before
disposition of any City owned real property, excepting City parks or cemeteries
which sale shall require the approval of a majority of the City’s electors
voting on the question of sale.
(Amended 11-7-2000)
   (2)   To acquire real and personal property by gift made by grant, devise,
bequest, or in any other manner, for public parks, grounds, boulevards,
zoological gardens, cemeteries, public buildings and other public purposes,
whether made directly or in trust, and whether within or without the corporate
limits of the City, or within or without the corporate limits of the County of
Genesee, and the City Council may appropriate funds for the maintenance and
upkeep of gifts so acquired.
   (3)   To make and enforce ordinances and resolutions for the care,
protection, control and management of property belonging to the City located
within the corporate limits. It may also make and enforce such ordinances and
resolutions as to such property located without the corporate limits, as is
permissible under the laws of the State .
   (4)   To acquire, construct, establish, own, equip, maintain, conduct,
manage and operate libraries, hospitals, markets, market houses, playgrounds,
parks, public grounds, recreation buildings, comfort stations, police stations,
jails, fire houses, City Hall, office buildings for use of City officials,
public buildings, sewage disposal systems and plants, lighting systems and
plants, water systems and pumping stations, water filtration plants, public
parking grounds, public works, works and plants for preparation, manufacture,
storage, handling or transportation of materials required in public work, and
all buildings, establishments, institutions and places which are necessary or
convenient for the transaction of public business or for promoting the health,
morals, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the City whether the same be
specifically enumerated herein or not; and to acquire sites therefor.
   (5)   To establish any department that it may deem necessary for the general
welfare of the City and for the separate incorporation thereof; provided that
these provisions shall not extend to and include public schools.
   (6)   To establish by ordinance districts or zones within which the use of
land and structures, the height, the area, the size and location of buildings
and required open spaces for light and ventilation of such buildings and the
density of population may be regulated by ordinance, and such regulations in
one or more districts may differ from those in other districts.
   (7)   To enact a building code and a housing code; to regulate the erection
and repair of buildings; to prevent the erection of unsafe buildings and to
provide for the removal of any such buildings; to require building permits for
all buildings and structures erected in the City; to regulate the maintenance
and occupancy of buildings in so far as the same affects health and safety.
   (8)   To regulate the location, construction, size and height of billboards
and the maintenance thereof; or to entirely prohibit the construction of
billboards in the City.
   (9)   To establish and maintain definite fire limits and to prohibit within
such limits the construction of buildings and other structures of materials
easily inflammable.
   (10)   To enact and enforce ordinances in relation to the prevention and
suppression of fires.
   (11)   To regulate the height, construction and location of all fences; to
provide for the building and maintenance of partition fences and all things in
relation thereto; to provide for a Board of Fence Viewers to determine all
disputes between owners in relation to partition fences and for the enforcement
of the decisions of such Board.
   (12)   To regulate the construction of cellars and basements so far as the
same in any manner affects the public safety or health.
   (13)   To regulate and license the storing, handling, disposing and sale of
combustible and explosive substances of every character.
   (14)   To regulate, restrict and limit the number and location of oil and
gasoline stations.
   (15)   To define, prohibit, abate, suppress, regulate and or prevent all
nuisances and all things detrimental to the health, morals, comfort, safety,
convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the City, and the causes of all
nuisances and such things.
   (16)   To care for and give relief to poor and indigent persons, delinquent
and juvenile offenders, and mentally or physically deficient persons.
   (17)   To provide for taking a census of the City.
   (18)   To provide for and regulate the numbering of buildings upon streets
and highways of the City.
   (19)   To exercise jurisdiction over all diseased or noxious trees, shrubs
and plants.
   (20)   To regulate the location of all poles used by public utilities.
   (21)   To require the approval of all plats of lands by the City Council
subject to such terms and conditions as may be deemed best.
   (22)   To regulate and control the disposition and handling of garbage,
ashes, dead animals and any other things detrimental to public health or good
sanitation.
   (23)   To maintain, operate, license, own and or control public fuel
supplies and markets of every kind.
   (24)   To regulate the speed of motor vehicles and to prohibit the reckless
driving thereof, upon the streets, highways and alleys of the City.
   (25)   To regulate traffic and parking of automobiles and other vehicles; to
prohibit such parking on designated highways, streets and alleys or parts
thereof; to provide for the impounding of vehicles parked in violation of such
regulations or prohibitions and of vehicles abandoned and left on the streets,
highways and alleys of the City; and to provide for the sale of any impounded
vehicle which shall not be claimed and the impounding and other charges paid,
within sixty days after being impounded.
   (26)   To make and enforce local, police and sanitary regulations.
   (27)   To inspect, regulate and control all weights and measures and the use
thereof and to seize and destroy inaccurate or fraudulent weights and measures.
   (28)   To regulate and license taxicabs, jitneys, and all kinds of vehicles
used for the conveyance of persons and property for hire; and to regulate,
license and control the drivers of such taxicabs, jitneys and other vehicles
above mentioned.
   (29)   To regulate and license hotels, rooming houses, boarding houses,
restaurants, candy manufacturers, distributors and retailers, and soft drink
manufacturers, distributors and retailers.
   (30)   To regulate and license billiard and pool tables, and rooms, and
bowling alleys, and to restrict the number and location thereof.
   (31)   To regulate and license theaters, motion picture shows, public shows,
exhibitions, and other amusements.
   (32)   To regulate and license public dances or to prohibit the same.
   (33)   To regulate and license auctioneers, pawnbrokers, hawkers, peddlers,
solicitors, transient merchants, junk dealers and junk yards. The above
occupations may also be prohibited unless such prohibition may be contrary to
State or Federal law.
   (34)   To regulate or prohibit the use, selling, storing and transportation
of firearms and fireworks.
   (35)   To prohibit the manufacture, transportation, possession, and sale of
intoxicating liquors, except for medicinal, mechanical, chemical, scientific or
sacramental purposes in accordance with the laws of the State .
   (36)   To license dogs and other animals and to prevent their running at
large.
   (37)   To require all employees in barber shops, beauty parlors and places
where foods are handled to submit to physical examinations and to prohibit the
employment in any such place of any person who is afflicted with any infectious
disease.
   (38)   To provide for the inspection, and to regulate and license the
manufacture, sale and keeping for sale, of provisions, foods, food supplies and
beverages.
   (39)   To regulate and license trades, occupations and amusements, not
inconsistent with State and Federal laws, whether the same be specifically
herein mentioned or not.
   (40)   To prescribe the terms and conditions upon which licenses shall be
granted and may require the payment of such license fees and the furnishing of
such bond as the Council shall deem reasonable and proper. Licenses shall be
subject to revocation by the Council as provided in each particular ordinance.
   (41)   To issue the bonds of the City for the purpose of providing the first
cost of installation and connection of sewers and water works on and to
property in the City used solely for dwelling house purposes, when such
installation and connection shall be ordered by the proper health authorities;
and to provide a lien on such property for the amount of such cost and the
manner of payment thereof.
   (42)   To regulate the obstructing of streets, highways and alleys by
trains, engines, cars or otherwise; to regulate the speed of all locomotives
and railroad trains and street cars within the City.
   (43)   To require that wires in streets, highways and alleys be placed
underground.
   (44)   To establish building lines; and to establish by ordinance future
street lines where the City contemplates to open or widen any street or
highway.
   (45)   To exercise all Municipal powers in the management and control of
Municipal property and in the administration of the Municipal government
whether such powers be expressly enumerated or not; to do any act to advance
the interest of the City, the good government and prosperity of the
Municipality and its inhabitants, and through its legally constituted authority
to pass all laws and ordinances relating to its Municipal concerns, subject to
the Constitution and general laws of this State .
   (46)   To do any act permitted by the provisions of Act No. 279 of the
Public Acts of 1909, as amended or as may be amended, commonly known as the
Home Rule Act, whether such Act is specifically mentioned or not.
   (47)   The City-owned properties commonly known as Grand Blanc Commons, Rust
Park and Physicians Park are to be held in perpetuity as community park land.
(Amended 11-7-2000)
   Section 3.   The City shall possess all the powers which are permitted to be
possessed by cities in this State under the Constitution and general laws of
the State and the enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall not
operate as an exclusion or limitation of any general powers.
   Section 4.   The City Council shall exercise all the powers of the City
which are not otherwise delegated in this Charter, and said Council shall have
authority to make and enforce ordinances and resolutions in relation thereto,
and also such as they may deem necessary or proper for the safety, order and
good government of the City and the general welfare of the inhabitants thereof,
subject to the Constitution and laws of the State and the provisions of this
Charter.
CHAPTER 3
Registration
   Section 1.   The City Clerk shall constitute the Board of Registration for
the entire City, and for that purpose shall be at the office of the City Clerk
at all times, when by the provisions of this Charter, or by the general laws of
this State , boards of registration are required to sit.
   Section 2.   The City Clerk shall provide a suitable register for the City,
and in such register shall be kept an accurate registration of all the
qualified electors of the City in the manner as that prescribed for the
registration in cities of the fifth class.
   Section 3.   At all times when not in use at the polling place in the City,
the book of registration required by law shall be kept in the office of the
City Clerk.
   Section 4.   Whenever the Board of Registration as provided in the Charter
shall be in session, each elector in the City of Grand Blanc shall be entitled
to have his or her name placed in the register by application to such Board in
the same manner as that provided by law for registration of voters in cities
and townships.
   Section 5.   In all matters not herein specifically provided for, the
general laws of the State of Michigan applicable to registration of electors
shall apply and be in force in this City when not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Charter.
CHAPTER 4
Elections, Officers, Terms of Office, Compensation
   Section 1.   The regular Municipal elections to be held under the provisions
of this Charter shall be held on the first Monday of April of the year 1931 and
every second year thereafter.
   Section 2.   Special elections may be appointed by resolution of the Council
and held at such time as it shall determine, the purpose and object of which
shall be fully set forth in the resolution appointing such election.
   Section 3.   In all elections in the City of Grand Blanc, the election
precinct, voting place, notice of election, method of conducting the election,
canvassing the votes, and announcing the results, shall be the same as provided
by the general election law of this State so far as applicable to Cities and
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter.
   Section 4.   It shall be the duty of the Council at least ten days before
any election held, to provide a polling place.
   Section 5.   The City Assessor, City Clerk and two Justices of the Peace
(after the first election) shall constitute the Board of Election Inspectors
for municipal, general or special elections, and shall act as such inspectors
unless absent or barred by statute, when any vacancy shall be filled by the
electors present, as provided by the general election law of Townships;
provided that, if the City shall be divided into two or more election
precincts, the Council shall at the time of such division provide for a Board
of Election Inspectors for such additional precincts or precinct. Said
inspectors shall have all the powers in regard to administering oaths,
appointment of clerks, gatekeepers, maintaining order, care of ballot boxes,
keys and seals, and of counting and returning of ballots, as are conferred by
the general laws of this State.
   Section 6.   In the City of Grand Blanc, there shall be elected by the
qualified electors of the whole City, the following officers: One Mayor, six
Councilmen, two members of the Board of Review, two Justices of the Peace, two
Constables.
(Amended 11-5-1968)
Editor’s note:
   Ordinance 107, passed March 9, 1977, abolished the office of Constable.
   Section 7.   A Council elected under this Charter shall, by majority vote of
all the Councilmen, elect, appoint one City Clerk, and such officers, whose
election or appointment is not herein specifically provided for as they may
deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this Charter, and the
officers so appointed shall hold office until the first Monday in May following
the next regular City election and until their successors shall have been
elected and qualified.
   Section 8.   The inspectors of election in each voting district shall
designate one of their number to act as clerk of election and shall assign
proper and appropriate duties, to the other members in accordance with the
general election laws, and such electors chosen or appointed as inspectors of
election shall take the constitutional oath of office which oath may be
administered by an inspector.
   Section 9.   When State and County elections are held on the same day as
Municipal elections, the inspectors of the election as specified herein shall
also be inspectors of State, County and district elections in their respective
voting districts.
   Section 10.   The inspectors of such elections shall have the same power and
authority for the preservation of order and for enforcing obedience to their
lawful commands during the time of holding the election and the canvass of the
votes as are conferred by law upon inspectors of general elections held in this
State.
   Section 11.   The said City Clerk shall make duplicate certificates under
the corporate seal of the City, of such determination, showing the results of
the election upon any question or proposition voted upon, and what persons are
declared elected to the several offices respectively; one of which certificates
he shall file in the office of the County Clerk. A certificate of election
shall also be issued to each candidate elected to office, and each person
elected to office in the City of Grand Blanc, under the provisions of this
Charter shall, within five days after receiving the certificate of his
election, take and subscribe to the official oath required by law and file the
same with the City Clerk.
   Section 12.   The inhabitants of the City having the qualifications for
electors under the Constitution and laws of the State shall be electors
therein, and every elector shall have resided therein during the twenty days
next preceding the day of election. The residence of any elector not being a
householder shall be deemed to be in the election district in which is located
his regular place of lodging.
   Section 13.   All the above named elective officers (except in the case of
an election to fill a vacancy) shall, in case of the first election under this
Charter, take office on the first Monday following the canvass of said
election, and thereafter on the second Monday in April, excepting justices of
the peace, who thereafter shall take office on July 4.
   Each of the officers first elected under this Charter shall serve until the
second Monday of April, 1931, or until their successors are elected and
qualified, excepting that of the six Councilmen first elected under this
Charter the three receiving the highest number of votes shall hold office until
the second Monday of April, 1933, and the three others shall hold office until
the second Monday of April, 1931, and at the election to be held on the first
Monday in April, 1931, and at the regular election in April every second year
thereafter, there shall be elected three Councilmen for the term of four years,
or until their successors shall be elected and qualified, also excepting that
of the two justices first elected under this Charter the one receiving the
highest number of votes shall hold office until July 4, 1933, and the other
justice so elected shall hold office until July 4, 1931, and at the regular
election to be held on the first Monday of April, 1931, and at the regular
election in April every second year thereafter, there shall be elected one
justice for a term of four years, the term of office to commence on July 4
following his election and to continue for a period of four years or until his
successor shall be elected and qualified.
   Section 14.   The Mayor and Councilmen shall receive compensation of two
dollars ($2.00) for each Council meeting attended with a maximum of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for any one year, the compensation of all regular City
officers, members of the boards and appointees and employees, not fixed in this
Charter shall be fixed by the Council.
   Section 15.   Elected officials shall take office on the second Wednesday
following their election. (Enacted 11-6-1984)
CHAPTER 5
Nominations
   Section 1.   The mode of nomination of all elective officers provided for
herein shall be by petition, and not otherwise, except as provided for in
Section 5 of the within Chapter. The name of any elector of the City shall be
printed upon the ballot when a petition in the form hereinafter prescribed
shall have been filed, in his or her behalf, with the election authorities
provided for in the within Charter. Such petition shall be signed by at least
twenty qualified electors of the City of Grand Blanc.
   Section 2.   The signatures to a nominating petition need not all be
appended to one paper, but to each separate paper there shall be attached an
affidavit of the circulator thereof stating the number of signers to such
paper, and that each signature appended thereto was made in his or her
presence, and is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to
be. Each signer of a petition shall sign his or her name in ink or indelible
pencil, and shall place on the petition after his or her name their place of
residence.
   Section 3.   The form of the petition papers shall be substantially as
follows:
   FORM OF PETITION
   We, the undersigned, hereby present                                    whose
residence is Grand Blanc, for the office of                            to be
voted for at the election to be held in the City on the                  day of
                   19     and we individually certify that we are qualified to
vote for candidates for the above office and that we have not signed any other
petition presenting any other candidate for said office.
Name                                                                          
Residence                                                                    
State of Michigan,
County of Genesee, SS.,
                            being duly sworn, deposes and says that he is an
elector of the City of Grand Blanc, and is the circulator of the foregoing
petition containing                   signatures, and that the signatures of
the persons whose names they purport to be.
                     Signed                                                                                
      Subscribed and sworn to before me this                                 
day of                  19      .
                                                                                                
Notary Public.
      The petition if found insufficient shall be returned to
                                            Grand Blanc, Michigan.
   Section 4.   All nominating papers comprising a petition shall be assembled
and filed with the City Clerk in one instrument not later than 5:00 p.m. on the
seventh Monday prior to the date of the odd year general election which shall
be held on the Tuesday following the first Monday in November of each odd-
numbered year, pursuant to Section 644E of Act No. 239 of the Public Acts of
1970, as amended. (Amended 3-10-1971)
   Section 5.   A meeting of the City Council shall be held at 7:30 p.m. on the
day following the last day on which nominations for the City officers may be
filed with the City Clerk, and the Council shall check all such nominations and
if the nominees are legal residents of the City and State and citizens of the
United States, and are not barred by any provisions of the State laws, the
Council shall order their names printed on the official ballots.
   Should any questions as to the qualifications of the nominee be raised by
any member of the Council or any elector of the City, the Council shall request
such nominee to appear before the Council at this meeting, or such time as may
be designated by the Council, and answer to the objections made and after the
Council shall have heard the evidence it shall appear that the nominee is not
eligible to the office for which he or she is nominated, the Council shall
declare the nomination void.
(Amended 4-7-1941)
   Section 6.   All ballots used in election held under the authority of this
Charter shall be nonpartisan, and without party mark or designation. Ballots
used for election of candidates shall contain a complete list of all the
offices to be filled, the number of candidates to be elected to such offices,
and the names of the candidates seeking the election therefor, and shall be
printed and numbered in accordance with the general laws of the State of
Michigan regulating the printing and numbering of ballots at elections in this
State.
   The candidates except as hereinafter stated, receiving the greatest number
of votes for any office in the City shall be deemed to have been duly elected
to such office; and if there shall be no choice for any office by reason of two
or more candidates having received an equal number of votes the Council shall
at the next meeting of said Council determine by lot between such persons,
which shall be considered elected to such office; provided however, that in
case of the candidates for the Council the three candidates receiving the
highest number of votes shall be deemed to have been duly elected; and in case
of the candidates for the Board of Review, and Constable, two candidates
receiving the highest number of votes shall be deemed to have been duly
elected.
Editor’s note:
   Ordinance 107, passed March 9, 1977, abolished the office of Constable.
   Section 7.   If a vacancy occurs in any of the foregoing elective offices
the Council shall appoint an eligible person to fill such vacancy until the
next regular City election.
   Section 8.   In all elections in the City of Grand Blanc the election
precinct, voting place, methods of conducting the election, canvassing the
votes, and announcing the results, shall be the same as provided by the general
election law of this State, so far as the same is applicable and not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter.
   Section 9.   Special elections may be called by the Council, provided
however, that the resolution of the Council calling for any special election
shall be passed by the Council at least forty days prior to the date fixed for
such special election; provided further that not more than two special
elections shall be called and held in any one calendar year, except that a
greater number of special elections may be held, if they shall be permitted or
required by law.
   Section 10.   The Clerk shall give notice of every regular or special City
election, by causing a copy of the notice of such election to be published in a
newspaper, published and circulated in the City, once in every calendar week
for at least two successive weeks prior to such election, the first publication
of which notice shall be at least twenty days prior to the date of such
election; and by posting a copy of said notice in five of the most public and
conspicuous places in the City at least twenty days prior to the day of such
elections. Each notice shall designate the time and place in each election
precinct at which such election shall be held, and shall state fully the
purpose or purposes of such election, and shall state any special question or
questions to be voted upon at such election in the form prescribed by the
Council in the resolutions calling the election. Proof of publication and
posting such notices shall be made by proper affidavits filed in the office of
the City Clerk.
   Section 11.   On the day of any election, the polls shall be opened at 7:00
a.m., or as soon thereafter as may be, and shall be kept open until 8:00 p.m.,
at which hour they shall be closed. The inspectors of election shall cause the
proclamation to be made upon opening the polls, and shall cause proclamation to
be made of the closing of the polls one hour, thirty minutes and fifteen
minutes, respectively, before the closing thereof. No elector shall be entered
on the poll lists after the time herein provided for the closing of the polls,
regardless of whether or not any such person is at that time within the voting
booth.
   Section 12.   All ballots shall be printed in full compliance with the
general election laws of the State and the offices to which candidates are to
be elected shall appear in the order set forth in Section 6, Chapter 4 of this
Charter.
   Section 13.   In all matters pertaining to elections in the City, the City
shall be governed by the general election law of this State, as the same now or
hereafter may exist, and in so far as the same now is or hereafter may be
applicable to the City, and any provision herein contained shall only control
in so far as they do not contravene the provisions of such general election
laws.
   Section 14.   No informalities in conducting any Municipal election shall
invalidate the same, if they have been conducted fairly and in substantial
conformity with the requirements of this Charter and the general law of the
State.
   Section 15.   At or before the time limited to take and file his or her oath
of office, each of the elective officers shall file with the City Clerk a sworn
statement showing the total amount of moneys expended by him, or in his behalf
in the matter of his said election; the exact amount of money contributed by
him or her toward such expenses and the several amount of moneys contributed by
others toward such expenses, together with the names of such other
contributors, and a detailed and itemized account of the disbursements of all
other moneys. Such elective officer shall also cause a true copy of the above
statement to be published in the next succeeding issue of the official
newspaper of the City; and shall file an affidavit of such publication in the
office of the City Clerk within ten days of such publications. Any elective
officer, who fails to comply with all the provisions of this chapter shall
thereby forfeit his office unless the time for complying therewith shall be
extended by the Council, which extension or extensions shall in no case exceed
twenty days.
CHAPTER 6
Recall
   Section 1.   Any elective officer of the City of Grand Blanc may be removed
by the qualified electors of the City in accordance with the general laws of
the State providing for recall of City officials.
   Section 2.   No recall petition shall be filed against any officer within
six months after he takes his office, nor in case of any officer re-elected in
a recall election until six months after that election.
CHAPTER 7
Initiative and Referendum
   Section 1.   Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the Council by
petition signed by at least twenty-five percent of the total number of
qualified electors. All petition papers, circulated with respect to any
proposed ordinance shall be uniform in character and shall contain the proposed
ordinance in full, and shall have printed or written thereon the names and
addresses of at least five electors who shall be officially regarded as filing
the petition, and who shall constitute a committee of the petitioners for the
purpose hereinafter named.
   Section 2.   Each signer of a petition shall sign his or her name in ink or
indelible pencil, and shall place on the petition paper after his or her name
his or her place of residence. The signatures to any such petition need not all
be appended to one paper, but to each paper there shall be attached an
affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating the number of signers to such part
of the petition and that each signature appended to the paper is the genuine
signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and was made in the
presence of the affiant.
   Section 3.   All papers comprising a petition shall be assembled, and filed
with the City Clerk, as one instrument and when so filed, the City Clerk shall
submit the proposed ordinance to the Council at its next regular meeting.
Provision shall then be made by the Council for public hearings upon the
proposed ordinance.
   Section 4.   The Council shall at once proceed to consider it, and shall
take final action thereon within thirty days from date of submissions. If the
Council rejects the proposed ordinance, or passes it in a form different from
that set forth in the petition, the committee of the petitioners may require
that it be submitted to a vote of the electors in its original form.
   Section 5.   When an ordinance proposed by petition is to be submitted to a
vote of the electors, the committee of the petitioners shall certify that fact
and the proposed ordinance to the City Clerk within twenty days after the final
action on such proposed ordinance by the Council.
   Section 6.   Upon receipt of the certificate and certified copy of the
proposed ordinance, the Clerk shall certify the fact to the Council at its next
regular meeting. If an election is to be held not more than three months nor
less than thirty days after the receipt of the Clerk’s certificate by the
Council such proposed ordinance shall be submitted to a vote of the electors at
such election. If no such election is to be held within the time aforesaid, the
Council shall provide for submitting the proposed ordinance to the electors at
a special election.
   Section 7.   The ballots used when voting upon any such proposed ordinance
shall state the title of the ordinance to be voted on, and below it the two
propositions, “For the Ordinance,” and “Against the Ordinance.” Immediately at
the left of each proposition there shall be a square in which by making a cross
(X) the voter may vote for or against the proposed ordinance. If a majority of
the electors voting on any such proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof,
if shall thereupon become an ordinance of the City.
   Section 8.   Proposed ordinances for repealing existing ordinance or
ordinances, in whole or in part, may be submitted to the Council as provided in
the preceding sections for initiating ordinances Initiated ordinances adopted
by the electors shall be published, and may be amended or repealed by the
Council as in the case of other ordinances, but not within twelve months after
their adoption.
   Section 9.   No ordinance except emergency measures and the annual
appropriation bill, shall go into effect until twenty days after its passage,
nor shall any resolution for a bond issue, franchise, or general public
improvement calling for the expenditure of money from the general funds of the
City, go into effect for a period of twenty days after being passed by the
Council. If at any time within said twenty days a petition signed by fifteen
percent of the qualified electors be filed with the City Clerk requesting that
any such ordinance be repealed, amended or submitted to a vote of the electors,
it shall not become operative until the steps indicated herein shall have been
taken, and said petition shall have printed or written thereon the names and
addresses of at least five electors who shall be officially regarded as filing
such petition.
   Section 10.   The City Clerk shall deliver the petition to the Council,
which shall proceed to reconsider the ordinance. If, upon such reconsideration,
the ordinance be not entirely repealed or amended in the manner asked for in
said petition, satisfactorily to the committee named in said petition, the
Council shall provide for submitting it to a vote of the electors, and in so
doing the Council shall be governed by the provisions of Sections 6 and 7,
Chapter 8 of this Charter, respecting the time of submission and of manner of
voting on ordinances proposed to the Council by petition. If, when submitted to
a vote of the electors any such ordinance be not approved by a majority of
those voting thereon, it shall be deemed repealed.
   Section 11.   Referendum petitions need not contain the text of the
ordinances, the repeal of which is sought, unless some special amendment is
asked for, but shall be subject in all other respects to the requirements for
petitions submitting proposed ordinances to the Council. Ballots used in
referendum elections shall conform in all respects to those provided for in
Section 7, Chapter 7 of this Charter.
CHAPTER 8
Ordinances
   Section 1.   The enacting clause of all ordinances shall read “The City of
Grand Blanc Ordains,” but such caption may be omitted when said ordinances are
published in book form, or are revised and digested by authority of the
Council.
   Section 2.   The adoption of an ordinance by the Council shall require for
its passage the concurrence of a majority of the members of the Council.
   Section 3.   The time when any ordinance shall take effect shall be
prescribed therein, which time shall not be less than twenty days from the date
of the passage, except as provided in Section 9 of Chapter 7 of this Charter.
   Section 4.   All ordinances shall be published once within two weeks after
their passage, in a newspaper published and circulated within the City, in case
of no newspaper there shall be ten notices put up in public places, and the
City Clerk shall certify on the record of ordinances the date of publication
and the name of the newspaper in which any ordinance was so published or the
date and places of posting thereof and such certificate shall be prima facie
evidence that legal publication of such ordinance has been made.
   Section 5.   No ordinance shall be finally passed on the day it is
introduced, except in case of public emergency, and then only on request of the
Mayor in writing.
   Section 6.   All ordinances shall be recorded in an index book marked
“Ordinance Record” and the record of each ordinance shall be authenticated by
the signature of the Mayor and City Clerk. Such record and authentication shall
be made within two weeks after the final passage of any ordinance, but failure
to so record and authenticate any ordinance shall not invalidate it or suspend
its operation.
   Section 7.   Immediately upon the final passage of any ordinance the Mayor
and City Clerk shall sign the same under a certificate of the day and date of
its passage.
   Section 8.   Ordinances submitted to the Council by initiative petition, and
passed by the Council without change or passed in an amended form and not
required to be submitted to a vote of the electors by the committee of the
petitioners, shall be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other
ordinances.
   Section 9.   If the provision of two or more ordinances adopted or approved
at the same election conflict, the ordinance receiving the highest affirmative
vote shall prevail.
   Section 10.   Ordinances passed as emergency measures shall be subject to
referendum in like manner as other ordinances, except that they shall go into
effect at the time indicated in such ordinances. If, when submitted to a vote
of the electors, an emergency measure be not approved by a majority of those
voting thereon, it shall be considered repealed as regards any further action
thereunder; but such measure so repealed shall be deemed sufficient authority
for payment, in accordance with the ordinance, of any expense incurred previous
to the referendum vote thereon.
   Section 11.   In case a petition be filed requiring that a measure passed by
the Council providing for a franchise, an expenditure of money, a bond issue,
or a public improvement, be submitted to a vote of the electors all steps
preliminary to the actual granting of such franchise, to such actual
expenditure, actual issuance of bonds, or actual execution of a contract for
which improvements may be taken prior to the election, but nothing shall be
done which will bind the City by the action of the Council.
   Section 12.   Any franchise, ordinance, resolution, proposed public
improvement, or contemplated public measure, affecting the general health or
welfare of the City, passed by the Council may be referred by the Council to
the qualified electors of the City; and no measure so referred shall become
operative unless approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon.
   Section 13.   Whenever it shall be necessary to prove any laws, regulations
or ordinances of this City, or any resolutions adopted by the Council thereof,
the same may be read in all courts and in all proceedings before any tribunal;
first, from a record thereof kept by the Clerk; second, from a copy of the
ordinance or of the record thereof, certified by the Clerk, under the corporate
seal of the City; third, from any compilation of ordinances or an individual
ordinance purporting to have been written or printed by authority of the
Council.
   Section 14.   Whenever a penalty shall be incurred for the violation of any
ordinance, and no provision shall be made for imprisonment of the offender upon
conviction thereof, or when a corporation shall incur a penalty for the
violation of any such ordinance, the same shall be sued for in the Justice
Court of the City or in any other Court of competent jurisdiction by an action
at law.
   Section 15.   Prosecution for violation of the ordinances shall be commenced
within two years after the commission of the offense, and shall be brought
within the City. Any Municipal Court or justice of the peace of the City shall
have the authority to hear, try and determine all causes and suits arising
under the ordinances of the City, and to inflict punishment for violations
thereof as provided in the ordinance.
CHAPTER 9
Mayor and Appointments
   Section 1.   Mayor to be Supervisor; Other Duties: The Mayor, by virtue of
his office, shall be supervisor of the City and as such shall represent the
City upon the Board of Supervisors of Genesee County, with all the rights,
authorities and privileges of supervisors of townships and cities.
   He shall be the presiding officer of the Council; he shall vote in all cases
of a tie and shall make appointments and perform such other duties, as, and in
the manner provided by this Charter.
   Section 2.   Appointments, How Made, When Effective, How Ended, Change of
Salary: Not later than May 1, the Council by resolution or motion, shall fix
the salaries of all appointive officers and any elective officers whose
salaries are not fixed in this Charter, and thereupon the Mayor, by and with
the approval of the Council shall also appoint any officers deemed necessary
and the members of all boards authorized by and for which no method of election
is provided in this Charter, and all officers thus appointed shall enter upon
their official duties on May 1 following their appointment and shall serve
until their successors are chosen: provided, however that the Council shall
have the right to (1) at any time discontinue any office by it created; (2) to
dismiss at its pleasure any appointee whose term of appointment is not fixed by
this Charter; (3) to dismiss for any cause any appointee whose term is fixed by
this Charter, and (4) to appoint a successor to any appointed office of the
City, when in its best judgment, the best interest of the City will be enhanced
thereby. The Council may also increase or decrease the salaries of all
appointed officers during their continuance in office, except officers
appointed for a definite period of time, and specify the manner in which their
salaries shall be paid, and shall also appoint such other officers as may be
required by law.
CHAPTER 10
City Clerk
   Section 1.   General Duties: The City Clerk shall keep the corporate seal,
and all the documents, official bonds, papers, files and records of the City
not by this Act or the ordinances of the City entrusted to some other officer;
he shall be Clerk of the Council, he shall attend its meetings; record all its
proceedings, ordinances and resolutions, and shall countersign and register all
licenses granted; he shall, when required, make and certify under the seal of
the City, copies of the papers and records filed and kept in his office, and
such copies shall be evidence in all places of the matters therein contained,
to that same extent and as the original would be; and for the making of such
copies for any person other than an officer of the City, he shall collect fees
allowed county clerks for like services, he shall possess and exercise the
powers of township clerk so far as the same are required to be performed within
the City; he shall have authority to administer oaths and affirmations.
   Section 2.   To Act as Accountant: The City Clerk shall act as City
Accountant, and as such he shall install and have supervision over the accounts
of all departments and offices of the City. As such Accountant he may require
from all officers and departments of the City from time to time, such reports
of money, receipts and disposition thereof, together with such financial and
operating statements as shall exhibit each transaction complete and the cost
thereof.
   Section 3.   Accounting System: An accounting procedure shall be devised and
maintained for the City adequate to record in detail all transactions affecting
the acquisition, custodianship and disposition of values, including cash
receipts and disbursements, and which shall conform to any uniform accounting
system required by law. The recorded facts above provided for shall be
presented periodically to officials and to the public in such summaries and
analytical schedules in detailed support thereof as shall be necessary to show
the full effect of such transaction for each fiscal year upon the finances of
the City, and in relation to each department of the City government, including
district summaries and schedules for each utility owned and operated.
       Section 4.   To be Purchasing Agent: The City Clerk shall act as
purchasing agent for the City and as such he shall purchase all supplies for
the City under the order of the Mayor and the Council.
CHAPTER 11
City Treasurer
   Section 1.   The City Treasurer shall have the custody of all moneys, bonds,
mortgages, notes, leases and evidences of value belonging to the City. He shall
receive all moneys belonging to and receivable by the corporation, and keep an
account of all receipts and expenditures thereof. He shall pay no money out of
the Treasury except in pursuance of and by authority of law, and upon warrants
signed by the Clerk and Mayor, which shall specify the purpose for which the
amounts thereof are to be paid. He shall keep an account of and be charged with
all taxes and money raised, paid in or appropriated, and shall pay every
warrant out of the particular fund constituted or raised for the purpose for
which the warrant was issued and having the name of such fund endorsed thereon
by the Clerk.
   Section 2.   The Treasurer shall render to the Clerk on the first Monday of
every month, and oftener if required, a report of the amounts received and
credited by him to each fund, and on what account received and of the amounts
paid out by him from each fund during the preceding month, and the amount of
money remaining in each fund on the day of his report.
   Section 3.   The City Treasurer shall keep all moneys in his hands belonging
to the City and to the public, separate and distinct from his own moneys; and
he is hereby prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, the
corporation moneys, warrants or evidences of debt, for his own use of benefit
or that of any other person. Any violation of this section shall subject him to
immediate removal from office by the City Council who are hereby authorized to
declare the office vacant for such offense and to appoint his successor.
   Section 4.   The City Treasurer shall be the collector of State and County
taxes within the City. He shall also collect all other taxes and assessments
levied within the City, whether the same be for general City purposes or for
special improvements, and he shall in addition thereto perform all such duties
in relation to the collection of taxes as may be covered by the general laws of
the State.
CHAPTER 12
Legal Department
   Section 1.   The Council shall make provision for the proper care of all
litigation in which the City may be interested, and to that end they are hereby
empowered to engage the services of any competent attorney whenever in their
opinion such services shall be needed and to agree with him as to his
compensation therefor.
   Section 2.   The Council may also engage any practicing lawyer to act as
prosecuting attorney for the prosecution of all offenders against any ordinance
of the City, and to fix his compensation therefor whether the same shall be in
the nature of a fixed salary, or by way of fees for services rendered.
   Section 3.   The Council whenever in its opinion the same shall be necessary
may employ such counsel and procure such legal advice upon any subject as they
may desire, and may pay therefor in such manner as to them may seem most
economical whether by annual retainer or otherwise, as may be agreed upon.
   Section 4.   Service of all process in suits against the City shall be made
on the Mayor or City Clerk.
CHAPTER 13
City Assessor
   Section 1.   The City Assessor shall annually estimate and assess the value
of all taxable real and personal property in the City, and make an assessment
roll in the same manner as supervisors of townships. There shall be spread upon
said roll any and all taxes duly certified by the Board of Supervisors of the
County or by other proper authority. He shall make all special assessments
authorized by the Charter of this City, and for the purpose of such special
assessment that portion of the annual assessment roll applicable thereto shall
be taken as the value of the property to be assessed.
   The City Assessor shall attend all meetings of the Board of Review, and
shall furnish the said Board and Mayor information concerning the assessment
roll made by him on property assessed thereon. Such Assessor shall receive such
compensation for his service as may be fixed by the Council.
CHAPTER 14
The Council
   Section 1.   Control over sidewalks, curbs, shade trees, etc.: The Council
may, by resolution, declare that certain specific sidewalks, curbings, gutters
and shade trees adjacent to any property abutting upon any public street, shall
be constructed, repaired, planted or removed. Upon the passage of such
resolution the City Council shall cause written notice of the passage thereof
to be served upon the owner or agent of the owner, of each parcel of land
abutting upon such street, who may be a resident of the City, in the manner
provided by law for the service of summons in civil actions. He shall return a
copy of the notice, with the time and manner of service, endorsed thereon,
signed by the person serving it, to the City Clerk, who shall file and preserve
such return. For the purpose of such service, if the owner of such property, be
not a resident of the City, any person charged by such owner with the
collection of rent or the payment of taxes on such property, or having control
thereof in any way, shall be regarded as the agent of the owner, and service
upon such person shall have the like force and effect as though personal
service was made upon the owner thereof. If it appears in any such return,
however, that the owner is a nonresident, or that neither agent nor said owner
could be found one publication of a copy of the resolution in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City shall be deemed sufficient notice to such
owner.
   Section 2.   Special Assessment for Sidewalks, Curbs and Trees: If such
sidewalks, curbings or gutters be not constructed or repaired, or such trees
planted or removed within fifteen days of the service of the notice provided
for in the preceding section, or the completion of the publication thereof. The
Council may proceed by direct employment of labor or by contract to carry out
the said construction or repair at the expense of the owner as in the case of
other improvements; and all such expense shall be reported to the Council. The
Council shall thereupon, by ordinance or resolution, assess the cost and
expense thereof upon the owner or owners of all the property bounding or
abutting thereon or benefited thereby, and such assessment shall be collected
in the same manner as other assessments, with a penalty of five percent and
interest for failure to pay at the time fixed by the assessment resolution.
   Section 3.   May Borrow Money For: The Council may, at any time, borrow
money and authorize issuance of notes, or bonds therefor, in anticipation of
the collection of assessments levied for the purpose of paying the cost of
constructing or repairing sidewalks, curbings and gutters, which are to be or
have been constructed by the Council upon the failure of the owners of the
property to construct or repair the same, pursuant to notice as hereinbefore
provided.
   Section 4.   Control Streets and Public Places: The Council shall provide by
ordinance for the care, supervision, control and improvement of public
highways, streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, public grounds, bridges,
aqueducts and viaducts within the City, and shall cause them to be kept open,
in repair, and free from nuisance.
   Section 5.   Same: When it deems it necessary, the Council may cause any
street, alley, or public highway to be opened, straightened, altered, diverted,
narrowed, widened, or vacated.
   Section 6.   Acceptance of Street Dedication: No street or alley hereafter
dedicated to public use by the proprietor of ground platted in the City shall
be deemed a public street or alley, or under the care and control of the
Council unless the dedication be accepted and confirmed by resolution or
ordinance passed for such purpose.
   Section 7.   Vacating Streets: The Council, in vacating any street or part
of street or changing the name of any street, may include in one resolution or
ordinance the change of name, or the vacation or narrowing of more than one
street, avenue, or alley, but before vacating any street or part thereof, or
narrowing any street, the Council shall first pass a resolution declaring its
intention to do so. The Council shall cause notice of such resolution to be
served in the manner provided in Section 1 of this chapter. Said notice shall
state the time and place at which objections can be heard before the Council.
The Council may, by resolution or ordinance, declare such vacation or
narrowing, and such order of the Council vacating or narrowing a street or
alley which has been dedicated to public use by the proprietor shall, to the
extent which it is vacated or narrowed operate as a revocation of the
acceptance thereof by the Council.
   Section 8.   The Council shall be empowered to regulate, require and enforce
the setting of shade trees in the streets of said City, and to provide for the
preservation of the same.
   Section 9.   Chapter XI of the Fourth Class Cities Incorporation Act
Adopted. Excepting as they may be in conflict with this Charter, or with the
Act under which the City of Grand Blanc is incorporated, said Council shall
have all the powers and authority vested upon City Councils by the provisions
of Chapter XI of Act 215 of the Public Acts of 1895 of the State of Michigan
entitled “An Act to provide for the incorporation of cities of the fourth
class,” and all acts amendatory thereof. The powers conferred on the City
Council under this section are in addition to the other powers conferred on
said Council in this charter.
   Section 10.   Proceedings to Acquire Private Property for Public Use. And
any additional power or authority (if any, and same not being inconsistent with
the foregoing provisions of this chapter) heretofore or hereafter granted to or
conferred upon the common council of cities of the fourth class by the general
laws of this State, and including specifically the power and authority to
appropriate private property for public use, as provided by Chapter XXV of said
Fourth Class City Act, is hereby adopted and granted to and conferred upon the
Council of the City of Grand Blanc, or the City of Grand Blanc at its option
may acquire private property for any public use, whether within or without the
corporate limits of the City, under the provisions of Act 149 of the Public
Acts of 1911 as amended, entitled, “An Act to provide for the condemnation by
State agencies and public corporations of private property for the use or
benefit of the public, and to define the terms “public corporations,” “State
agencies,” and “private property” as used herein.
   Section 11.   The Council shall be the judge of election and qualification
of its own members, subject to review of the courts in case of contest.
   Section 12.   The Council shall determine its own rules of procedure, may
punish its members for disorderly conduct and may compel the attendance of the
members.
   Section 13.   Council Meetings, General and Special: The Council shall
prescribe the time of its regular meetings at least one of which shall be held
each month, in the City Hall.
   The Mayor or any two members of the Council may appoint special meetings
thereof, notice of which, in writing, shall be given each Councilman or left at
his place of residence at least six hours before the meeting; provided that if
all members of the Council be present at any special meeting due notice shall
be presumed to have been given.
   Section 14.   Journal to be Kept: The Council shall cause to be kept in the
English language, a written or printed journal of every session of said
Council.
   Section 15.   May Designate Bank: The Council is authorized to negotiate
with one or more banks within the City given sufficient security to have all,
or such portion of the City funds as may be agreed upon deposited with such
bank, and to receive from such bank interest on daily or other periodical
balances at such rate of interest as may be agreed upon, and thereafter to
cause such City money to be deposited and remain in such bank during the time
agreed upon, except such amounts as may be withdrawn by warrants issued in the
ordinary course of business under the provisions of this Charter.
   Section 16.   The Council may annually cause to be levied and collected
taxes in a sum not to exceed two per centum of the assessed value of all real
and personal property in the City of Grand Blanc.
   Section 17.   The City Council may provide for the punishment of those who
violate laws or ordinances of the City of Grand Blanc, but no punishment shall
exceed a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for ninety
days, or both, in the discretion of court: said imprisonment may be in the
County Jail or City Prison, or in any workhouse in the State authorized by law
to receive prisoners from such City.
CHAPTER 15
Pounds
   Section 1.   The Council may provide and maintain one or more pounds in the
City, and may appoint poundmasters, prescribe their powers and duties, and fix
their compensation, and may authorize the impounding of all beasts and fowls
found in the streets, or otherwise at large, contrary to any ordinance of the
City, and if there shall be no pound or poundmaster, they may provide for the
impounding of such beasts and fowls by some person duly appointed for the
purpose in some suitable place under his immediate care and inspection, and may
confer on him the powers and duties of poundmaster.
CHAPTER 16
Cemetery
   Section 1.   May Own and Regulate: The City may acquire, own and hold such
cemetery or public burial place or places, either within or without the limits
of the corporation, as in the opinion of the City Council shall be necessary
for the public welfare and suitable for the convenience of the inhabitants, and
may prohibit interment of the dead within the City, or may limit such
interments therein to such cemetery or burial place as the City Council may
prescribe, and it may cause bodies buried within the City in violation of any
rule or ordinance made in respect to such burial, to be taken up and buried
elsewhere.
   Section 2.   Certain Statutes Adopted: All provisions of Chapter XV of Act
215 of the Public Acts of 1895 and Acts amendatory thereto relative to the
incorporation of cities of the fourth class shall be considered as a part of
this Charter, except that all powers therein granted to the Council in relation
to cemeteries shall hereafter be exercised by the Council herein provided for.
CHAPTER 17
Public Health
   Section 1.   Certain Statutes Adopted: It shall be the duty of the Council
to protect the public health of inhabitants of the City, and for that purpose
they are hereby clothed with all the powers granted to City Councils by Chapter
XIV of Act 215 of the Public Acts of 1895 relative to incorporation of fourth
class cities; and said act and all amendments thereto shall be considered as a
part of this Charter, and the Council shall possess all the powers therein
granted to City Councils and shall be the Board of Health until such time as it
may create a separate Board of Health and appoint a Health Officer and define
their powers and duties, authority to do so being hereby granted.
CHAPTER 18
Justices of the Peace
   Section 1.   To File Oath and Bond with County: Every justice of the peace
shall, within the same time and in the same manner as in case of justices of
the peace elected in townships, take and file with the County Clerk of Genesee
County an oath of office and bond or security for the performance of the duties
of his office said bond or security to be executed in the presence of the City
Clerk and approved by the Council of the City of Grand Blanc, and for failure
of such justice so to do, shall be liable to the same penalties as are provided
in cases of justices of the peace elected in townships.
   Section 2.   To File Bond With City: Each justice of the peace shall also
before entering upon the duties of his office, give a bond to the City in a
penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00), to be executed and approved as
above, conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties as the justice of
the peace in and for said City.
   Section 3.   Authority of Justices of Peace: Each justice of the peace
elected in the City of Grand Blanc, under the provisions of this Charter, shall
have and exercise therein and within Genesee County, the same jurisdiction and
shall have the same powers and authority and shall perform the same duties and
make the same records, and make the same disposition of fines, penalties and
forfeitures by him collected or received, and be subject to the same general
duties, obligations, requirements, restrictions and prohibitions as are now or
may hereafter be conferred upon or required of justices of the peace by the
Constitution and general laws of the State of Michigan, save only as may be
herein otherwise lawfully provided.
   Any report of a justice of the peace required by general statutory
provisions hereinbefore referred to be made to the common council or
legislative body of any local municipal unit shall, under the provisions
hereof, be made to the Council of Grand Blanc.
   Section 4.   Vacancy in Office of Justice, How Filled: In case of vacancy in
the office of justice of the peace in said City, it shall be filled by
appointment by the Mayor by and with the approval of the Council, such
appointee to serve until July 4 following the first regular City election after
said appointment. At said election the balance of said unexpired term shall be
filled by election in the regular manner of a justice of the peace to serve
from said July 4 for the remainder of such unexpired terms.
   Section 5.   City Fines: All fines, penalties and forfeitures received by a
justice of the peace arising out of proceedings to enforce any ordinance of the
City imposing a fine or penalty for a violation thereof shall within thirty
days after such receipt be paid to the City Treasurer, who shall give duplicate
receipts therefor and within the same time said justice shall file one of such
duplicate receipts with the City Clerk, and all fines, penalties and
forfeitures so received by the City of Grand Blanc shall be credited to the
general funds of the City.
CHAPTER 19
City Finances
   Section 1.   Fiscal Year: The fiscal year for the City shall commence on
June 1 each year.
   Section 2.   General Authority and Tax Limit: The Council shall have the
authority within the limits herein prescribed, to raise annually by taxation
upon the real and personal property liable to taxation in said City, as in
Section 2, Chapter 20, defined, such sums of money as may be necessary to
defray the general expenses and pay the current liabilities of the City and
carry into effect the powers in this Charter granted: provided, the aggregate
amount thereof shall not exceed in any one year two percent of the assessed
valuation of all real and personal property in the City.
   Section 3.   General Funds: The revenue so raised by general taxation or by
loan to be repaid by such tax, shall be divided into such and so many funds and
apportioned to the various general needs and purposes of said City as the
Council may by ordinance or resolution determine.
   Section 4.   Council to Audit Books and Publish Statement: Within two weeks
next preceding the annual City election, the Council shall audit and settle the
accounts of the Treasurer and other officers of the City as of March 1, and so
far as practicable, of all persons having claims against the City, and shall
make out a statement in detail of the receipts and expenditures of the City
during the preceding year, which statement shall distinctly show the amount of
all taxes raised during the year for all purposes and the amount apportioned to
each fund, the amount levied by special assessment (if any) and the amount
collected on each; also the items and amounts received from all other sources
during the year, also the several items of all expenditures made during the
year, and the object thereof, classifying the same for each purpose separately
and containing such other information as shall be necessary to a full
understanding of the financial condition of the City. Said statement shall also
show the amount and the items of all indebtedness outstanding against the City;
and to whom payable, and upon what rate of interest; the amount of salary or
compensation paid or payable to each officer of the City for the year, and such
other information as shall be necessary to a full understanding of all the
financial concerns of the City for the year. Such statements, signed by the
Mayor and Clerk, shall be filed in the office of the Clerk and a copy thereof
published in a newspaper of the City at least seven days previous to said
annual election, if one is published therein.
   Section 5.   Board of Estimates, Annual City Budget: The Mayor and Clerk
shall constitute a Board of Estimates. On or before the first Monday in May of
each year, said Board of Estimates shall furnish to the Council estimates in
writing of the probable expenses and liabilities and disbursements to be
incurred and made by this City for the ensuing fiscal year, specifying in
detail the probable purpose and fund for and to which expenditures are
intended; estimating, covering and specifying for every purpose for which, in
their opinion, any money will be required to be paid from any of the several
funds of the City during the coming fiscal year: and also the estimated amount
of revenue from all sources other than tax levy. The estimates thus made shall
be styled the “Annual City Budget.” Said Board of Estimates shall make any and
such further recommendations as to them may seem best. Said budget, when so
prepared and completed shall be signed by said Board of Estimates and filed
with the City Clerk.
   Section 6.   Public Hearing on Budget: The Council shall proceed to hold a
public hearing on the “Annual City budget,” said hearing to be held in the
month of May contemporaneous with or prior to the adoption of the annual
appropriation ordinance. Notice of said public hearing shall be given by one
publication in some newspaper of general circulation in the City, and in case
there is no such newspaper, then by posting such notice in ten public places
within said City at least ten days prior to said meeting and said notice to
specify the day and hour of said meeting.
   Section 7.   Annual Appropriation Ordinance: The Council during the month of
May, and after having held the public hearing on the annual City budget, and
after the assessment roll shall have been certified to it by the Board of
Review, as hereinafter provided, shall pass the annual appropriation ordinance,
providing for and appropriating the several amounts required to defray the
expenditures and liabilities of the corporation for the next fiscal year, to be
apportioned to and among and payable from the several funds as estimated and
determined upon, to be raised by tax with the next general City tax levy and to
be paid into and apportioned among the several funds of the City; provided, the
total amount so raised and appropriated shall not exceed the amount designated
and recommended in said annual City budget, except by and upon a two-thirds
vote of the City Council.
   Section 8.   No Expenditure Until Appropriated: No improvement, work,
repairs, or expense to be paid out of any general fund, (excepting as herein
otherwise provided) shall be ordered, commenced or contracted for, or incurred
in any fiscal year unless in pursuance of an appropriation specially made
therefore in the last preceding annual appropriation bill, nor shall any
expenditure be made or any liability incurred in any year, for any such work,
improvement, repairs, or for any purpose, exceeding the appropriation for that
purpose in said bill.
   Section 9.   May Borrow in Anticipation of Taxes: The Council shall have the
authority to raise money by loan in anticipation of the receipts from special
or general assessments for the purpose of defraying the cost of the
improvement, object or purpose for which the assessment was levied. Such loans
shall not exceed the amount of the assessment for the completion of the whole
work nor shall any such loan be negotiated and made nor any indebtedness
incurred until after the general appropriation therefor has been approved or
the special assessment has been determined, confirmed and levied. The Council
is hereby authorized to pledge the credit of the City in support of any loan
made under the provisions of this section.
   Section 10.   Funds Kept Separate: All moneys and taxes raised, loaned or
appropriated for the purpose of any particular funds shall be paid into and
credited to said fund and shall be applied to the purpose for which such moneys
were raised and received, and to none other. Moneys not received or
appropriated for any particular fund shall be credited to the general, or
contingent fund, and moneys belonging to one fund shall not be transferred into
any other fund except as permitted by Section 10, Chapter 21.
   Section 11.   Necessary Authority for Payment: No money shall be drawn from
the Treasury except in pursuance of the authority and appropriation of the
Council and upon warrants of the Clerk countersigned by the Mayor. Such warrant
shall specify the fund from which it is payable, and shall be paid from no
other fund.
   Section 12.   No Contract Until Money Appropriated: Neither the Council nor
any officer or employee of the City shall have authority to make any contract
involving the expenditure of public money, or impose upon the City any
liability to pay money until a definite amount of money shall have been
provided by an authorized bond issue or loan or regularly appropriated for the
payment of all pecuniary liability of the City under such contract, or in
consequence thereof to mature during the period covered by the contract and
such contract, if made, shall be voidable at the option of the City; provided,
that nothing herein contained shall prevent the Council from providing the
payment of any expenses, the necessity for which is caused by any casualty,
accident or public calamity arising after the passage of the annual
appropriation ordinance, as contemplated in succeeding sections of this
chapter.
   Section 13.   May Borrow Money For Emergency: If, during any fiscal year,
there shall arise some unforseen emergency by which any bridge, street, sewer
or public highway shall become dangerous to the public health, convenience or
welfare, or by which it shall become a public necessity to expend money on the
repair of any public building to an amount exceeding the sum then on hand
available for that purpose, the Council shall so declare, by resolution,
stating the circumstances which cause such conditions, which resolution shall
thereupon declare an expenditure necessary to the public health, convenience or
welfare and shall spread such resolution at large upon its minutes. Upon the
passage of the above resolution at large, but not otherwise, the Council may
borrow such sum, not exceeding fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500) as may be
necessary to repair such damage or provide for such public health, convenience
or welfare, which loan shall be included in the next annual budget, and, when
collected, applied to the extinguishment of said debt; provided, however, that
no new construction work shall be provided for in this manner. And in case a
greater sum than fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500) be needed because of such
emergency, then and in such case such further sum as may be needed may in like
manner be borrowed for such purpose, provided such action shall be approved by
the electors of the City when submitted to them at a general or special
election called for that purpose.
   Section 14.   May Borrow Further for Emergency: In case of fire, flood or
other calamity, the Council may borrow for the relief of the inhabitants of
said City, and for the preservation of Municipal property in the City, a sum
not exceeding one-fourth of one percent of the assessed valuation of all real
and personal property in the City, such sum to be due and payable in not more
than three years. For such loans, lawfully made, the bonds of the City may be
issued, bearing a rate of interest not exceeding six percent.
   Section 15.   Bond, Authority and Requirements: Said City may also issue
bonds for the purposes and in the manner permitted to villages, and
particularly as provided by Chapter 9 of the aforesaid village Act, and more
particularly as provided by sections thereof numbers 2747 to 2751 both
inclusive, of the Compiled Laws of Michigan for 1915, subject only to the
limitations of this Charter and the laws governing the incorporation of the
City of Grand Blanc, provided all bond issues (excepting refunding bonds) shall
be approved by a vote of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon.
   Section 16.   Must Appropriate for Bonds and Interest: It shall be the duty
of said Council each and every year, so long as the City shall remain in debt,
to include in the taxes levied, a sum not less than the amount of the bonds and
interest coming due in said year.
   Section 17.   Bonds, Record of: The Clerk shall enter in a book kept for
that purpose a record of all bonds and warrants issued, showing the date,
number, amount, date of maturity and rate of interest, of each thereof, and for
what issued.
   Section 18.   Debt Limitation: The Council is hereby prohibited from
authorizing the creation of any liability or indebtedness against the City, in
any one fiscal year, exceeding in the aggregate the amount of one half of one
percent of the assessed valuation of the property of said City; nor shall it be
lawful for said City ever to create an indebtedness from time to time to
exceed, in the aggregate, eight percent of the then assessed valuation of the
property of the City. This section shall not apply to special assessments, or
other specific provisions and authorities of this Charter relative to light,
power, water or public utility projects, as permitted by Chapter 22 and 23 and
hereof, nor Sections 13 and 14 of this chapter. In case any sum or sums of
money shall be borrowed by the Council, the same shall be paid out of the sum
raised by taxes for such year if the payment is not otherwise provided for, and
all sums of money borrowed by said City shall be applied to the purpose for
which the sum was borrowed, and to no other purpose whatever.
   Section 19.   Maturity of Bond Issues: Every bond issue of the City shall be
made payable within thirty years from the date of the issue, and shall contain
on its face a statement specifying the object for which the same is issued; and
if issued for the purpose of raising money for any public improvement, the
particular improvement shall also be specified on the face of such bonds;
provided, any bond issue which shall not be made to mature within five years,
from date of issue shall be so divided and matured that some of said bonds
shall mature serially each year after the first three years. And it shall be
unlawful for any officer of the City to sign or issue any such bond unless such
matters are set forth on the face of the same as aforesaid, or to use such
bonds, or proceeds from the sale thereof for any other object then mentioned on
the face of the bond.
CHAPTER 20
General Taxation
   Section 1.   Clerk to Certify to Assessor for Collection: All sums ordered
in the annual appropriation bill in any year to be raised for the several
general funds, or for other lawful purposes, and all sums ordered in said
appropriation ordinance to be levied or assessed as special assessments (if
any) as well as any and all special assessments authorized and directed, shall
forthwith, upon adoption and confirmation, be certified by the City Clerk to
the Assessor and shall be levied and collected upon the assessed valuation of
all taxable property within the City, or within said special assessment
district as the case may be.
   Section 2.   Assessment Annually, What Property Subject to: An assessment of
all property in the City shall be made annually by the City Assessor, and the
property subject to taxation for Municipal purposes shall be the same as for
the State, County and school purposes under the general tax law.
   Section 3.   When Assessment Roll Made: On or before the first Monday in May
of each year the City Assessor shall make and complete an assessment roll of
the City upon which he shall set down the names of every person liable to be
taxed in the City, and a description of all the real property and the aggregate
amount of all personal property liable under the laws of the State to taxation
in the City, and the name of the owner, agent, or person liable to pay taxes
thereon. If known, and shall set down in such roll the valuation of such
property at its true cash value, on such basis as may hereafter be provided by
general law, placing the value of the real and personal property in separate
columns; provided that the description of personal property on said roll may be
made by using the word “Personal” except in cases where the general law
requires the kind of personal property assessed to be designated upon the roll.
Upon making said assessment roll the Assessor shall be governed by all the
provisions of the general law for the assessment of property in townships. All
personal property found in the City may be assessed therein, whether the owner
thereof resides in the City or elsewhere.
   Section 4.   Board of Review, Composition and Quorum: The Board of Review
shall consist of the Mayor, the City Assessor and the two elected members of
the Board. They shall review the assessment roll of the City and a majority of
said Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
   Section 5.   Board of Review, When Meet, Powers of: The said Board of Review
shall meet on the third Monday in May of each year at the Council chamber at
nine o’clock in the forenoon and shall continue in session at least two days
successively and at least eight hours each day, during which time any person or
persons desiring so to do, may examine said assessment roll and may show cause
if any exists, why the valuation thereof should be changed, and the Board shall
forthwith consider and act upon said petition or request and their decision
shall be final. A decision of the majority of all members of said Board upon
all questions shall govern.
   They may examine on oath any person or persons touching on the matter of
his, her or their assessment, or petition, or request, and the chairman or any
member may administer oaths. They shall keep a record of their proceedings and
of all changes made in said roll, and the amount added to or deducted from the
total valuation shall be entered upon said record, which shall be deposited
with the City Clerk.
   The City Clerk shall act as Clerk of the Board of Review. The Board shall
select one of their number as Chairman.
   Notice of Time of Meeting: The City Clerk shall give notice of the time of
meeting of said Board of Review and of the place of holding the same, at least
one week prior to the time of meeting, by publishing a notice thereof in a
newspaper of general circulation in said City and also by posting the same in
three public places in said City.
   Assessment Roll Confirmed: The roll as prepared by the Assessor shall stand
as approved and adopted as the act of the Board of Review when and as changed
as herein provided.
   After said Board shall have completed the revision of said roll the City
Clerk shall endorse and sign a statement upon the roll to the effect that the
same is the general assessment roll for the City for the year in which it has
been prepared, as approved by said Board. Such statement may be made in the
following form, viz:
   (Form of Certificate)
STATE OF MICHIGAN
County of Genesee, ss.
   I hereby certify that the Board of Review of the City of Grand Blanc has
reviewed, equalized and corrected the within assessment roll and has deducted
from (or added to, as the case may be)             dollars from (or to, as the
case be) the valuation of the real estate and personal property made by the
Assessor, and has determined the aggregate value of such real estate to be
$            and the aggregate value of the personal estate to be $         
for the year A.D.                   .
Dated                      .
                                                                                                     
                                 City Clerk
   Upon the completion of such roll and its endorsement in manner aforesaid, it
shall be returned to the Assessor and shall be conclusively presumed by all
courts and tribunals to be valid and shall not be set aside except for causes
mentioned in the general laws of the State relating to the assessment of
property and the levy and collection of taxes thereon. The omission of such
endorsement, however, shall not affect the validity of any such roll.
   Section 6.   Blanket Authority of Board of Review: Said Board of
Equalization and Review shall have the same power and perform the same duties
in all respects as boards of review in townships in reviewing and correcting
assessments made by the supervisors of townships, except as in this Charter
otherwise provided.
   Section 7.   Assessor to Spread Tax: After confirmation of that assessment
roll and after passage of the annual appropriation ordinance, and certification
thereof to the assessor, as in Section 7 of Chapter 19 and Section 5 of this
chapter provided, and before the second Monday in June, the City Assessor shall
apportion the several taxes to be raised in said City, except school taxes,
according and in proportion to the equalized valuation entered by the Board of
Review and Equalization in the assessment roll of the City. Such taxes shall be
entered in separate columns with appropriate headings. The total of all taxes
assessed against any one valuation or parcel of property shall be added and
carried out in the last column under the right hand of such roll. The City
Assessor shall carefully foot the several columns of valuation and taxes and
make a detailed statement thereof to the City Clerk, and said Clerk shall
immediately charge the amount of taxes to the City Treasurer.
   Section 8.   Tax Roll Certified to Treasurer: The City Assessor shall
thereupon prepare a copy of said assessment roll with the taxes assessed as
hereinbefore provided, and annex thereto a warrant signed by the City Clerk
commanding the City Treasurer to collect the several sums mentioned in the last
column of such roll not less than thirty nor more than sixty days from the date
of such warrant, and deliver said tax roll and warrant to the City Treasurer on
or before the second Monday in June. The said warrant shall authorize and
command the Treasurer, in case any person named in the assessment roll shall
neglect or refuse to pay his tax, to levy the same by distress and sale of
goods and chattels of such person, and the said Treasurer shall have the same
power and authority to enforce the collection of said taxes by seizure and sale
of personal property, or by suit, as is conferred upon township treasurers by
the general tax law. This roll shall be known as the “City Tax Roll” and shall
be a duplicate copy of the assessment roll prepared for school, State and
County taxation after the same has been reviewed, but before the taxes have
been spread thereon. Said warrant may be renewed from time to time by order of
the Council, and for such time as the Council may direct; provided, that the
time shall not be extended later than October 31 of any year.
   Section 9.   Office Hours of the Treasurer: Upon receiving such tax roll and
warrant, the City Treasurer shall proceed to collect such taxes; and to receive
the payment of taxes, he shall remain in his office at least one day in each
week from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. throughout the tax collection period, and at such
other time as the Council may prescribe, and shall give notice of such days by
publication in a newspaper published and circulating in the City.
   Section 10.   When Taxes Due and Collection Fee: Taxes so assessed on the
City tax roll shall become due and payable on July 1 in each year, except as
conditionally authorized by Section 8 of Chapter 21 hereof. Taxes paid before
August 31 shall be paid with one percent fee or penalty: taxes paid thereafter
may be paid with a two percent fee or penalty: taxes remaining unpaid after
October 31, shall be returned as delinquent. Said fee shall belong to the City
and shall be paid into the general or contingent fund.
   Section 11.   Treasurer to Give Notice Taxes Due: The City Treasurer shall
give six days notice to the taxpayers of the City that such roll has been
delivered to him, by publication of such notice in a newspaper published in
said City at least six days before July 1, which notice shall be sufficient
demand for the payment of all taxes on said roll; and that payment therein
specified may be made to him at any time up to and including August 31 with one
percent therefor. Provided, that the failure to give the notice specified in
this section for the payment of such tax shall not invalidate the said tax nor
release the persons assessed from the penalty herein specified.
   Section 12.    The taxes thus assessed shall, on July 1, and on such other
date as provided under Section 8, Chapter 21, become at once a debt to the City
from the person to whom they are assessed, and the amounts assessed on any
interest in real estate shall on the said day become a lien upon such real
property, and the lien for such amount, and for all interest and charges
thereon, shall continue until payment thereof; and all personal taxes shall
also be a lien on all personal property of such person so assessed from and
after the said day in each year and shall take precedence of any sale,
assessment, chattel mortgage, levy or other lien on such personal property
executed or made after said day, except where such property is actually sold in
the regular course of trade.
   Section 13.   General Tax Law Adopted: All such taxes shall be collected on
or before October 31 in each year, and all provisions of the general tax law in
relation to the making of the assessment roll and the levying, collection and
payment of such taxes, are hereby adopted so far as the same are applicable.
   Section 14.   Treasurer to Certify Delinquents: If the City Treasurer shall
be unable to collect any of the taxes upon such roll assessed on real property
before October 31 in each year, he shall make a statement of the same, with a
full and perfect description of such property with the taxes upon each parcel
thereof, which statement shall be verified by his affidavit that such taxes
remain unpaid, and that he has not upon diligent inquiry been able to secure
any goods or chattels liable to pay such sum whereon he could levy the same;
and he shall also make a statement showing the taxes upon personal property
remaining unpaid, and the names of the persons against whom they are assessed,
and the amount against each, which statement he shall verify by his affidavit
that the amount so mentioned as uncollected remains unpaid and that he has not
been able after diligent inquiry, to discover any goods or chattels belonging
to the persons liable to pay such sum wherein he could levy the same. He shall
also make a statement showing the amount of all moneys collected by him on
account of taxes on said roll, which statement shall be filed with the City
Clerk. The Council shall direct the City Clerk to assess the annual roll for
the State, County and school taxes with all such delinquent taxes so returned,
with a penalty of six cents of each dollar of the sum total of taxes assessed
and returned delinquent on each particular description of land or other
property, and which penalty shall be carried out opposite to each particular
description of land or other property in a column provided for that purpose,
placing the aggregate sum of general taxes in the column headed “Delinquent
City Taxes” and all unpaid special district assessments shall be placed in a
column headed “Delinquent Special Assessment,” and the aggregate sum thereof,
including the six percent penalty tax, shall be placed in the column headed
“Total Delinquent City Taxes.”
   Section 15.   Roll to Board of Supervisors: The City Clerk shall keep the
original assessment roll in his office until the annual meeting of the Board of
Supervisors of Genesee County and he shall then present such rolls to said
Board, which roll shall be the assessment roll of the City for all taxation
purposes whatever, except the levying of taxes to be collected in the months of
July, August, September and October, as herein provided.
   Section 16.    School, State and County Tax Spread: On November 1, the City
Assessor shall apportion and spread upon the tax roll all school, State and
County Taxes, certified to him by the Board of Supervisors, delinquent City
taxes, and such other taxes as are legally required to be spread upon the roll.
   Section 17.   Fall Tax Roll Certified to Treasurer: Within thirty days after
November 1, the City Assessor shall deliver a certified copy of the above
mentioned assessment roll to the City Treasurer to be filed in his office to
which roll shall be annexed a warrant signed by the City Clerk and directed to
the Treasurer, in all respects as near as may be as warrants to township
treasurers for the collection of State, County and township taxes.
   Section 18.   Notice of Fall Tax: Upon receiving said tax roll as herein
provided, the City Treasurer shall give notice to the tax payers of the City
that such roll has been delivered to him, and that the taxes therein levied may
be paid to him at his office at any time after December 1, up to and including
January 9 next ensuing with a charge for collection of one percent, but that
four percent collection fee will be charged and collected upon all taxes
remaining unpaid on January 10. Said notice shall be given by publishing the
same in a newspaper published in said City ten days before December 1. But any
defect in said notice, or omission to comply with the provisions of this
section, shall not invalidate said tax roll, or any measure thereafter to be
taken to enforce collection of the taxes thereon.
   Section 19.   City Treasurer has Authority of Township Treasurer: For
collection of all taxes remaining unpaid on the general tax roll on January 10,
the City Treasurer shall proceed in the same manner as township treasurers are
required by law to do for the collection of taxes in townships, and shall for
that purpose have all the power and authority conferred by law upon township
treasurers for such purposes. And it is hereby made mandatory upon the City
Treasurer to exhaust all legal remedies for the collection of unpaid personal
taxes before the return thereon.
   Section 20.   Pay County Funds to County Treasurer-General Authority: The
said City Treasurer shall pay to the County Treasurer all moneys payable to him
at the same time and in the same manner as is required of township treasurers
by the general tax law, and he shall make return of delinquent taxes to the
County Treasurer according to the general law of the State relating to township
treasurers, and said general law shall govern all things relating to the levy
and collection of taxes not herein otherwise provided for.
   Section 21.   Delinquents Returned to County Treasurer. If the City
Treasurer shall be unable to collect any taxes on his roll as assessed on real
property, he shall make return thereof to the County Treasurer, and shall also
make statements showing the taxes upon personal property remaining unpaid in
the same manner as is required of township treasurers by the general tax law.
CHAPTER 21
Special Assessment
   Section 1.   When, by the provisions of this Charter, the cost and expense
of any local or public improvement may be defrayed in whole or in part by
special assessment upon the lands abutting upon or adjacent thereto, or
otherwise benefited by the improvements, such assessment may be made as in this
Charter provided.
   Section 2.   Right to Petition For: The residents and the property owners
upon any street or district desiring to have any public improvement made
therein, whether the same is to be paid by special assessment or not, may
petition therefor, and file such petition with the City Clerk. Upon filing of
such petition the City Clerk shall number it in its order for that year, make a
record thereof, and then turn the same over to the Mayor. The Mayor shall
thereupon investigate the subject and if, in his opinion, the improvement is
desirable, he shall include the same in the next appropriate annual budget for
improvements.
   Section 3.   Budget for Special Improvements: On or before May 1 in each
year the Mayor shall prepare and present to the Council a budget of all
improvements proposed to be made during the ensuing fiscal year to be paid for
in whole or in part by special assessment. This budget shall contain the
following information:
      A.   Location and general description of each improvement.
      B.   Estimated cost of the same.
      C.   Method of financing.
      D.   Method of assessment, mode of payment, number of annual payments and
such other information as the Council may require.
      E.   A schedule showing which of these improvements, in his opinion, is
most necessary to make and the order in which they should be taken up.
   Section 4.   Hearing on Special Improvement Budget: The Council shall,
immediately upon receipt of such budget, make the same provision for a public
hearing as is prescribed in Section 6, 19th Chapter for “annual City budget,”
which hearing may be held at the same time, or at a separate time, whichever
shall be decided upon by the Council; and like notice shall be given to the
public of the time and place of such hearings as that prescribed in said
Section 6.
   Section 5.   Effect of Petition For or Against: If, at or previous to the
public hearing mentioned in the last section in relation to any special
assessment and previous to the passage of the resolution hereinafter mentioned
declaring the same as a necessary public improvement, a majority of the
property owners in and owning at least fifty percent of the assessed value,
according to the preceding annual assessment roll, of the property to be taxed
for such public improvement shall file with the City Clerk a remonstrance
against the making of such improvement the Council shall drop said improvement
from such special improvement budget for that year; and if, at or previous to
the public hearing mentioned in the last section and previous to the passage of
the resolution hereinafter mentioned declaring the necessary public
improvements for that year, but not afterwards, one half of the property owners
in and owning fifty percent of the assessed value of the property to be taxed
for any public improvement, shall file with the City Clerk a petition
requesting that such improvement be made during the current year, then and in
such case such improvement petitioned for shall be considered as part of the
budget presented by the Mayor and be dealt with accordingly.
   Signatures may be withdrawn from or added to such petitions up to but not
after the Council shall have determined the sufficiency of such petition.
   Section 6.   Necessity to be Declared: Immediately after such public hearing
shall have been held, the Council, subject to petitions as above, shall approve
by resolution the whole of such budget or such portion thereof as to them shall
seem best, and shall enter such resolution at large upon their minutes, such
resolution shall contain a statement that the Council declares such
improvement, in each case, a necessary public improvement and shall therein
state what portion of the expense thereof shall be paid by special assessment
and what part, if any, shall be appropriated from the general funds of the
City, and shall in the same resolution designate the district of land and the
premises upon which each special assessment shall be levied.
   Section 7.   Special Assessment. Limitation: The cost and expenses of any
improvement which may be made by special assessment shall include the cost of
surveys, plans, assessments and cost of construction. In no case shall the
whole amount to be levied by special assessment upon any lot or premises for
any one improvement, exceed the amount of benefits resulting from such
improvement to such lot or land.
   Section 8.   Emergency Special Assessment: If, after preparation of and
hearing on the special assessment budget as in Sections 3 and 4 hereof
provided, the Council by a three fourths vote of all members elect shall
declare some additional proposed special improvement an immediate necessity, to
be borne by special assessment, such special improvement and special assessment
may be authorized and directed, subject to like notice, hearing, action and
confirmation as in case of ordinary special assessments, and said Council may
declare the sum due at such time as they deem necessary and issue their warrant
to the City Treasurer directing such collection; provided, not to exceed one
tenth part of the cost of such emergency improvement shall be spread over the
City at large unless provision shall have been anticipated and made in the last
annual appropriation bill for such greater part.
   Section 9.   Special Assessment. How Levied: In addition to the amount
hereinbefore authorized, the Council may raise, by special assessment upon a
special assessment district, the whole or such portion of the cost of such
improvement as they may determine, except as provided in Section 12 hereof, for
the purpose of grading, paving, curbing and otherwise improving streets as
herein provided, or for the constructing of sewers or drains, or for building
retaining walls upon or along any stream or water front, or for making other
local improvements especially beneficial to the lands and property in the
district.
   The amount to be so raised by special assessment for any form of street
improvement may be levied according to benefit, as the Council may determine.
   Section 10.   Special Assessment Funds: Revenues and moneys raised for
taxation in any special assessment district in the City shall be divided into
special assessment funds. The money raised by special assessment in any special
district for sewers, paving, repairs, or improvements of any kind, shall
constitute a special fund for the purpose for which it was raised, and such
fund shall be used for no other purpose whatever; provided, if there be a
surplus after paying for such special improvement, it may be credited to some
other fund when it does not exceed ten percent of the amount collected, as the
Council may determine, but if it exceeds such percent it shall be returned to
those form whom collected.
   Section 11.   Assessment Precedes Contract: Special assessments, to defray
the estimated cost of any improvement, shall be levied and the special
assessment roll confirmed before the making of the improvement or signing
contract.
   Section 12.   Part of Cost Paid from General Fund: Whenever any special
assessment is to be made according to a resolution of the Council made in the
manner prescribed in this chapter, the Council shall direct the assessment to
be made by the City Assessor against the premises or locality constituting the
district to be assessed therefor. If there shall be included in any special
assessment district lots belonging to the City, or public buildings or public
grounds belonging to the City, not taxable, such part of the expense of such
improvement as in the opinion of the Council making the special assessment
would be justly apportionable to such public grounds, buildings and City
property, and to any interior square or places formed by the intersection of
streets, were they taxable, shall be paid from the general fund, or from the
proper street district fund or partly from each, as the Council shall determine
to be just.
   Section 13.   Special Assessment Roll To Be Prepared: Upon receiving such
order the City Clerk shall at once make a transcript of that portion of the
last annual assessment roll covering the property to be assessed, so far as the
description of each parcel of land, the name of the owner, if known, and the
valuation thereof is concerned, which transcript, when completed, shall
constitute the special assessment roll for that district. The City Assessor
shall thereupon levy as a special assessment roll and against the person
chargeable therewith, if known, the amount which such Assessor shall fix as the
just proportion of benefit derived by him, such person, or shall spread and
levy the same according to the frontage touching and abutting on said street or
improvement, as the Council may direct, and in case of any irregularly shaped
premises, reasonable allowance may be made therefor. In all cases where the
ownership of any description is unknown to the Clerk he shall in lieu of the
name of the owner insert the word “unknown” and if by mistake or otherwise any
person shall be improperly designated as the owner of any lot, parcel of land,
or premises, or if the same shall be assessed without the name of the owner,
such assessment shall not for any cause be vitiated but shall, in all respects,
be as valid a claim upon and against such lot, parcel of land or premises, as
though assessed in the name of the proper owner, and when the assessment roll
shall have been confirmed, be a lien upon such lot, parcel of land or premises,
as though assessed in the name of the proper owner, and when the assessment
roll shall have been confirmed, be a lien upon such lot, parcel of land or
premises, and be collected as in other cases.
   Section 14.   Special Charges: When any expense shall be incurred by the
City or in respect to any separate or single lot, parcel of land or premises
which, by the provisions of this act, the Council is authorized to charge and
collect as a special assessment against the same, and not being of that class
of special assessment required to be made pro rata upon several lots or parcels
of land in an assessment district, the Mayor or Clerk shall make an account of
the labor or services for which such expense was incurred, verified by the
officer or person performing the labor or services, with a description of the
lot or premises upon in respect to which the expense was incurred, and the name
of the owner or person chargeable therewith shall be report to the Council in
such manner as they shall prescribe. The Council shall thereupon determine what
amount or part of every expense shall be charged and the person, if known,
against whom, and the premises upon which the same shall be levied as a special
assessment, and report the same to the City Clerk.
   Section 15.   Charges. How Collected: The City Clerk shall thereupon file
such report, together with the determination of the Council, in his office, and
at once present a bill therefore to the party charged therewith for payment. If
such payment shall not be made before the time of making out the next annual
City tax roll, then the City Clerk shall report that fact to the assessing
officer, and he shall thereupon place such sum, with interest at the rate of
seven percent per annum from the date of rendering such bill, upon the next
annual tax roll, in a column specially marked for that purpose, as a charge
against the premises designated by the Council in its original order; and the
assessment and all taxes levied thereon shall thereafter be in all things
governed by the general tax laws of the State and the provisions of this
Charter in relation to special assessment.
   Section 16.   Assessment a Lien: All special assessments shall, from the
date of confirmation thereof, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or
parcels of land assessed, and shall be charged against the person to whom
assessed until paid.
   Section 17.   Ten Installments Permitted: Upon the confirmation of any
special assessment, the amount thereof may be divided into not more than ten
installments, one of which shall be collected each year at such times as the
City Council shall determine, with annual interest at a rate not exceeding six
percent per annum, but the whole assessment, after confirmation, may be paid to
the City Treasurer any time in full, with appropriate interest thereon.
   Section 18.   When Due. All special assessments, except such installments
thereof as the City Council shall make payable at a future time, as provided in
the preceding section, shall be due and payable on confirmation.
   Section 19.   One Roll for all Installments: If any special assessment be
divided into installments, it shall not be necessary to make a special
assessment roll for each installment, nor to reconfirm or recertify the same to
successive Treasurers, but the assessment on the original assessment roll shall
be divided into installments and each installment, as the same becomes due,
with accrued interest upon all unpaid installments, shall be collected from
said original assessment roll.
   Section 20.   Additional Assessment if Necessary. Should any special
assessment prove insufficient to pay for the improvement or work for which it
was levied, and the expenses incident thereto, the City Council may, within the
limitations prescribed for such assessments, make an additional pro rata
assessment to supply the deficiency; and in case a larger amount shall be
collected than was necessary, the excess may be refunded ratable to those by
whom it was paid, in accordance with Section 10 of this chapter.
   Section 21.   Reassessment, When: Whenever any special assessment shall in
the opinion of the City Council, be invalid by reason of irregularity or
informality in the proceedings or in any court of competent jurisdiction shall
adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the City Council shall, whether the
improvement has been made or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be
made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All
proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof, shall be
conducted in the same manner as provided for in the original assessment and
whenever any sum or part thereof levied upon any premises in the assessment so
set aside has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied
upon the reassessment on said premises and the reassessment to that extent
shall be deemed satisfied.
   Section 22.   Lien Remains. When any special assessment shall be confirmed,
and be payable as hereinbefore provided, the City Clerk shall, within ten days
thereafter, attach his warrant for the collection of said special assessment
roll, therein commanding the City Treasurer to collect from each person the
amount assessed to and set opposite his name therein, and in case any person
named in said roll shall neglect or refuse to pay his assessment on demand,
then to levy and collect the same by distress and sale of goods and chattels of
such persons; and return said roll and warrant together with his doings
thereon, within sixty days from the date of the warrant.
   Section 23.   Treasurer to Collect. Upon receiving said special assessment
roll and warrant, the City Treasurer shall proceed to collect the amount
assessed thereon. If any person shall neglect or refuse to pay his assessment
on demand, the Treasurer shall seize and levy upon any personal property found
within the City or elsewhere, within the County, belonging to said person, and
sell the same at public auction, first giving six days notice of the time and
place of such sale by posting such notice in three of the most public places in
the City or township where such property may be found. The proceeds of such
sale, or so much thereof as may be necessary for that purpose, shall be applied
to the payment of the assessment, and a percentage of five percent upon the
amount of the assessment for the costs and expenses of said seizure and sale,
and the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the person entitled thereto.
   Section 24.   Return by Treasurer: The Treasurer shall make return of said
special assessment roll and warrant to the City Clerk, according to the
requirements of the warrant and if any of the assessments in said roll shall be
returned unpaid the Treasurer shall attach to his return a statement, verified
by affidavit containing a list of the persons delinquent, and a description of
the lots and premises upon which the assessment remains unpaid, and the amount
unpaid on each.
   Section 25.   Renewal of Warrant. Said warrant may be renewed from time to
time by the City Clerk if the Council shall so direct, and for such time as
they shall determine, and during the time of such renewal, the warrant shall
have the same force and the City Treasurer shall perform the said duties and
make like returns, as above provided. In case of any special assessment being
finally returned by the City Treasurer unpaid, as aforesaid, the same may be
certified by the City Clerk in the manner provided in Sections 8, 14 and 21 of
Chapter 20, of this Charter, and shall then be reassessed with interest
included at the rate of six percent per annum from date of the confirmation of
the assessment until July 1 next, or until December 1 if the next City tax roll
be for general taxes payable on December 1, and then be collected in all
respects as other taxes are collected.
   Section 26.   May Sue. At any time after a special assessment has become
payable, the same may be collected by suit, in the name of the City against the
persons assessed, in any action of assumpsit in any court having jurisdiction
of the amount. In every action a declaration upon the common counts for money
paid shall be sufficient. The special assessment roll and certified order of
resolution confirming the same shall be prima facie evidence of the regularity
of the proceedings in making the assessment and right of the City to recover
judgment therefore.
   Section 27.   Suit, Further. If in any such action it shall appear that by
reason or any irregularities or informalities the assessment has not been
properly made against the defendant or upon the lot or premises sought to be
charged, the court may, nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expense has
been incurred by the City, and that same is fair, reasonable charge against the
defendant or the lot or premises in question, render judgment for the amount
properly chargeable against such defendant, or upon such lot or premises.
   Section 28.   May Borrow for Deferred Installments. It shall be within the
power of the Council to direct and empower the Mayor and Clerk to issue and
negotiate, for and on behalf of the City, not exceeding six percent annual
interest notes, free of taxation for the aggregate amount of any special
assessment tax, the time for payment of which has been extended beyond the year
of the original warrant for their collection.
   Such notes shall be made payable at the office of the City Treasurer and
shall fall due at such time as the Council shall determine and such tax can be
collected; and the proceeds of such notes shall be deposited with the City
Treasurer and by him disbursed on the order of the Council in payment of the
cost and expense of the public improvement on account of which they have been
issued, and for no other purpose whatever, and the proceeds of such extended
tax, when collected, shall be used for the payment of said notes and for no
other purpose.
   Section 29.   Notice of Hearing. Whenever any special assessment roll as in
this chapter provided, shall have been completed by the City Assessor, he shall
report the same back to the Council. Before adopting the assessment, the
Council shall cause to be published for one week at least in some newspaper in
said City, if any be published therein, or if not, to be posted in three public
places in said City for the same length of time a notice of the filing of said
assessment roll with the Clerk and designating a time and place when and where
the Council and Board of Assessors will meet to review the assessment and hear
any objection thereto.
   Section 30.   Special Assessment Confirmed. At the time appointed for such
purpose, the Council and Assessor shall meet and there, or at some adjourned
meeting, review the assessment and hear any objections thereto, and the Council
shall correct the same, if necessary, and confirm it as reported or as
corrected, or they may refer the assessment back to the Assessor for revision,
or annul it and direct a new assessment, in which case the same proceedings
shall be had as in respect to the previous assessments. When a special
assessment shall be confirmed, the Clerk shall endorse a certificate thereof
upon the roll showing the date of confirmation.
   Section 31.   Village Act on Special Assessment Adopted in Part. Excepting
as herein otherwise specifically provided, the several provisions of Chapter 8
of the Village Act, so called same being Act 3 of the Public Acts of 1895 of
the State of Michigan as now or hereafter amended in this Charter hereinbefore
referred to, so far as the same refers to special improvements and special
assessments, is hereby adopted as a part of this Charter, provided, that
whenever therein the word “president” is used, the same shall mean “Mayor”, and
wherever the words “boards of assessors” are used the same shall mean
“Assessor,” and all officers of this City, in that respect are hereby vested
with the authority therein conferred upon officers of the village performing
corresponding duties.
   Section 32.   City May Do Work and Levy Certain Assessments. The Council
shall also have power to provide for the construction, repair and maintenance
through the performance by contract or directly by the employment of labor, of
all things in the nature of local improvements, and to provide for the payment
of any part of the cost of any such improvement by levying and collecting
special assessments upon abutting, adjacent and contiguous or other specially
benefited property, but the amount assessed against any property to pay for
such local improvements shall not exceed the amount provided in Section 7 of
this chapter and such assessment may be divided into installments as provided
in Section 17 of this Chapter.
CHAPTER 22
Public Utilities
   Section 1.   May Acquire and Operate Water Works and Sewage Disposal
Systems: The City of Grand Blanc may acquire, purchase, construct, operate and
maintain a water works system in the City of Grand Blanc for the purpose of
supplying the City and its inhabitants with pure and wholesome water, and may
acquire, operate, extend and maintain a sewage disposal system either within or
without the corporate limits of the City, and may acquire property for such
water works and sewage disposal systems by purchase, gift or condemnation,
whether such property be within or without the corporate limits of the City of
Grand Blanc and may fix and provide for the collection of charges for service,
covering the cost of such service, the proceeds whereof shall be used
exclusively for the purpose of such water works system and sewage disposal
system, such systems to be operated as separate public utilities or as one
utility, and may provide for a net return to the City from the operation of
such utilities of an amount sufficient to pay a fair return on the fair value
of the property devoted to such service, excluding from such valuation such
portions of the sewage disposal system as may have been paid by special
assessment, and may also provide that the charges for such service may be made
a lien upon the property served, and if not paid when due provide for the
collection thereof in the same manner as other City taxes.
   Section 2.   May Finance Water Works and Sewage Disposal Systems. The City
of Grand Blanc may borrow money on the faith and credit of the City for the
purpose of acquiring, owning, operating, maintaining, or extending a water
works system, and, or a sewage disposal system for the purposes specified in
the preceding section as a public utility or utilities when authorized by a
three-fifths vote of the electors of the City voting on the question submitted
by the Council at any general or special election called for that purpose.
Provided, that the total amount so borrowed shall not cause the total bonded
indebtedness of the City, exclusive of special assessment bonds and emergency
bonds, to exceed eight percent of the assessed valuation of the property of the
City, real and personal, as shown by the last assessment roll of the City as
fixed and determined by the Board of Review of the City, and shall not for any
purpose exceed the limit of bonded indebtedness as fixed by the general laws of
the State. And the City of Grand Blanc may borrow further sums for the purposes
heretofore stated in this section and issue mortgage bonds therefor beyond the
general limit of the bonded indebtedness prescribed by this Charter.
   Provided, that such mortgage bonds issued beyond the general limits of the
bonded indebtedness prescribed by this Charter shall not impose any liability
upon the City, shall be secured only upon the property and revenues of such
public utility or utilities, including the franchise or franchises, stating the
terms upon which, in case of foreclosure, the purchaser may operate the same,
which franchise or franchises shall in no case extend for a longer period than
twenty years from the date of the sale of such utility and franchise on
foreclosure. And provided, that said mortgage bonds shall be sold for not less
than par, bear interest at a rate not in excess of six percent and the total
amount thereof shall not exceed sixty percent of the original cost of the
utility. And provided further, that a sinking fund shall be created by setting
aside such percentage of the gross or net earnings of the public utility so
mortgaged as may be deemed sufficient for the payment of the mortgage bonds at
maturity.
   Section 3.   Council to Direct Operation. The operation of all Municipally
owned public utilities shall be under the direct charge of the City Council, or
otherwise as the Council may by ordinance provide.
   Section 4.   Council to Fix Rates. The Council shall have the power subject
to the general laws of this State, to fix all rates for Municipally owned
public utilities and shall have the power to fix all salaries and other
expenses which may be incurred by the operation of all City owned public
utilities.
   Section 5.   Clerk and Treasurer to Audit. The City Clerk and City Treasurer
shall act as a Board of Auditors for all City owned public utilities and shall
meet every month before the regular meeting of the City Council, at which time
they shall make an audit of the books of the City Clerk and City Treasurer and
submit a statement of all balances of the City funds to the City Council at its
next regular meeting.
   Section 6.   Auditors to Report. The City Clerk and City Treasurer as a
Board of Auditors may require any person or persons employed by the City
Council, or who handle funds belonging to the City in connection with any
Municipally owned or operated public utility, to submit his, it or their books
to said Board of Auditors at any reasonable time. The said Board of Auditors
shall report in writing to the City Council at its next regular meeting a
statement showing the number of customers of all Municipally owned and operated
public utilities other than parking facilities, at the beginning of the month
and the number of such customers during the month with the location of the
connection the number of such customers whose service has been discontinued
during the month, with the location of the connections discontinued, and the
whole number of customers at the end of each month. Provided, that at the first
meeting of the City Council the City Clerk shall submit a complete list of all
light, power, water and sewage disposal customers by name and the location of
connections. Also the said Board of Auditors shall submit the amount due the
City for public utility service from the customers and the amount paid by each
as evidenced by the duplicate receipts and other records of the collector or
collectors, and balance the number with the amount turned over to the City
Clerk by the collector. And the said Board of Auditors shall file with the City
Council a complete statement of such audit and report in writing all customers
subscribing for light, power, water or sewage disposal, who are delinquent in
their payment for light, power, water or sewage disposal.
   Section 7.   Parking Facilities as a Public Utility. The City may acquire,
establish, construct, extend and maintain facilities for the parking of
vehicles within its corporate limits and may fix and collect charges for
services and use thereof as a public utility, and for such purpose may acquire
by grant, purchase, condemnation or otherwise, the lands necessary therefor,
and may by ordinance establish rules and regulations for the operation of such
utility and the method of accounting and reporting the receipts and
expenditures in connection with the conduct of such utility. The provisions of
Sections 1 and 2 of this chapter relative to the borrowing of money and issuing
of mortgage bonds are applicable to parking facilities as a public utility for
the purposes in this section contained.
CHAPTER 23
Franchise and Public Utilities
   Section 1.   Time Limit. No franchise shall be granted by the City for a
longer period than thirty years. No license shall be granted by the Council for
a longer term than one year.
   Section 2.   Submitted to Electors. No franchise or grant which is not
revocable at the will of the Council shall be granted or become operative until
the same shall have been referred to the people at a general or special
election, and shall have received the approval of a majority of the electors
voting thereon at such election, and if such grant or franchise be of or for a
public utility it shall receive three-fifths of the votes thereon at said
election.
   Section 3.   No persons, firms or corporation shall ever be granted any
exclusive franchise, license, right or privilege whatever (and not any
franchise shall be renewed before three years prior to its expiration.)
   Section 4.   Franchise Must be Accepted. No franchise shall be submitted to
a vote of the electors until it shall have been accepted in writing by the
grantee or grantees.
   Section 5.   Franchise Nonassignable Except. No franchise granted by the
City shall ever be leased, assigned, or otherwise alienated except by mere
“operation of law” or in accordance with the express provisions of said
franchise, and all franchises granted by the City shall provide how, and in
what manner, and under what conditions, said franchise may be leased, assigned
or alienated; and no dealings with the lease or assignee on the part of the
City, which shall recognize the performance of any act or payment of any
compensation by the leasee or assignee shall be deemed to have operated as such
consent.
   Section 6.   Franchise Changes. How Made. No change or modification of any
franchise or grant of rights or power previously granted to any corporation,
firm, person or association of persons shall be made except in the manner and
subject to all the conditions herein provided for, for the making of original
grants and franchises.
   Section 7.   Right to Regulate and License. The City shall have the right to
regulate and license and impose a license fee on street cars, motor buses,
telephone, gas meters, electric meters, water meters and any other device used
for measuring service, also telephone, telegraph, electric light and power
poles and wires. All said license fee shall be exclusive of and in addition to
other lawful taxes upon the property of the holder thereof.
   Section 8.   Compensation Necessary for Franchise. No franchise, lease or
rights to use the streets or the public places or property of the City shall be
granted by the City without fair compensation to the City therefor. Where the
franchise, lease or grant fixes the rate of fare, or the price for service
rendered or commodity furnished by the grantee, such rate or fare or price of
service or commodity furnished shall be subject to review and change at the end
of every ten year period during the life of said franchise in such manner and
form as in said franchise shall be provided.
   Section 9.   Cannot Waive Tax Liability. No such compensation by any such
grant shall ever be in lieu of any lawful taxation upon its property or of any
license or charges which are not levied on account of such use.
   Section 10.   Inspection of Public Utility Service. The Council shall by
ordinance provide for efficient inspection and regulation of all public
utilities operated in the City, and to that end shall provide means for
ascertaining and testing the quality and pressure of the gas (if any) furnished
to consumers, the candle power, voltage and insulation of electric wires, heat
and power furnished the City, and its inhabitants and the inspection and
installation of meters, for registering the consumption of any commodity sold
by any grantee operating under any franchise, grant or license from the City of
Grand Blanc or the State of Michigan, it being the intention of this section to
provide means for securing to the City sufficient service from all public
utilities operated in the City, and the proper observance by such operators of
the conditions imposed by their respective franchises and by the laws of the
State and by the ordinances of the City.
CHAPTER 24
Vacancy
   Section 1.   A vacancy shall exist in an elective office when an elected
officer fails to qualify within the time required by this Charter, dies,
resigns, is removed from office, removes from the City, or absents himself
continuously therefrom for more than ninety days or is convicted of a felony.
CHAPTER 25
Amendments to Charter
   Section 1.   Amendments to this Charter may be proposed by the Council or by
petition and adopted as provided in Section 21 of Act 279 of the Public Acts of
1909 of the State of Michigan, being the “Home Rule for Cities” Act, so called,
under which the City of Grand Blanc is now incorporated as a City and being
Section 3324 of the Compiled Laws of Michigan for 1915 as amended.
CHAPTER 26
Condemnation and Appropriation of Property
   Section 1.   Purposes. Private property, whether within or without the City
limits, may be purchased, condemned or appropriated for public use for the
purpose of opening, widening, altering or extending streets, alleys, and
avenues; for the construction of bridges, parkways, markets and market places,
sewers, drains and water courses, libraries, public cemeteries, sewage
disposal, water supply, water mains, water works, and for the protection
thereof, or any necessary lawful public use not specifically enumerated herein.
   Section 2.   Proceed Under General Law. If it shall become necessary to
condemn or appropriate private property for the public uses or purposes
specified in the preceding section, the right to occupy and hold the same, and
the ownership therein and thereto may be acquired by the City in the manner and
with like effect as provided by the general laws of this State relating to the
taking of private property for public use, as provided by Section 10 of Chapter
14 of this Charter.
   Section 3.   Resolution and Procedure. Whenever the Council shall have
decided that a public improvement is necessary, and shall have declared that
they deem it necessary to take private property, describing it, for such public
improvement designating it and that the improvement is for the use and benefit
of the Municipality, they shall, by resolution, direct the Mayor to institute
the necessary proceedings in behalf of the Municipality before the proper
court, to carry out the object of the resolution in regard to taking private
property by the City for such public use.
CHAPTER 27
General Powers and Provisions
   Section 1.   Designation of Jurymen. The selection and certifying to the
proper County officials of persons in said City of Grand Blanc to be eligible
for jury service, as required by general law, shall be made by the Mayor and
justice of the peace whose term soonest expires.
   Section 2.   Term of Office Until Successor Qualifies. All officers and
appointees shall serve until their successor is elected or appointed and
qualifies as required.
   Section 3.   Liability for Damages. The liability of the City of Grand Blanc
for damages sustained by reason of any defective bridge, street or highway, or
by reason of any obstruction, snow, ice or other encumbrance upon any street,
sidewalk, crosswalk, bridge or highway shall be limited to and subject to like
conditions as in case of cities of the fourth class.
   Section 4.   Authority Over Streets. In addition to the specific authorities
of this Charter, but subject to any specific limitations of it, the Council may
open, extend, alter and discontinue streets and alleys and establish grades
therefor and regulate the use thereof, in like manner as cities of the fourth
class.
   Section 5.   Fire Dept. and Protection. The City of Grand Blanc shall have
like power and authority to legislate and make regulations relative to fire
departments and fire protection as applicable to cities of the fourth class,
and particularly as authorized by Chapter XXIX of said Fourth Class City Act.
   Section 6.   General Statutory Amendments. Whenever in this Charter general
reference or general adoption is made to or of any general statutory provision,
same shall be deemed to include all future amendments thereto, provided no
repeal of such statutory provision by the Legislature shall operate to repeal
the same as to the City of Grand Blanc unless it shall clearly appear that such
effect was intended by such legislative repeal or unless such repealed statutes
be replaced and superseded by other statutes covering the same subject matter,
in which event such new legislation shall be deemed applicable thereto.
   Section 7.   General Powers. Said Council and several officers and
appointees are hereby declared vested with full power and authority to do all
things necessary to effectuate the declared and implied purposes of this
Charter, whether such power and authority is herein specifically enumerated and
conferred or not, and if in any such case adequate provision is not made in
this Charter, then such powers and authority shall be measured, limited and
exercised by said City of Grand Blanc in like manner as provided in the so
called “Fourth Class City Act,” known as Act No. 215, P.A. of Michigan of 1895,
and any amendments thereto.
   Section 8.   Void Sections Not Invalidate Whole. The holding or
determination by any court of any particular section or sections of this
Charter to be illegal or void, shall not have the effect of invalidating or
rendering void the other sections hereof not dependent upon such void section
or sections.
   SCHEDULE
   In order to carry this Charter into complete operation and effect, it is
hereby declared:
   Section 1.   Publication and Submission of Charter: This Charter shall be
submitted to the electors of the City of Grand Blanc, in the State of Michigan,
for their approval or rejection on March 4, 1930.
   Said Charter shall be published on February 6, 1930, in the Grand Blanc
Press, a newspaper published and circulating in said City of Grand Blanc.
   Section 2.   Manner of Nominating First Elective Officers: The manner of
nominating the first elective officers herein provided for to become officers
of the City of Grand Blanc in the event of the adoption of this Charter shall
be as follows: A general caucus of the qualified electors of the City of Grand
Blanc shall be held at the Township Hall of the Township of Grand Blanc,
situated in said City, on February 13, 1930, at 7:30 o’clock p.m., at which
time the electors present shall select a chairman and secretary of the meeting
and shall appoint tellers, who shall take the constitutional oath of office,
and within twenty-four hours after such caucus the chairman and secretary
thereof shall file with the Clerk of this Charter Commission a list of persons
nominated as candidates for the several offices to be filled at the ensuing
election herein called to vote on the question of adopting this Charter, to
which list shall be attached the certificate of such chairman and secretary
showing the correctness of such list; and at any time within five days after
the time herein fixed for said general nominating caucus a petition or
petitions may be filed with the Clerk of this Charter Commission signed by not
less than twenty qualified electors of the City of Grand Blanc asking said
Clerk to call an additional caucus or caucuses of the qualified electors of the
City of Grand Blanc for the purpose of nominating candidates for the offices to
be filled at such election, and said Clerk shall thereupon forthwith give
notice of the time and place of holding such additional nominating caucus or
caucuses in the manner herein specified, and such additional nominating caucus
or caucuses shall be organized and conducted in like manner and lists of
persons nominated for the several offices to be filled, signed by the chairman
and secretary, shall be filed with said Clerk within twenty-four hours after
the date fixed for holding such additional nominating caucus or caucuses in
like manner as specified herein. And said Clerk shall cause to be printed and
submitted at said ensuing election a sufficient number of ballots for use at
said election containing the names of said candidates in the form prescribed in
Section 6 of Chapter 5 of this Charter. The said clerk shall give notice of the
time and place of holding such nominating caucus at least seven days before the
date thereof by publishing such notice in the Grand Blanc Press, a newspaper
published and circulating in the City of Grand Blanc.
   Section 3.   Machinery for First Election: For the purpose of registering
the qualified electors of the City of Grand Blanc and to provide for a Board of
Registration for the special election to be held on March 4, 1930, for the
adoption of this Charter for the City of Grand Blanc, and for the election of
the first City officers, Arnold E. Nelson, Clerk of this Charter Commission,
shall perform all the acts and duties which are required by the City Clerk and
Board of Registration in connection with said election and the submission of
this Charter, and he shall sit as such Board of Registration at the said
Township Hall, in said City of Grand Blanc, on March 1, 1930, from nine o’clock
in the forenoon to eight o’clock in the afternoon. Notice of the time and place
shall be given with the notice of said election.
   Section 4.   Notice of First Election: Said Arnold E. Nelson, said Clerk
shall give notice of said election and the submission of this Charter to the
electors of said City by posting in ten public place in said City of Grand
Blanc and by publishing the same once in the Grand Blanc Press at least two
weeks before the date of said election day specifying therein the place of
holding said election and the hours when said polls will be open, and shall
give like notice that at said election there will be elected the officers
specified in Section 6 of Chapter 4 of this Charter.
   Section 5.   Polling place: The polling place for such election on March 4,
1930 is hereby designated as the Township Hall of the Township of Grand Blanc,
in said City of Grand Blanc.
   Section 6.   First Election Inspectors: Frank Hill, Earl Brown, Essie Cook
and Arnold E. Nelson are hereby designated as the Board of Election Inspectors
for said election to be held on March 4, 1930, in said City of Grand Blanc, and
Frank Hill is hereby designated as chairman thereof. Should any of said persons
become ineligible or fail to qualify and act as members of such Board such
vacancy or vacancies shall be filled by vote of the electors present at the
polls at the time of such vacancy.
   Section 7.   Special Board of Canvassers and Commissioners. W.H. Walker,
George H. Chapel and Leslie K. Davis are hereby designated as a Board of
Election Commissioners and as Board of Canvassers to canvass and declare the
result of said election to be held in said City of Grand Blanc, March 4, 1930,
upon the submission to the electors of said City of the question of adoption or
rejection of this Charter, in manner as provided by Section 11 of Chapter 4 of
this Charter.
   Section 8.   Charter, When Effective. If adopted, this Charter shall take
effect forthwith upon completion by the aforesaid special Board of Canvassers
of their canvass of said election and the filing of said Board of Canvassers of
their report declaring the said Charter adopted, which report and declaration
shall be filed with the secretary of this Charter Commission, Arnold E. Nelson.
   Section 9.   First Meeting of Council. The first meeting of the Council of
said City of Grand Blanc shall be held on Monday, March 10, 1930, at seven
thirty o’clock in the evening, at which time the Council shall set the regular
date and time of meetings of said Council, and shall perform such other duties
as may be required by the general statutes of this State, or as may properly
come before said Council.
   Section 10.   All legitimate and proper expenses incurred in the matter of
the incorporation of the City of Grand Blanc, including the drafting of this
Charter, the cost of publication thereof, the expense of the several special
elections and for services of attorneys in connection therewith, shall be and
the same is hereby assumed by the City of Grand Blanc, and is hereby declared
to be a debt thereof.
   Resolution of Adoption. Resolved, That the Charter Commission of the City of
Grand Blanc, Michigan, does hereby adopt the foregoing proposed City Charter
and the Clerk of this Commission is hereby instructed to transmit the same to
the Governor of the State of Michigan, in accordance with the provisions of the
statute, for his approval.
   The vote on the adoption of said resolution was as follows:
   Ayes: Nine
   Nays: None
   ARNOLD E. NELSON
   Clerk of the Grand Blanc Charter Commission
   Countersigned by the following commissioners, Sept. 10, 1930.
      ALEX D. GUNDRY
      E. SUMNER RUST
      RAY D. GUNDRY
      GEO. H. CHAPEL
      ROY A. BABCOCK
      ERNEST B. CLARK
      CHARLES STONE
      H.W. DAY
      Approved: Sept. 26, 1929
   FRED W. GREEN, Governor
                                                 
                           Grand Blanc, Michigan, March 5th, 1930
STATE OF MICHIGAN
County of Genesee, ss.
I, Arnold E. Nelson, Clerk of the Charter Commission of the City of Grand
Blanc, State of Michigan, do hereby certify that this is the said Charter of
the City of Grand Blanc as was drafted by the Charter Commission of the City of
Grand Blanc, of the State of Michigan; and the same was, at a special election
held in the said City of Grand Blanc on Tuesday, March 4, 1930, adopted by a
three-fifths vote of the electors voting thereon.
   The vote of such electors being as follows:
   Whole number of votes cast, Three Hundred and Two.
   For said Charter Adoption, Two Hundred and Fifty-Five.
   Against said Charter Adoption, Thirty-Seven.
   Cast Out, Ten.
                           ARNOLD E. NELSON
                           Clerk of the Charter Commission
PART TWO: ADMINISTRATION CODE
   TITLE TWO - General Provisions
      
Chap. 202. Codified Ordinances.
      
Chap. 204. Official Standards.
      
Chap. 206. Wards and Boundaries.
      
Chap. 208. Policies.
   TITLE FOUR - Legislation
      
Chap. 220. Council.
      
Chap. 222. Ordinances and Resolutions.
   TITLE SIX - Administration
      
Chap. 230. Mayor.
      
Chap. 232. City Manager.
      
Chap. 234. City Clerk.
      
Chap. 236. City Treasurer.
      
Chap. 238. City Assessor.
      
Chap. 240. City Attorney.
      
Chap. 242. Building and Zoning Administrator.
      
Chap. 244. City Engineer.
      
Chap. 246. Department of Public Works.
      
Chap. 248. Police Department.
      
Chap. 250. Fire Department.
      
Chap. 252. Employees Generally.
   TITLE EIGHT - Boards, Commissions and Committees
      
Chap. 270. Board of Health.
      
Chap. 272. Sign Review Committee.
      
Chap. 274. Local Officers Compensation Commission.
      
Chap. 276. Board of Review.
      
Chap. 278. Planning Commission.
      
Chap. 280. Board of Zoning Appeals.
      
Chap. 282. Building Code Board of Appeals.
      
Chap. 284. Downtown Development Authority.
      
Chap. 286. Fire Commission. (Repealed)
   TITLE TEN - Judiciary
      
Chap. 290. District Court and Circuit Court.
TITLE TWO: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
Chap. 202. Codified Ordinances
      
Chap. 204. Official Standards
      
Chap. 206. Wards and Boundaries
      
Chap. 208. Policies
CHAPTER 202: CODIFIED ORDINANCES
Section
202.01   Designation; citation; headings
202.02   Amendments and supplements; numbering
202.03   Definitions and interpretation
202.04   Notices
202.05   Separability
202.06   Sections and ordinances repealed
202.07   Exemptions from repeal
202.08   Copies of codified ordinances
 
202.98   Municipal civil infraction penalties
202.99   General Code penalty; complicity
Statutory reference:
   Publication of codes of municipal ordinances, see M.C.L.A. § 117.5b
§ 202.01 DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS.
   (a)   This volume consists of all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature of the municipality , as revised, codified, arranged, numbered and
consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections, and as such
shall be known and designated as the codified ordinances of Grand Blanc,
Michigan, for which designation “Codified Ordinances” may be substituted. Code,
title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as
contained in the Codified Ordinances.
   (b)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to such
components of the Codified Ordinances unless otherwise specified. Any component
code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code”.
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the
number, such as “§
202.01”.
§ 202.02 AMENDMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTS; NUMBERING.
   (a)   The codified ordinances of Grand Blanc may be amended or supplemented
at any time and, when any amendment or supplement is adopted in such form as to
indicate the intention of Council to make the same a part thereof, such
amendment or supplement shall be incorporated in, and deemed a part of, the
codified ordinances, so that a reference to the codified ordinances shall be
understood and construed as including the codified ordinances of Grand Blanc
and any and all such amendments and supplements.
   (b)   All amendments and supplements enacted as a part of the codified
ordinances shall be integrated therewith by following the form of arrangement
and plan set forth in the original Codified Ordinances as follows: each code
shall be subdivided into titles and/or chapters, and each chapter shall be
subdivided into sections, which shall be numbered in accordance with the
decimal numbering system. The numbering of all sections, except penalty
sections, shall be consecutive within each chapter commencing with the first
section of Chapter 202, which shall be numbered 202.01, the first “2”
signifying code 2, and the two figures “02” before the decimal signifying the
chapter within the code, and the two figures “01” after the decimal signifying
the first section in Chapter 202 of the code. Penalty sections shall be
designated “99” and shall be the last section of a chapter.
§ 202.03 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION.
   In the construction of these codified ordinances, or any provision thereof,
the following rules and definitions shall control, except those which are
inconsistent with the manifest intent of Council as disclosed in a particular
provision, section or chapter:
   ADOPTING ORDINANCE. The ordinance of the municipality  adopting the codified
ordinances of Grand Blanc in conformity with M.C.L.A. 117.5b.
   AND. Includes “or” and “or” includes “and”, if the sense so requires.
   AUTHORITY. Whenever in the codified ordinances authority is given to an
officer or an act is required to be performed, such authority may  be exercised
and such act may  be performed, at the instance of such officer, by a deputy or
subordinate, unless contrary to law  or to the clear intent of any such
particular provision.
   CALENDAR; COMPUTATION OF TIME. The terms MONTH and YEAR mean the calendar
month or year. The time  expressed in days within which an act is to be done or
a period is to expire shall  be computed by excluding the first and including
the last day, unless the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which case
it shall be excluded. If time  is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a
legal holiday shall be excluded.
   CITY. The City of Grand Blanc, Michigan.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the Grand Blanc, Michigan.
   COUNTY. The County of Genesee, Michigan.
   GENDER. Words importing the masculine shall  extend and be applied to the
feminine and neuter genders.
   GENERAL RULE. Except as otherwise provided in this section, words and
phrases shall  be construed according to the common usage of the language,
provided, however, that technical words and phrases and such others as may
have acquired a special meaning in the law  shall be construed according to
such technical or special meaning.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. Words giving authority to a board, commission, authority or
to three or more officers or employees or other persons shall  be construed as
giving authority to a majority thereof, unless otherwise specifically provided.
   KEEPER and PROPRIETOR. Persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and
copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or
employee.
   LAND and REAL ESTATE. Include rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
   LAW. All applicable laws of the United States of America, the State of
Michigan and the City of Grand Blanc.
   MAY. Is permissive.
   MANAGER. The City Manager of Grand Blanc, Michigan.
   MUNICIPALITY or CITY. The City of Grand Blanc, Michigan.
   NUMBER. Words in the plural include the singular and words in the singular
include the plural number.
   OATH. Includes affirmation. When an oath is required or authorized by law ,
an affirmation in lieu thereof may  be taken by a person having conscientious
scruples about taking an oath. An affirmation shall  have the same force and
effect as an oath.
   ORDINANCE. Includes any ordinance of the municipality , including any
provision of these codified ordinances.
   OWNER. When applied to property , includes a part owner, joint owner or
tenant  in common of the whole or any part of such property .
   PERSON. Includes any individual, copartnership, corporation, association,
club, joint venture, estate, trust and any other group or combination acting as
a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit.
   PREMISES. When used as applicable to property , extends to and includes land
and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property and any mixed and lesser
estates or interests therein. PERSONAL PROPERTY includes every kind of property
except real property; REAL PROPERTY includes lands, tenements and
hereditaments.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to or upon which the public resorts or travels,
whether such place is owned or controlled by the city or any agency of the
state  or is a place to or upon which the public resorts or travels by custom
or by invitation, express or implied.
   PUBLISH. To print in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality
the entire document or a brief summary thereof with a listing of places where
copies have been filed and times when they are available for inspection.
   REASONABLE TIME. In all cases where provision is made for an act to be done
or notice to be given within a reasonable time , it shall  be deemed to mean
such time  only as may  be necessary for the prompt performance of such act or
the giving of such notice.
   RESIDENCE. An abode in which a person permanently resides.
   RESPONSIBILITY. Whenever any act is prohibited by a provision of these
Codified Ordinances or by any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, such
prohibition shall  extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding or
abetting of another person to do such act.
   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street  between the curb lines or lateral lines
and the right-of-way lines, which is intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The State of Michigan.
   STREET, HIGHWAY and ALLEY. The entire width subject to an easement for
public right-of-way, or owned in fee by the city, county or state , of every
way or place, or whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use
of the public as a matter of right for purposes of public travel. The word
ALLEY means any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and
egress from a property .
   TENANT AND OCCUPANT. As applied to buildings or land , shall  extend and be
applied to any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the
whole or any part of, a building or land , alone or with others.
   TENSES. The use of any verb in the present tense includes the future.
   TIME. Whenever any time established in the codified ordinances for the
taking of any action expires on a Sunday or a legal holiday, such time shall
not expire on such day but shall expire on the next week day.
§ 202.04 NOTICES.
   (a)   Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections,
dangerous structures, abating nuisances or any other act, the expense of which
if performed by the city may be assessed against the premises under the
provisions of these codified ordinances, shall be served:
      (1)   By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the
same at his or her residence , office or place of business with some person of
suitable age and discretion;
      (2)   By mailing such notice by certified or registered mail to such
owner at his or her last known address; or
      (3)   If the owner is unknown, by posting such notice in some conspicuous
place on the premises for five days before the act or action concerning which
the notice is given.
   (b)   No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear
down any official notice or placard posted by any city officer unless
permission is given by such officer to remove such notice or placard.
§ 202.05 SEPARABILITY.
   (a)   It is the legislative intent of Council in adopting these codified
ordinances that all provisions and sections of these codified ordinances be
liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of the city. Should any provision or section of
these codified ordinances be held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding
shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining
provisions or sections, it being the intent that these codified ordinances
shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section
thereof.
   (b)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any
section of these codified ordinances, whether or not the wording of this
section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance .
§ 202.06 SECTIONS AND ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the municipality , and
parts of the same, in conflict with any of the provisions of these codified
ordinances, are hereby repealed.
§ 202.07 EXEMPTIONS FROM REPEAL.
   The repeal provided for in §
202.06 shall not affect:
   (a)   Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, before the adoption
of these codified ordinances;
   (b)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money by or to the municipality , or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of
the municipality , or any evidence of the municipality ’s indebtedness, or any
contract or obligation assumed by the municipality ;
   (c)   The administrative ordinances and resolutions of Council not in
conflict or inconsistent with any provision of these codified ordinances;
   (d)   Any right, license or franchise conferred by any ordinance or
resolution of Council on any person;
   (e)   Any ordinance or resolution establishing, naming, relocating or
vacating any street or other public way;
   (f)   Any ordinance or resolution or part thereof providing for the
establishment of positions, for salaries or compensation;
   (g)   Any prosecution, suit or other proceeding pending, or any judgment
rendered, on or prior to the adoption of these codified ordinance ;
   (h)   Any ordinance or resolution levying or imposing taxes or assessments;
   (i)   Any ordinance or resolution establishing or changing the boundaries of
the municipality ; or
   (j)   Any ordinance or resolution adopted by Council after the adoption of
these codified ordinances.
§ 202.08 COPIES OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES.
   Each copy of the codified ordinances distributed to an officer or employee
of the city shall remain the property of the city and shall be turned over by
such officer or employee, upon expiration of his or her term of office or
employment with the city, to the City Clerk for reassignment.
§ 202.98 MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION PENALTIES.
   (a)   A violation of a municipal civil infraction shall subject the offender
to a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $750.
   (b)   In addition to the penalties for a violation of the municipal civil
infraction as set forth in division (a) above, the City of Grand Blanc may also
institute an appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking
injunctive, declaratory or other equitable relief to enforce or interpret this
section or any provision of this section.
   (c)   All remedies available to the City of Grand Blanc under this section,
other ordinance and state law shall be deemed to be cumulative and not
exclusive.
(Ord. 2502-03, passed 3-12-2025)
Cross-references:
   For specific examples of municipal infractions, see §§
410.99,
666.01 and
676.04
§ 202.99 GENERAL CODE PENALTY; COMPLICITY.
   (a)   General penalty. Whenever, in these codified ordinances, or in any
technical or other code adopted by reference in these codified ordinances, or
in any rule, regulation or order promulgated or made under authority of any
provision of these codified ordinances, or under authority of any technical or
other code adopted by reference in these codified ordinances, or under
authority of state  law , an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no
specific penalty is otherwise provided, whoever violates or fails to comply
with any such provision shall  be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not
more than 90 days, or 93 days for violation of a codified ordinance  that
substantially corresponds to a violation of state  law  punishable by a maximum
period of imprisonment of 93 days, or both, for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or
noncompliance occurs or continues, unless otherwise provided.
   (b)   Surcharges; equitable remedies. The imposition of any penalty provided
for in this section shall  be in addition to any surcharge levied for a
violation of or noncompliance with a provision of these codified ordinances, or
a provision of a technical or other code adopted by reference in these codified
ordinances, or a rule, regulation or order promulgated or made under authority
of either, or under authority of state  law , and shall be in addition to any
equitable remedy provided by a provision of these codified ordinances, or a
provision of a technical or other code adopted by reference in these codified
ordinances, or a rule, regulation or order promulgated or made under authority
of either, or provided by state  law , or a rule, regulation or order
promulgated or made under authority of state  law , including the enforced
removal of prohibited conditions.
   (c)   Complicity. Every person concerned in the commission of an offense
under these codified ordinances, whether he or she directly commits the act
constituting the offense or procures, counsels, aids or abets in its
commission, may  be prosecuted, indicted, tried and on conviction shall  be
punished as if he or she had directly committed such offense.
(Ord. 2013-07, passed 11-13-2013)
CHAPTER 204: OFFICIAL STANDARDS
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 204. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
Constitutional reference:
   State seal, see Mich. Const. Art. 3, § 3
Cross-reference:
   Design standards, see §
1226.04
   Fiscal year, see
Charter Ch. 19, § 1
   General penalty, see
Charter Ch. 14, § 17
Statutory reference:
   State seal, see M.C.L.A. §§ 2.41 et seq.
   Weights and measures, see M.C.L.A. §§ 290.601 et seq., §§ 750.561 et seq.
CHAPTER 206: WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 206. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   Boundaries and wards, see
Charter Ch. 1
   City to consist of one ward, see
Charter Ch. 1, § 3
Statutory reference:
   Apportionment, see M.C.L.A. § 117.27a
   Equal representation, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3
   Incorporated city or village annexed to home rule city, see M.C.L.A. §
117.13
CHAPTER 208: POLICIES
Section
Freedom of Information Act
208.01   Statement of principles
208.02   General policies
208.03   Requesting a public record
208.04   Processing a request
208.05   Fee deposits
208.06   Calculation of fees
208.07   Waiver of fees
208.08   Discounted fees
208.09   Appeal of a denial of a public record
208.10   Appeal of an excessive FOIA processing fee
208.11   Conflict with prior FOIA policies and procedures; effective date
208.12   Appendix of FOIA forms
Editor’s note:
   This section incorporates the 2015 “City of Grand Blanc FOIA Procedures and
Guidelines” document.
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
§ 208.01 STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES.
   (a)   It is the policy of the city that all persons, except those
incarcerated, consistent with the Michigan Freedom of Information Act (“FOIA”),
are entitled to full and complete information regarding the affairs of
government and the official acts of those who represent them as public
officials and employees. The people shall be informed so that they fully
participate in the democratic process.
   (b)   The city’s policy with respect to FOIA requests is to comply with
state  law in all respects and to respond to FOIA requests in a consistent,
fair and even-handed manner regardless of who makes such a request.
   (c)   The city acknowledges that it has a legal obligation to disclose all
non-exempt public records in its possession pursuant to a FOIA request. The
city acknowledges that sometimes it is necessary to invoke the exemptions
identified under FOIA in order to ensure the effective operation of government
and to protect the privacy of individuals.
   (d)   The city will protect the public’s interest in disclosure, while
balancing the requirement to withhold or redact portions of certain records.
The city’s policy is to disclose public records consistent with and in
compliance with state  law .
   (e)   The City Council has established the following written procedures and
guidelines to implement the FOIA and will create a written public summary of
the specific procedures and guidelines relevant to the general public regarding
how to submit written requests to the public body and explaining how to
understand a public body’s written responses, deposit requirements, fee
calculations and avenues for challenge and appeal. The written public summary
will be written in a manner so as to be easily understood by the general
public.
§ 208.02 GENERAL POLICIES.
   (a)   The City Council, acting pursuant to the authority at M.C.L.A. §
15.236, designates the City Clerk/Treasurer as the FOIA Coordinator. He or she
is authorized to designate other city staff to act on his or her behalf to
accept and process written requests for the city’s public records and approve
denials.
   (b)   If a request for a public record is received by fax or email, the
request is deemed to have been received on the following business day. If a
request is sent by email and delivered to a city spam or junk-mail folder, the
request is not deemed received until one day after the FOIA Coordinator first
becomes aware of the request. The FOIA Coordinator shall note in the FOIA log
both the date the request was delivered to the spam or junk-mail folder and the
date the FOIA Coordinator became aware of the request.
   (c)   The FOIA Coordinator shall review city spam and junk mail folders on a
regular basis, which shall be no less than once a month. The FOIA Coordinator
shall work with City Information Technology staff to develop administrative
rules for handling spam and junk mail so as to protect city systems from
computer attacks which may be imbedded in an electronic FOIA request.
   (d)   The FOIA Coordinator may , in his or her discretion, implement
administrative rules, consistent with state  law and this “Procedures and
Guidelines” document to administer the acceptance and processing of FOIA
requests.
   (e)   The city is not obligated to create a new public record or make a
compilation or summary of information which does not already exist. Neither the
FOIA Coordinator nor other city staff are obligated to provide answers to
questions contained in requests for public records or regarding the content of
the records themselves.
   (f)   The FOIA Coordinator shall keep a copy of all written requests for
public records received by the city on file for a period of at least one year.
   (g)   The city will make this “Procedures and Guidelines” document and the
“Written Public Summary” publicly available without charge. If it does not, the
city cannot require deposits or charge fees otherwise permitted under the FOIA
until it is in compliance.
   (h)   A copy of this “Procedures and Guidelines” document and the city’s
“Written Public Summary” must be publicly available by providing free copies
both in the city’s response to a written request and upon request by visitors
at the city’s office.
   (i)   This “Procedures and Guidelines” document and the city’s “Written
Public Summary” will be maintained on the city’s website at:
www.cityofgrandblanc.com, so a link to those documents will be provided in lieu
of providing paper copies of those documents.
§ 208.03 REQUESTING A PUBLIC RECORD.
   (a)   No specific form to submit a request for a public record is required.
However, the FOIA Coordinator may make available a FOIA request form for use by
the public.
   (b)   Requests to inspect or obtain copies of public records prepared,
owned, used, possessed or retained by the city may be submitted on the city’s
FOIA request form, in any other form of writing (letter, fax, email and the
like) or by verbal request.
   (c)   Verbal requests for records may be documented by the city on the
city’s FOIA request form.
   (d)   If a person makes a verbal, non-written request for information
believed to be available on the city’s website, where practicable and to the
best ability of the employee receiving the request, he or she shall be informed
of the pertinent website address.
   (e)   A request must sufficiently describe a public record so as to enable
city personnel to identify and find the requested public record.
   (f)   Written requests for public records may be submitted in person or by
mail to any city office. Requests may also be submitted electronically by fax
and email. Upon their receipt, requests for public records shall be promptly
forwarded to the FOIA Coordinator for processing.
   (g)   A person may request that public records be provided on non-paper
physical media, emailed or otherwise provided to him or her in digital form in
lieu of paper copies. The city will comply with the request only if it
possesses the necessary technological capability to provide records in the
requested non-paper physical media format.
   (h)   A person may subscribe to future issues of public records that are
created, issued or disseminated by the city on a regular basis. A subscription
is valid for up to six months and may be renewed by the subscriber.
   (i)   A person serving a sentence of imprisonment in a local, state or
federal correctional facility is not entitled to submit a request for a public
record. The FOIA Coordinator will deny all such requests.
§ 208.04 PROCESSING A REQUEST.
   (a)   Responses generally.
      (1)   Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the person making the
request, the city will issue a response within five business days of receipt of
a FOIA request. If a request is received by fax, email or other electronic
transmission, the request is deemed to have been received on the following
business day.
      (2)   The city will respond to a request in one of the following ways:
         A.   Grant the request;
         B.   Issue a written notice denying the request;
         C.   Grant the request in part and issue a written notice denying in
part the request;
         D.   Issue a notice indicating that due to the nature of the request
the city needs an additional ten business days to respond for a total of no
more than 15 business days. Only one such extension is permitted; and
         E.   Issue a written notice indicating that the public record
requested is available at no charge on the city’s website.
   (b)   When a request is granted.
      (1)   If the request is granted or granted in part, the FOIA Coordinator
will require that payment be made in full for the allowable fees associated
with responding to the request before the public record is made available.
      (2)   The FOIA Coordinator shall provide a detailed itemization of the
allowable costs incurred to process the request to the person making the
request.
      (3)   A copy of these “Procedures and Guidelines” and the “Written Public
Summary” will be provided to the requestor free of charge with the response to
a written request for public records, provided, however, that because these
“Procedures and Guidelines” and the “Written Public Summary” are maintained on
the city’s website at: www.cityofgrandblanc.com, a link to the “Procedures and
Guidelines” and the “Written Public Summary” will be provided in lieu of
providing paper copies of those documents.
      (4)   If the cost of processing a FOIA request is $50 or less, the
requester will be notified of the amount due and where the documents can be
obtained.
      (5)   If the cost of processing a FOIA request is expected to exceed $50
based on a good-faith calculation, or if the requestor has not paid in full for
a previously granted request, the city will require a good-faith deposit
pursuant to §
208.05 before processing the request.
      (6)   In making the request for a good-faith deposit, the FOIA
Coordinator shall provide the requestor with a detailed itemization of the
allowable costs estimated to be incurred by the city to process the request and
also provide a best efforts estimate of a time frame it will take the city to
provide the records to the requestor. The best efforts estimate shall be non-
binding on the city, but will be made in good faith and will strive to be
reasonably accurate, given the nature of the request in the particular
instance, so as to provide the requested records in a manner based on the
public policy expressed by §
208.02.
   (c)   When a request is denied or denied in part.
      (1)   If the request is denied or denied in part, the FOIA Coordinator
will issue a notice of denial which shall provide in the applicable
circumstance:
         A.   An explanation as to why a requested public record is exempt from
disclosure;
         B.   A certificate that the requested record does not exist under the
name or description provided by the requestor, or another name reasonably known
by the city;
         C.   An explanation or description of the public record or information
within a public record that is separated or deleted from the public record;
         D.   An explanation of the person’s right to submit an appeal of the
denial to either the office of the Mayor or seek judicial review in the County
Circuit Court;
         E.   An explanation of the right to receive attorneys’ fees, costs and
disbursements, as well actual or compensatory damages, and punitive damages of
$1,000, should they prevail in Circuit Court; and
         F.   The notice of denial shall be signed by the FOIA Coordinator.
      (2)   If a request does not sufficiently describe a public record, the
FOIA Coordinator may , in lieu of issuing a notice of denial indicating that
the request is deficient, seek clarification or amendment of the request by the
person making the request. Any clarification or amendment will be considered a
new request subject to the timelines described in this section.
   (d)   Requests to inspect public records. The city shall  provide reasonable
facilities and opportunities for persons to examine and inspect public records
during normal business hours. The FOIA Coordinator is authorized to promulgate
rules regulating the manner in which records may  be viewed so as to protect
city records from loss, alteration, mutilation or destruction and to prevent
excessive interference with normal city operations.
   (e)   Requests for certified copies. The FOIA Coordinator shall, upon
written request, furnish a certified copy of a public record at no additional
cost to the person requesting the public record.
§ 208.05 FEE DEPOSITS.
   (a)   If the fee estimate is expected to exceed $50 based on a good-faith
calculation, the requestor will be asked to provide a deposit not exceeding
one-half of the total estimated fee.
   (b)   If a request for public records is from a person who has not paid the
city in full for copies of public records made in fulfillment of a previously
granted written request, the FOIA Coordinator will require a deposit of 100% of
the estimated processing fee before beginning to search for a public record for
any subsequent written request by that person when all of the following
conditions exist:
      (1)   The final fee for the prior written request is not more than 105%
of the estimated fee;
      (2)   The public records made available contained the information sought
in the prior written request and remain in the city’s possession;
      (3)   The public records were made available to the individual, subject
to payment, within the time frame estimated by the city to provide the records;
      (4)   Ninety days have passed since the FOIA Coordinator notified the
individual in writing that the public records were available for pickup or
mailing;
      (5)   The individual is unable to show proof of prior payment to the
city; and
      (6)   The FOIA Coordinator has calculated a detailed itemization that is
the basis for the current written request’s increased estimated fee deposit.
   (c)   The FOIA Coordinator will not require an increased estimated fee
deposit if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person making the request is able to show proof of prior
payment in full to the city;
      (2)   The city is subsequently paid in full for the applicable prior
written request; or
      (3)   Three hundred sixty five days have passed since the person made the
request for which full payment was not remitted to the city.
§ 208.06 CALCULATION OF FEES.
   (a)   A fee may be charged for the labor cost of copying/duplication.
   (b)   A fee will not be charged for the labor cost of search, examination,
review and the deletion and separation of exempt from non-exempt information
unless failure to charge a fee would result in unreasonably high costs to the
city because of the nature of the request in the particular instance, and the
city specifically identifies the nature of the unreasonably high costs.
   (c)   Costs for the search, examination review and deletion and separation
of exempt from non-exempt information are “unreasonably high” when they are
excessive and beyond the normal or usual amount for those services (Attorney
General Opinion 7083 of 2001) compared to the costs of the city’s usual FOIA
requests, not compared to the city’s operating budget (Bloch v. Davison
Community Schools, Michigan Court of Appeals, Unpublished, April 26, 2011).
   (d)   The following factors shall be used to determine an unreasonably high
cost to the city:
      (1)   Volume of the public record requested;
      (2)   Amount of time spent to search for, examine, review and separate
exempt from non-exempt information in the record requested;
      (3)   Whether the public records are from more than one city department
or whether various city offices are necessary to respond to the request;
      (4)   The available staffing to respond to the request; and
      (5)   Any other similar factors identified by the FOIA Coordinator in
responding to the particular request.
   (e)   The state FOIA statute permits the city to charge for the following
costs associated with processing a request:
      (1)   Labor costs associated with copying or duplication, which includes
making paper copies, making digital copies or transferring digital public
records to non-paper physical media or through the internet;
      (2)   Labor costs associated with searching for, locating and examining a
requested public record, when failure to charge a fee will result in
unreasonably high costs to the city;
      (3)   Labor costs associated with a review of a record to separate and
delete information exempt from disclosure, when failure to charge a fee will
result in unreasonably high costs to the city;
      (4)   The cost of copying or duplication, not including labor, of paper
copies of public records. This may include the cost for copies of records
already on the city’s website if a person asks for the city to make copies;
      (5)   The cost of computer discs, computer tapes or other digital or
similar media when the requester asks for records in non-paper physical media.
This may include the cost for copies of records already on the city’s website
if a person asks for the city to make copies; and
      (6)   The cost to mail or send a public record to a requestor.
   (f)   Labor costs will be calculated based on the following requirements.
      (1)   All labor costs will be estimated and charged in 15-minute
increments, with all partial time increments rounded down. If the time involved
is less than 15 minutes, there will be no charge.
      (2)   Labor costs will be charged at the hourly wage of the lowest-paid
city employee capable of doing the work in the specific fee category,
regardless of who actually performs work.
      (3)   Labor costs will also include a charge to cover or partially cover
the cost of fringe benefits.
      (4)   The city may add up to 50% to the applicable labor charge amount to
cover or partially cover the cost of fringe benefits, but in no case may it
exceed the actual cost of fringe benefits.
      (5)   Overtime wages will not be included in labor costs unless agreed to
by the requestor; overtime costs will not be used to calculate the fringe
benefit cost.
      (6)   Contracted labor costs will be charged at the hourly rate of $48.90
(six times the state minimum hourly wage).
   (g)   The cost to provide records on non-paper physical media when so
requested will be based on the following requirements:
      (1)   Computer disks, computer tapes or other digital or similar media
will be at the actual and most reasonably economical cost for the non-paper
media;
      (2)   This cost will only be assessed if the city has the technological
capability necessary to provide the public record in the requested non-paper
physical media format; and
      (3)   The city will procure any non-paper media and will not accept media
from the requestor in order to ensure integrity of the city’s technology
infrastructure.
   (h)   The cost to provide paper copies of records will be based on the
following requirements.
      (1)   Paper copies of public records made on standard letter (eight and
one-half by 11) or legal (eight and one-half by 14) sized paper will not exceed
$0.10 per sheet of paper.
      (2)   Copies for non-standard sized sheets of paper will reflect the
actual cost of reproduction.
      (3)   The city will provide records using double-sided printing, if it is
cost-saving and available.
   (i)   The cost to mail records to a requestor will be based on the following
requirements:
      (1)   The actual cost to mail public records using a reasonably
economical and justified means;
      (2)   The city may charge for the least expensive form of postal delivery
confirmation; and
      (3)   No cost will be made for expedited shipping or insurance unless
specified by the requestor.
   (j)   If the FOIA Coordinator does not respond to a written request in a
timely manner, the city must:
      (1)   Reduce the labor costs by 5% for each day the city exceeds the time
permitted under FOIA up to a 50% maximum reduction, if any of the following
applies:
         A.   The city’s late response was willful and intentional;
         B.   The written request conveyed a request for information within the
first 250 words of the body of a letter facsimile, email or email attachment;
or
         C.   The written request included the words, characters or
abbreviations for “freedom of information”, “information”, “FOIA”, “copy” or a
recognizable misspelling of such or legal code reference to M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231
et seq. or Public Act 442 of 1976 on the front of an envelope or in the subject
line of an email, letter or facsimile cover page.
      (2)   Fully note the charge reduction in the detailed itemization of
costs form.
§ 208.07 WAIVER OF FEES.
   The cost of the search for and copying of a public record may be waived or
reduced if, in the sole judgment of the FOIA Coordinator, a waiver or reduced
fee is in the public interest because it can be considered as primarily
benefitting the general public. The City Council may identify specific records
or types of records it deems should be made available for no charge or at a
reduced cost.
§ 208.08 DISCOUNTED FEES.
   (a)   Indigence.
      (1)   The FOIA Coordinator will discount the first $20 of the processing
fee for a request if the person requesting a public record submits an affidavit
stating that they are:
         A.   Indigent and receiving specific public assistance; or
         B.   If not receiving public assistance, stating facts demonstrating
an inability to pay because of indigence.
      (2)   An individual is not eligible to receive the waiver if:
         A.   The requestor has previously received discounted copies of public
records from the city twice during the calendar year; or
         B.   The requestor requests information in connection with other
persons who are offering or providing payment to make the request.
      (3)   An affidavit is sworn statement. The FOIA Coordinator may make a
fee waiver affidavit form available for use by the public.
   (b)   Nonprofit organization advocating for developmentally disabled or
mentally ill individuals. The FOIA Coordinator will discount the first $20 of
the processing fee for a request from: a nonprofit organization formally
designated by the state  to carry out activities under subtitle C of the
Federal Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act of 2000,
Pub. Law No. 106-402, and the Protection and Advocacy for Individuals with
Mental Illness Act, Pub. Law No. 99-319, or their successors, if the request
meets all of the following requirements:
      (1)   Is made directly on behalf of the organization or its clients;
      (2)   Is made for a reason wholly consistent with the mission and
provisions of those laws under § 931 of the Mental Health Code, Public Act 258
of 1974, M.C.L.A. § 330.1931; and
      (3)   Is accompanied by documentation of its designation by the state ,
if requested by the public body.
§ 208.09 APPEAL OF A DENIAL OF A PUBLIC RECORD.
   (a)   When a requestor believes that all or a portion of a public record has
not been disclosed or has been improperly exempted from disclosure, he or she
may appeal to the City Council by filing an appeal of the denial with the
office of the City Manager .
   (b)   The appeal must be in writing, specifically state the word “appeal”
and identify the reason or reasons the requestor is seeking a reversal of the
denial. The city’s FOIA appeal form (to appeal a denial of records) may be
used.
   (c)   The City Council is not considered to have received a written appeal
until the first regularly scheduled City Council meeting following submission
of the written appeal.
   (d)   Within ten business days of receiving the appeal, the City Council
will respond in writing by:
      (1)   Reversing the disclosure denial;
      (2)   Upholding the disclosure denial;
      (3)   Reverse the disclosure denial in part and uphold the disclosure
denial in part; or
      (4)   Under unusual circumstances, issue a notice extending for not more
than ten business days the period during which the City Council shall respond
to the written appeal. The City Council shall not issue more than one notice of
extension for a particular written appeal.
   (e)   If the City Council fails to respond to a written appeal, or if the
City Council upholds all or a portion of the disclosure denial that is the
subject of the written appeal, the requesting person may seek judicial review
of the nondisclosure by commencing a civil action in Circuit Court.
   (f)   Whether or not a requestor submitted an appeal of a denial to the City
Council, he or she may file a civil action in County Circuit Court within 180
days after the city’s final determination to deny the request.
   (g)   If a court determines that a public record is not exempt from
disclosure, it shall order the city to cease withholding or to produce all or a
portion of a public record wrongfully withheld, regardless of the location of
the public record. Failure to comply with an order of the court may be punished
as contempt of court.
   (h)   If a person asserting the right to inspect, copy or receive a copy of
all or a portion of a public record prevails in such an action, the court shall
award reasonable attorneys’ fees, costs and disbursements. If the person or
city prevails in part, the court may , in its discretion, award all or an
appropriate portion of reasonable attorneys’ fees, costs and disbursements.
   (i)   If the court determines that the city has arbitrarily and capriciously
violated this Act by refusal or delay in disclosing or providing copies of a
public record, the court shall order the city to pay a civil fine of $1,000,
which shall be deposited into the General Fund of the State Treasury. The court
shall award, in addition to any actual or compensatory damages, punitive
damages in the amount of $1,000 to the person seeking the right to inspect or
receive a copy of a public record. The damages shall not be assessed against an
individual, but shall be assessed against the next succeeding public body that
is not an individual and that kept or maintained the public record as part of
its public function.
§ 208.10 APPEAL OF AN EXCESSIVE FOIA PROCESSING FEE.
   (a)   FEE means the total fee or any component of the total fee calculated
under §
208.05, including any deposit.
   (b)   If a requestor believes that the fee charged by the city to process a
FOIA request exceeds the amount permitted by state  law or under this policy,
he or she must first appeal to the City Council by submitting a written appeal
for a fee reduction to the office of the City Manager .
   (c)   The appeal must be in writing, specifically state the word “appeal”
and identify how the required fee exceeds the amount permitted. The city’s FOIA
appeal form (to appeal an excess fee) may be used.
   (d)   The City Council is not considered to have received a written appeal
until the first regularly scheduled City Council meeting following submission
of the written appeal.
   (e)   Within ten business days after receiving the appeal, the City Council
will respond in writing by:
      (1)   Waiving the fee;
      (2)   Reducing the fee and issuing a written determination indicating the
specific basis that supports the remaining fee;
      (3)   Upholding the fee and issuing a written determination indicating
the specific basis that supports the required fee; or
      (4)   Issuing a notice detailing the reason or reasons for extending for
not more than ten business days the period during which the City Council will
respond to the written appeal. The City Council shall not issue more than one
notice of extension for a particular written appeal.
   (f)   Where the City Council reduces or upholds the fee, the determination
must include a certification from the City Council that the statements in the
determination are accurate and that the reduced fee amount complies with its
publicly available procedures and guidelines and §
208.05.
   (g)   Within 45 days after receiving notice of the City Council’s
determination of an appeal, the requesting person may commence a civil action
in County Circuit Court for a fee reduction.
   (h)   If a civil action is commenced against the city for an excess fee, the
city is not obligated to complete the processing of the written request for the
public record at issue until the court resolves the fee dispute.
   (i)   An action shall not be filed in circuit court unless one of the
following applies:
      (1)   The city does not provide for appeals of fees;
      (2)   The City Council failed to respond to a written appeal as required;
or
      (3)   The City Council issued a determination to a written appeal.
   (j)   If a court determines that the city required a fee that exceeds the
amount permitted under its publicly available procedures and guidelines or §
208.05, the court shall reduce the fee to a permissible amount. Failure to
comply with an order of the court may be punished as contempt of court.
   (k)   If the requesting person prevails in court by receiving a reduction of
50% or more of the total fee, the court may , in its discretion, award all or
an appropriate portion of reasonable attorneys’ fees, costs and disbursements.
The award shall be assessed against the public body liable for damages.
   (l)   If the court determines that the city has arbitrarily and capriciously
violated the FOIA by charging an excessive fee, the court shall order the city
to pay a civil fine of $500, which shall be deposited in the General Fund of
the State Treasury. The court may also award, in addition to any actual or
compensatory damages, punitive damages in the amount of $500 to the person
seeking the fee reduction. The fine and any damages shall not be assessed
against an individual, but shall be assessed against the next succeeding public
body that is not an individual and that kept or maintained the public record as
part of its public function.
§ 208.11 CONFLICT WITH PRIOR FOIA POLICIES AND PROCEDURES; EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (a)   To the extent that this “Procedures and Guidelines” document conflicts
with previous FOIA policies promulgated by City Council or the City
Administration, this “Procedures and Guidelines” document is controlling. To
the extent that any administrative rule promulgated by the FOIA Coordinator
subsequent to the adoption of this resolution is found to be in conflict with
any previous policy promulgated by the City Council or the city administration,
the administrative rule promulgated by the FOIA Coordinator is controlling.
   (b)   To the extent that any provision of this “Procedures and Guidelines”
document or any administrative rule promulgated by the FOIA Coordinator
pertaining to the release of public records is found to be in conflict with any
state statute, the applicable statute shall control. The FOIA Coordinator is
authorized to modify this policy and all previous policies adopted by the City
Council or the City Administration, and to adopt such administrative rules as
he or she may deem necessary, to facilitate the legal review and processing of
requests for public records made pursuant to state ’s FOIA statute, provided
that such modifications and rules are consistent with state  law . The FOIA
Coordinator shall inform the City Council of any change to this “Policies and
Guidelines” document.
   (c)   These FOIA “Policies and Guidelines” become effective July 1, 2015.
§ 208.12 APPENDIX OF FOIA FORMS.
   The following are FOIA forms:
   (a)   Request for public records form;
   (b)   Notice to extend response time form;
   (c)   Notice of denial form;
   (d)   Detailed cost itemization form;
   (e)   Appeal of denial of records form; and
   (f)   Appeal of excess fee form.
TITLE FOUR: LEGISLATION
      
Chap. 220. Council
      
Chap. 222. Ordinances and Resolutions
CHAPTER 220: COUNCIL
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 220. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   Authority regarding sidewalk repair, see §
1022.04
   Authority regarding taxicabs, see §
870.14
   Authority to levy taxes, see
Charter Ch. 19, §§ 2 et seq.
   Council generally, see
Charter Ch. 14
   Duties regarding signs, see
Ch. 1480
   Health powers, see
Charter Ch. 17
   Supervision of parks, see §
1062.04
Statutory reference:
   Legislative bodies in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3
CHAPTER 222: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 222. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   Codified ordinances, see
Ch. 202
   Initiative and referendum, see
Charter Ch. 7
Statutory reference:
   Actions to recover fines and penalties, see M.C.L.A. § 117.29
   Council procedures regarding enactment, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4j
   Enforcement, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i
   Ordinances in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.3, 117.5b
TITLE SIX: ADMINISTRATION
      
Chap. 230. Mayor.
      
Chap. 232. City Manager.
      
Chap. 234. City Clerk.
      
Chap. 236. City Treasurer.
      
Chap. 238. City Assessor.
      
Chap. 240. City Attorney.
      
Chap. 242. Building and Zoning Administrator.
      
Chap. 244. City Engineer.
      
Chap. 246. Department of Public Works.
      
Chap. 248. Police Department.
      
Chap. 250. Fire Department.
      
Chap. 252. Employees Generally.
CHAPTER 230: MAYOR
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 230. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   Duties, see
Charter Ch. 9
   Election, term, compensation, see
Charter Ch. 4
   Responsibility regarding construction and repair of sidewalks, see §
1020.05(c), (h)
   Responsibility regarding hazards and nuisance abatement, see §
1020.04(d)
   Responsibility regarding improvements, see §§
1020.03,
1020.06(a)
   Signatures on licenses required, see §
802.05
Statutory reference:
   Mayors in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3
CHAPTER 232: CITY MANAGER
Section
232.01   Job description; compensation
232.02   Sale of city property
Statutory reference:
   Changing salary or emoluments during term of office, see M.C.L.A. § 117.5
§ 232.01 JOB DESCRIPTION; COMPENSATION.
   (a)   Following is a job description for the City Manager, which description
shall be the basis for a performance evaluation at least annually. The City
Manager shall serve at the discretion of Council and shall be responsible to
the Mayor and Council for the proper administration of the city. To that end,
he or she is hereby authorized and required to:
      (1)   Act on behalf of, carry out the instructions of, and be the
authorized agent of, the Mayor and Council;
      (2)   Be solely responsible to the Mayor and Council for efficient
operation of all the departments of the city and all personnel therein, within
limits set by ordinance and the City Charter;
      (3)   Attend all meetings of Council with the right to take part in
discussions, but without the right to vote;
      (4)   Be a member ex officio of all committees of Council with the right
to vote if specified in committee rules;
      (5)   Recommend to the Mayor and Council any measure which he or she
feels is necessary for the improvement of the city;
      (6)   Be responsible for the recommendation for the purchase of all city
property , provided that all purchases in excess of $10,000 shall be with the
approval of Council;
      (7)   Present to the Mayor and Council periodic reports and special
reports when requested to do so, covering the activities of the city
administration for which he or she is responsible;
      (8)   Recommend to the Mayor and Council the salaries to be paid to the
appointed officials and employees of the city. However, neither the Mayor nor
Council shall dictate to the Manager regarding the employment of any person or
interfere with him or her in direction of the departments under his or her
jurisdiction. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Mayor and Council shall
make all contacts with department heads through the Manager ; and
      (9)   Be responsible for preparation of applications for grants or loans
as authorized by Council.
   (b)   The City Manager  shall be compensated as determined from time to time
by Council, shall have the use of a city vehicle and shall reside in the
community.
(Ord. 2406-04, passed 7-10-2024)
§ 232.02 SALE OF CITY PROPERTY.
   (a)   Schedule of valuation.
      (1)   Items having a value of $1,000 or less may be disposed of by the
City Manager at his or her discretion.
      (2)   Items having a value in excess of $1,000, but not greater than
$10,000, shall be advertised in a local newspaper or placed on a web based bid
platform by choice of the City Manager with sealed bids solicited. Bids shall
be opened and the award made by the City Manager .
      (3)   Items having a value in excess of $10,000, but not greater than
$25,000, shall be advertised in a local newspaper, a comparable metropolitan
newspaper, web based bid platform by choice of the City Manager or a trade
publication, with sealed bids solicited. The opening of bids and the award
shall be made by the City Manager and approved by Council.
      (4)   Items having a value in excess of $25,000 shall be sold only after
the matter is presented to Council and a recommendation is made by Council as
to the manner in which the sale shall be made.
      (5)   The exception to the schedule of valuation is vehicle and equipment
trade-ins when made at the dealership at the time of a purchase of a newer
vehicle. The trade-in value can be accepted by the City Manager without City
Council approval. The City Manager  may determine that the trade in value is
not sufficient and place the vehicle for bid according to the schedule of
valuation clauses.
   (b)   Setting valuation. The value of any item to be sold shall  be set by
the City Manager , in concert with department heads. The City Manager  may
obtain appraisals, if deemed necessary.
   (c)   Bids.
      (1)   The time allowed for bids to be submitted shall be at the
discretion of the City Manager , unless specified by Council, but in no case
shall the deadline for bids be less than ten days from the last day on which
the bid solicitation was advertised.
      (2)   The city reserves the right to set minimum bid prices and to reject
any and all bids.
      (3)   In all cases, the sale shall be awarded to the highest bidder, or,
in the case of default, to the second highest bidder.
   (d)   Inspections. Items on which bids have been solicited shall  be made
available for inspection during normal working hours, beginning on the date of
the first publication of the bid solicitation.
   (e)   Payments; title.
      (1)   Sale shall be complete only upon payment and transfer of title as
provided in this section or by state  law .
      (2)   Payment shall be made by cash or certified check before the buyer
will be allowed title to the item purchased.
      (3)   Title to the item purchased shall pass upon the issuance of a bill
of sale by the City Manager , or other transfer of title, as required by law .
   (f)   Reports. Following consummation of any sale, regardless of value, a
report shall  be presented to Council stating, in writing, the following:
      (1)   The name, description and condition of the item sold;
      (2)   The sale price of the item; and
      (3)   The name and address of the purchaser.
   (g)   Waiver of requirements. Any of the conditions set forth in this
section may  be waived by a majority vote of Council. Such waiver, if invoked,
shall  apply only to the sale of the particular item voted upon.
(Res. passed 2-12-1975; Ord. 2406-04, passed 7-10-2024)
CHAPTER 234: CITY CLERK
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 234. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   City Clerk generally, see
Charter Ch. 10
   Signature on licenses required, see §
802.05
   Voter registration, see
Charter Ch. 3
Statutory reference:
   Apportionment of wards; copy of apportionment plan, see M.C.L.A. § 117.27a
   Filing charters and amendments thereto, see M.C.L.A. § 117.24
   Filing of initiative petitions, see M.C.L.A. § 117.25
CHAPTER 236: CITY TREASURER
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 236. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   City Treasurer generally, see
Charter Ch. 11
   Duties regarding general taxation, see
Charter Ch. 20
Statutory reference:
   Collection of municipal income taxes, see M.C.L.A. § 141.671
   Deposit of public funds, see M.C.L.A. §§ 129.11 et seq.
   Justices of the Peace to turn moneys collected over to City Treasurer, see
M.C.L.A. § 117.31
CHAPTER 238: CITY ASSESSOR
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 238. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   City Assessor generally, see
Charter Ch. 13
   Duties regarding general taxation, see
Charter Ch. 20
   Responsibility regarding construction and repair of sidewalks, see §
1020.05(k)
   Responsibility regarding hazards and nuisance abatement, see §
1020.04(g)
   Responsibility regarding improvements, see §§
1020.03(h),
1020.06(d)
Statutory reference:
   Tax Assessors in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3
CHAPTER 240: CITY ATTORNEY
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 240. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   Legal Department, see
Charter Ch. 12
Statutory reference:
   Duties regarding animals running at large, see M.C.L.A. §§ 433.53, 433.62
   Legal advisor, see M.C.L.A. § 87.20
   Membership in Board of Election Commissioners, see M.C.L.A. § 168.25
   Service of process, see M.C.L.A. § 600.1925
CHAPTER 242: BUILDING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
Editor’s note:
   References throughout these codified ordinances to the Building Inspector,
the Building Inspector and Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement
Officer and the Zoning Administrator mean the Building and Zoning
Administrator.
CHAPTER 244: CITY ENGINEER
Editor’s note:
   The city contracts on a job to job basis with an engineer or a firm of
engineers, designated the City Engineer. Copies of the latest relevant
legislation may be obtained, at cost, from the City Clerk.
CHAPTER 246: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 246. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   Acquisition and operation of sewage disposal systems by the city, see
Charter Ch. 22, §§ 1 et seq.
   Acquisition and operation of water works by the city, see
Charter Ch. 22, §§ 1 et seq.
   Excavations, see §
1024.02
   Special assessments, see
Ch. 1020,
Charter Ch. 14, § 2;
Ch. 21
   Utilities generally, see
Charter Ch. 22
Statutory reference:
   Approval of public works projects by Planning Commission, see M.C.L.A. §§
125.39, 125.40
   Improvements in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4d
CHAPTER 248: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 248. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
Cross-reference:
   Enforcement of building numbering regulations, see §
1460.07
   Enforcement of peddler regulations, see §
850.13
   Impounding of motor vehicles operated by minors either possessing or
transporting alcoholic beverages, see §
606.02
Statutory reference:
   Arrest, see M.C.L.A. § 117.34
   Enforcement of laws, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i
   Jurisdiction outside city limits, see M.C.L.A. § 117.34
CHAPTER 250: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 250. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
Cross-references:
   BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, see
Ch. 1610
   Fire Department and protection, see
Charter Ch. 27, § 5
   Hazardous spills, see §
1612.14
   Interference with fire suppression forces; emergencies, see
Ch. 1612
Statutory reference:
   Borrowing money for fire protection, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4a
   Fire stations, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4e
   Firefighter’s Retirement System, see M.C.L.A. §§ 38.551 et seq.
CHAPTER 252: EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
Editor’s note:
   Because of the frequency of change, provisions relating to compensation and
benefits are not codified. Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be
obtained, at cost, from the City Clerk. Council has adopted, by resolution, a
City of Grand Blanc Patrolman’s Agreement, a City of Grand Blanc Dispatchers
Personnel Manual and a City of Grand Blanc Personnel Manual. These documents
provide for compensation, benefits and other incidents of employment for
police, dispatchers and other city personnel, respectively, and are amended
from time to time by resolution of Council. Copies of these documents may be
examined at the City Hall or reproduced, at cost.
TITLE EIGHT: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
      
Chap. 270. Board of Health.
      
Chap. 272. Sign Review Committee.
      
Chap. 274. Local Officers Compensation Commission.
      
Chap. 276. Board of Review.
      
Chap. 278. Planning Commission.
      
Chap. 280. Board of Zoning Appeals.
      
Chap. 282. Building Code Board of Appeals.
      
Chap. 284. Downtown Development Authority.
      
Chap. 286. Fire Commission. (Repealed)
CHAPTER 270: BOARD OF HEALTH
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 17 of the City Charter provides that Council shall be the Board of
Health until such time as it may create a separate Board of Health, appoint a
Health Officer and define their powers and duties.
Constitutional reference:
   Health and sanitation, generally, see Mich. Const. Art. IV, § 51
Statutory reference:
   Health and sanitation, generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 333.1101 et seq., 750.466
et seq.
   Health and sanitation in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.3, 117.4i
   Nuisances generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 600.3801 et seq.
CHAPTER 272: SIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE
Section
272.01   Establishment
272.02   Composition
272.03   Terms of office
272.04   Meetings; duties
272.05   Hearings on appeals or variances from sign regulations
272.06   Reports to Building Department
272.07   Minutes
272.08   Duties of Council representative
§ 272.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established in and for the city a Sign Review Committee.
(Ord. 213, passed 4-11-1990)
§ 272.02 COMPOSITION.
   The Sign Review Committee shall be composed of precisely the same membership
and appointed officials as the City Planning Commission.
(Ord. 213, passed 4-11-1990)
§ 272.03 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The terms of office for members of the Sign Review Committee shall be
coterminous with the terms of office for the City Planning Commission.
(Ord. 213, passed 4-11-1990)
§ 272.04 MEETINGS; DUTIES.
   (a)   The Sign Review Committee shall act as the Board of Appeals for
Chapter 1480 of the Building and Housing Code. The Committee shall have the
authority to interpret, consider requests for variances and consider appeals of
administrative decisions.
   (b)   The Sign Review Committee shall meet upon request of the Building and
Zoning Administrator or upon receipt of a completed application and the payment
of a fee to request a variance or an appeal.
   (c)   Meetings shall be held the same evening as the regularly scheduled
Planning Commission meeting, unless a special meeting is called as identified
by the Chairperson of the Planning Commission or his or her designee.
   (d)   The Committee shall have the following authority and duties.
      (1)   The Committee shall review and approve proposed or existing signs
for compliance with applicable standards of Chapter 1480 of the Building and
Housing Code. The Committee may consider sign placement and design in
consideration of pedestrian and vehicular access, provision of clear sight
distance for motorists and non-motorized travelers, reasonable maintenance of
views to existing conforming signs, existence of desirable natural features,
conflicts with utility poles and structures and possible detrimental impacts of
signs located adjacent to residentially zoned districts.
      (2)   The Committee shall hear variance requests on all applications that
do not conform to the provisions of Chapter 1480 of the Building and Housing
Code relating to the location, maintenance, design, illumination, size, height,
number and type of signs. The Committee shall use the standards provided in §
1480.14 of the Building and Housing Code. In no case shall the Committee have
the authority to grant a variance when the matter concerns construction or
design requirements of the Building Code. Such variance may only be considered
by the Building Code Board of Appeals.
      (3)   The Committee may interpret any aspect of a sign or its framework
that might adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the public,
except construction requirements set forth in the Building Code. Such
interpretation may be requested by an applicant, business owner , city official
or the Building and Zoning Administrator.
      (4)   The Committee shall interpret the provisions of Chapter 1480 of the
Building and Housing Code or hear appeals of administrative decisions where it
is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Building and Zoning Administrator in the enforcement
of
Chapter 1480 of the Building and Housing Code, provided that in no case shall
the Committee hear an appeal on a matter that deals with requirements contained
in the Building Code.
(Ord. 243, passed 6-10-1998)
§ 272.05 HEARINGS ON APPEALS OR VARIANCES FROM SIGN REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The Committee shall hold a public hearing on appeals or variances, and
shall permit all interested persons to offer oral or written testimony. After
the close of the public hearing, the Committee, by vote, may affirm, annul or
modify the order or action of the Building and Zoning Department. Any decision
to grant a variance or annul the decision of the Building and Zoning Department
shall require a majority vote of its full membership, not just a majority of
those present.
   (b)   After reviewing a sign application to appeal an administrative
decision or request a variance from the provisions of
Chapter 1480 of the Building and Housing Code, the Sign Review Committee shall
either:
      (1)   Approve the sign application as presented upon a finding, point by
point, that all the criteria in §
1480.14 of the Building and Housing Code are met;
      (2)   Approve the sign application appeal or variance subject to certain
changes or conditions as required, such as, but not limited to, changes to sign
dimensions or proposed location, changes to materials of the sign or sign base/
framework to be more complementary to the overall site design or character of
the area, the addition of landscaping around the base of the sign or changes to
sign illumination; or
      (3)   Reject the sign application appeal or variance, in which case the
applicant shall be provided with a written explanation of the reasons for such
rejection and those provisions of Chapter 1480 of the Building and Housing Code
that would not be varied.
(Ord. 243, passed 6-10-1998)
§ 272.06 REPORTS TO BUILDING DEPARTMENT.
   The Sign Review Committee shall report its findings to the Building
Department within three days after a meeting pursuant to §
272.04(a).
(Ord. 213, passed 4-11-1990)
§ 272.07 MINUTES.
   The Sign Review Committee shall keep minutes of meetings and of actions
taken and shall submit such minutes to the City Clerk who shall distribute them
to the Mayor and Council in the same manner as that of other Council committee
meetings.
(Ord. 213, passed 4-11-1990)
§ 272.08 DUTIES OF COUNCIL REPRESENTATIVE.
   The Councilperson on the Sign Review Committee shall provide liaison between
Council and the Committee.
(Ord. 213, passed 4-11-1990)
CHAPTER 274: LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION
Section
274.01   Establishment; function
274.02   Composition; appointments
274.03   Terms of office; vacancies
274.04   Qualifications
274.05   Duties
Statutory reference:
   Compensation and salaries in home rule cities, see M.C. L. A. §§ 117.3,
117.5, 117.17, 117.19, 117.20, 117.28, 117.32, 117.33
§ 274.01 ESTABLISHMENT; FUNCTION.
   There is hereby established in and for the city a Local Officers
Compensation Commission. The principal duty of the Commission shall be to
determine the salaries of all local elected officials.
(Ord. 82, passed 1-9-1974)
§ 274.02 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENTS.
   The Local Officers Compensation Commission shall consist of five members who
are registered electors of the city, to be appointed by the Mayor subject to
confirmation by Council.
(Ord. 82, passed 1-9-1974)
§ 274.03 TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES.
   The term of office of members of the Local Officers Compensation Commission
shall be five years, except that of the first members appointed, one shall be
appointed for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four
years and one for five years. The first members shall be appointed within 30
days after the effective date of this section (Ordinance 82, passed January 9,
1974). Thereafter, members shall be appointed before October 1 of the year in
which a vacancy occurs. When vacancies occur during the term, the appointments
shall be for the unexpired term.
(Ord. 82, passed 1-9-1974)
§ 274.04 QUALIFICATIONS.
   No member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of
any level of government, nor any member of the immediate family of such a
member or employee, shall be eligible to be a member of the Local Officers
Compensation Commission.
(Ord. 82, passed 1-9-1974)
§ 274.05 DUTIES.
   After the Local Officers Compensation Commission has been appointed and
qualified according to law , it shall perform the duties imposed upon it by
M.C.L.A. 117.5c, as amended.
(Ord. 82, passed 1-9-1974)
CHAPTER 276: BOARD OF REVIEW
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 276. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross references and any future legislation.
Cross-references:
   Authority regarding assessments, see
Charter Ch. 20, § 6
   Composition and quorum, see
Charter Ch. 20, § 4
   Limitation on taxation, see
Charter Ch. 19, § 2
   Meetings, powers, see
Charter Ch. 20, § 5
   Real estate tax, see
Ch. 882
   Taxation generally, see
Charter Ch. 14, § 16;
Ch. 20
CHAPTER 278: PLANNING COMMISSION
Editor’s note:
   Provisions relating to the Planning Commission are codified in
Chapter 1220 of Part Twelve, the Planning and Zoning Code.
CHAPTER 280: BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Editor’s note:
   Provisions relating to the Zoning Board of Appeals are codified in Article
XXIX of the Zoning Ordinance, passed August 11, 1993 (the Zoning Code), which
is published as an appendix.
Statutory reference:
   Actions for Review; proper and necessary parties; notice; failure to appear,
see M.C.L.A. § 125.3601
   Meetings of the Board; freedom of information, see M.C.L.A.§§ 125.3602,
125.3701
   Review by Circuit Courts; appeals to Supreme Court; procedure, see M.C.L.A.
§ 125.3606
   Zoning Board of Appeals, see M.C.L.A. § 125.3603
CHAPTER 282: BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
Editor’s note:
   Provisions relating to the Building Code Board of Appeals are codified in
the Stille-Derossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act, Public Act 230 of
1972, M.C.L.A. § 125.1504, which is referenced in the Michigan Building Code,
as adopted by reference in Chapter 1410 of Part Fourteen, the Building and
Housing Code of these codified ordinances.
CHAPTER 284: DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
Section
284.01   Definitions
284.02   Determination of necessity
284.03   Establishment of authority
284.04   Downtown Development Authority District boundary description
284.05   Board of Trustees
284.06   Powers of authority
284.07   Fiscal year; adoption of budget
284.08   Amendment
§ 284.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning given to them in
Act 57 or as hereafter provided in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates to the contrary. As used in this chapter:
   ACT 57. Act 57 of the Public Acts of 2018, as amended.
   AUTHORITY. The Downtown Development Authority established by this chapter.
   BOARD and BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The Board of Trustees of the Authority , the
governing body of the  Authority .
   CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER. The Mayor.
   CITY. The City of Grand Blanc, Michigan.
   COUNCIL and CITY COUNCIL. The  City  Council of Grand Blanc.
   DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT TAX. The tax authorized by this chapter pursuant to Act
57  to be imposed by the Authority  in the downtown area.
   DOWNTOWN DISTRICT. The Downtown District referred to in this chapter as now
existing or hereafter amended.
(Ord. 06-01, passed 5-17-2006)
§ 284.02 DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY.
   The City Council hereby determines that it is necessary for the best
interests of the city to halt property value deterioration and increase
property tax valuation where possible in the business district of the city, to
eliminate the causes of that deterioration and to promote economic growth by
establishing a Downtown Development Authority pursuant to Act 57 .
(Ord. 06-01, passed 5-17-2006)
§ 284.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF AUTHORITY.
   There is hereby established, pursuant to Act 57 , a Downtown Development
Authority in and for the city . The Authority shall be a public body corporate
and shall be known and exercise its powers under the title of “Grand Blanc
Downtown Development Authority”. The Authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be
sued in any court of this State and shall possess all of the powers necessary
to carry out the purposes of its incorporation as provided in this chapter and
Act 57. The enumeration of a power in this chapter or in Act 57 shall not be
construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the Authority.
(Ord. 06-01, passed 5-17-2006)
§ 284.04 DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY DISTRICT BOUNDARY DESCRIPTION.
   Part of the City of Grand Blanc, Genesee County, Michigan, described as
beginning at the center lines of Saginaw (M-54) Road and Perry Road; thence
northwesterly, along the center line of said Saginaw (M-54) Road, to the south
line of lot 22 of “assessor’s plat no. 1”, extended northeasterly; thence
southwesterly to the most southerly corner of said lot 22; thence northwesterly
along the easterly line of lot 17 of “Ingleside Addition” to the center line of
Sawyer Street; thence northeasterly along the center line of said Sawyer Street
to the westerly line of lot 15, extended southeasterly; thence northwesterly to
the most northwesterly corner of lot 73 of said “assessor’s plat no. 1”; thence
northeasterly to the most southerly corner of lot 74 of said plat, thence
northwesterly to the intersection of the center line of High Street with the
southwesterly line of lot 75 of said “assessor’s plat no. 1”, extended
northwesterly; thence southwesterly, along the center line of said High Street,
to the center line of Davis Street; thence northwesterly to the north line of
lot 63 of said plat, extended northeasterly to the center line of Davis Street;
thence southwesterly to the most westerly corner of said lot 63; thence
northwesterly to the most northerly corner of lot 190 of “assessor’s plat no.
4”; thence southwesterly along the northerly line of said lot 190 to the
northwesterly corner of said lot 190; thence southeasterly to the most
southerly corner of said lot 190 thence southwesterly, southeasterly and
southerly, along the east line of lot 195 of “assessor’s plat no. 4”, to the
southeast corner of said lot 195; thence westerly, along the south line of said
lot 195 and said south line extended westerly to the center line of the
Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad; thence southeasterly along said center line to
the east-west 1/4 line of section 16, T6N-R7E; thence west along said east-west
1/4 line 143 feet more or less; thence southeasterly 143.0 feet southwesterly
of and parallel with the center line of said railroad to the north plat line of
“Stone Hollow,” extended easterly; thence westerly along said plat line, also
being the south property line of the “Proclean strip commercial center” to the
southwest corner of said “Proclean strip commercial center” property; thence
northwesterly along the west line of said parcel to the center line of Grand
Blanc Road; thence southwesterly along said center line to the east line of lot
53 of “Grand Oak,” extended southerly; thence northerly along the east line of
said plat to the southwest corner of “Davis western addition”; thence easterly
along the south line of said plat to the center line of Seward Street; thence
northerly along said center line to the center line of Church Street; thence
northeasterly along said center line to the center line of the Chesapeake and
Ohio Railroad; thence northwesterly along said center line to the north line of
lot 188 of “assessor’s plat no. 3,” extended northeasterly; thence
southwesterly to the most southerly corner of lot 189 of said plat; thence
northwesterly, southwesterly, northwesterly, southwesterly, southeasterly and
southwesterly along the southerly line of said lot 189 and said southerly line
extended southwesterly to the westerly line of said “assessor’s plat no. 3”;
thence southerly along said west line to the center line of Reid Road; thence
westerly to the west line of the City limits; thence northerly along the City
limits line to the center line of Saginaw (M-54) Road; thence southeasterly
along said center line to the northerly line of lot 2 of “Woodward Acres,”
extended southwesterly; thence northeasterly to the most northerly corner of
said lot 2; thence southeasterly to the most easterly corner of lot 1 of said
plat; thence northeasterly along the east line of said plat to the City limits
line, also being the east-west 1/4 line of section 9, T6N-R7E; thence easterly
along said east-west 1/4 line to the center line of the Chesapeake and Ohio
Railroad; thence southeasterly along said center line to the center line of
Center Road, extended southeasterly as platted in “Rust’s Subdivision”; thence
northeasterly along said centerline of Center Road to the center line of Center
Road as relocated; thence southeasterly along said center line as relocated to
the northerly line of lot 24 of said “rust subdivision,” extended
southwesterly; thence northeasterly to the center line of walker Street; thence
southeasterly along said center line to the southerly line of lot 8, extended
southwesterly; thence southwesterly to the northwesterly corner of lot 3 of
“Rust’s Subdivision”; thence southeasterly to the southwest corner of said lot
3; thence northeasterly to the most northerly corner of lot 152 of “assessor’s
plat no. 1”; thence southerly to the section corner common to sections 9, 10,
15, and 16, T6N-R7E, City of Grand Blanc; thence southeasterly, along the east
line of “assessor’s plat no. 1,” to the most easterly corner of lot 161 of said
plat; thence southwesterly to the most westerly corner of lot 15 of “Indian
Hill Colony”; thence southeasterly and northeasterly, along the westerly and
southerly line of said “Indian Hill Colony” to the northwest corner of lot 25
of “Maplegrove Subdivision”; thence southeasterly to the most southerly corner
of lot 23 of said plat; thence southwesterly 138.5 feet more or less; thence
southeasterly 101.7 feet more or less; thence southwesterly 92 feet more or
less; thence southeasterly 101.7 feet more or less, to the northerly line of
lot 12 of said “Maplegrove Subdivision”; thence southwesterly to the most
westerly corner of said lot 12; thence southeasterly, along the southwesterly
line of said lot 12 to the center line of Bush Avenue; thence northeasterly
along said center line to a point which is southwesterly 15.0 feet, along the
southerly line of said Bush Avenue, and northerly 25.0 feet at right angles to
said southerly street line from the most westerly corner of lot 31 of said
plat; thence southeasterly, 15.0 feet southwesterly of and parallel to the
southwesterly line of said lot 31 of “Maplegrove Subdivision” to the
southeasterly line of said plat; thence southwesterly along the southeasterly
line of lots 30, 29, and 28 of said plat to a point northeasterly 215.69 from
the southerly corner of lot 10 of said plat; thence southeasterly,
northeasterly and southeasterly along the southwesterly line of tax parcel 25-
56-15-100-021 to the center line of Grant Street; thence southwesterly, along
said center line, to a point which is 173.0 feet from the center line of
Saginaw (M-54) Road; thence southeasterly, parallel with the southwest line of
lot 17 of “Cheney Addition” to the southeasterly line of said lot 17; thence
southwesterly 20.00 feet to the most easterly corner of lot 1 of said plat;
thence southeasterly along the northeasterly line of lots 2 through 8,
inclusive, and said line extended, to the center line of Perry Road; thence
northeasterly along said center line to the north-south 1/4 line of section 15,
T6N-R7E; thence southerly along said north-south 1/4 line, 343.5 feet more or
less to the northerly line of tax parcel 25-56-300-001; thence southwesterly
along said northerly line to the center line of Saginaw (M-54) Road; thence
northwesterly to the place of beginning, also being the intersection of Saginaw
(M-54) Road and Perry Road center lines, as described.
(Ord. 06-01, passed 5-17-2006)
§ 284.05 BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   The Authority  shall be under supervision and control of a Board of Trustees
consisting of the chief executive officer of the city and ten members as
provided in Act 57 . The members shall be appointed by the chief executive
officer subject to approval by the Council and shall hold office for the terms
provided in Act 57. Every member shall hold office until the member’s successor
is appointed.
(Ord. 06-01, passed 5-17-2006)
§ 284.06 POWERS OF AUTHORITY.
   Except as specifically otherwise provided in this chapter, the Authority
 shall have all powers provided by law subject to the limitations established
by law and herein contained.
(Ord. 06-01, passed 5-17-2006)
§ 284.07 FISCAL YEAR; ADOPTION OF BUDGET.
   (a)   The fiscal year of the Authority  shall begin on July 1 of each year
and end on June 30 of the following year, or such other fiscal year as may
hereafter be adopted by the city .
   (b)   The Board of Trustees  shall annually prepare a budget and shall
submit it to the Council on the same date that the proposed budget for the city
is required by the City Charter to be submitted to the Council. The Board shall
not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been
approved by the City Council. The Board may , however, temporarily adopt a
budget in connection with the operation of any improvements which have been
financed by revenue bonds where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing
the revenue bonds.
   (c)   The Authority  shall submit financial reports to the Council at the
same time and on the same basis as departments of the city are required to
submit reports. The Authority shall be audited annually by the same independent
auditors auditing the city, and copies of the audit report shall be filed with
the Council.
(Ord. 06-01, passed 5-17-2006)
§ 284.08 AMENDMENT.
   (a)   Review and determination of public purpose.
      (1)   Following a duly noticed public hearing on the amended downtown
development and tax increment financing plans, which were recommended to the
City Council by the Downtown Development Authority (“DDA”) on May 17, 2006,
City Council reviewed said plans and found the plans to meet the following
standards and criteria, as set forth in the Recodified Tax Increment Financing
Act, Public Act 57 of 2018 (the “Act”), being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4101 through
125.4915.
         A.   A Development Area Citizens Council is not required by the Act
for the city’s DDA District.
         B.   The Downtown Development Plan meets the requirements set forth in
M.C.L.A. § 125.4217 of the Act, and the Tax Increment Financing Plan meets the
requirements set forth in M.C.L.A. § 125.4214 of the Act.
         C.   The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and
the DDA has the ability to arrange financing.
         D.   The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the
purposes of the Act.
         E.   Any land included within the development area to be acquired is
reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plans and of the Act in
an efficient and economically satisfactory manner.
         F.   The downtown development plan is in reasonable accord with the
master plan of the city .
         G.   Public services, such as fire and police protection and
utilities, are or will be adequate to serve the project area.
         H.   Potential changes to zoning, streets, street levels,
intersections and utilities are reasonably necessary for the project and for
the city .
      (2)   In deliberations toward the adoption of this section, the City
Council has determined that the adoption and implementation of amended downtown
development and tax increment financing plans constitutes a public purpose.
   (b)   Approval of plan. Premised upon the determination made in division (a)
above and upon further finding that the execution of the downtown development
plan and the tax increment financing plan appear to be in the best interest of
the city , the amended plans are hereby approved and adopted by reference. No
additional amendments to the plans shall  be effective unless and until
submitted to and approved by the City Council  in accordance with the
procedures established by the Act.
(Ord. 1911-01, passed 12-11-2019)
CHAPTER 286: FIRE COMMISSION
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 286 was repealed by Ordinance 2212-01, passed January 1, 2023.
TITLE TEN: JUDICIARY
      
Chap. 290. District Court and Circuit Court.
CHAPTER 290: DISTRICT COURT AND CIRCUIT COURT
Editor’s note:
   Violations of city law are prosecuted in the 67th District Court of the City
of Grand Blanc. Equitable remedies are pursued in the Genesee County Circuit
Court.
Constitutional reference:
   Circuit Courts generally, see Mich. Const. Art. 6, Sec. 1
   Courts generally, see Mich. Const. Art. 6, §§ 1 et seq.
Statutory references:
   Circuit Courts generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 600.501 et seq.
   Courts generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 600.101 et seq.
   District Courts generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8101 et seq.
PART FOUR: TRAFFIC CODE
      
Chap. 410. Uniform Traffic Code and Michigan Vehicle Code.
      
Chap. 440. Parking Violations Bureau.
      
Chap. 450. Parking Generally.
      
Chap. 480. Miscellaneous Regulations.
CHAPTER 410: UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE AND MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE
Section
410.01   Adoption by reference
410.02   References in code
410.03   Notices to be published
410.99   Penalty
§ 410.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   (a)   The Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. §§
257.1 to 257.923, and all future amendments and revisions, as of the effective
date, are hereby incorporated and adopted by reference.
   (b)   The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages,
promulgated by the Director of the Michigan Department of State Police,
pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Public Act 306 of 1969,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 24.201 to 24.328, as of January 29, 2007, and as may be
amended or revised from time to time, as of the effective date, are hereby
incorporated and adopted by reference.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 6-25-2008)
§ 410.02 REFERENCES IN CODE.
   References in the Michigan Vehicle Code and the Uniform Traffic Code for
Cities, Townships and Villages to a “government unit” shall  mean the City of
Grand Blanc.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 6-25-2008)
§ 410.03 NOTICES TO BE PUBLISHED.
   The City Clerk shall  publish  this chapter in the manner required by law
and shall publish , at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the
Michigan Vehicle Code and the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and
Villages and the fact that a complete copy of each code is available to the
public for inspection at the office of the Clerk.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 6-25-2008)
§ 410.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Penalty. The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code and the
Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages are adopted by
reference, with the exception that the city shall not enforce any provision
wherein the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days.
   (b)   Municipal civil infraction for Motor Vehicle Code. In addition to the
criminal penalties, as set forth in this chapter, and any amendments thereto,
and hereby adopting the text of the Motor Vehicle Code and any criminal
penalties for said conduct, said actions may be treated as a municipal civil
infraction, as set out in §
202.98.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 6-25-2008; Ord. 2502-03, passed 3-12-2025)
CHAPTER 440: PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Section
440.01   Establishment; supervision and control
440.02   Location; employees; rules and regulations
440.03   Disposition of violations
440.04   Tickets and notices of violation
440.05   Schedule of fines
Statutory reference:
   Municipal violations bureaus in counties of 100,000 or more, see M.C.L.A. §
725.301
   Parking generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 257.672 et seq.
§ 440.01 ESTABLISHMENT; SUPERVISION AND CONTROL.
   Pursuant to § 8395 of the Revised Judicature Act (M.C.L.A. § 600.8395), as
amended, a Parking Violations Bureau, for the purpose of handling alleged
parking violations in the city, is hereby established. The Bureau shall be
under the supervision and control of the City Manager .
(Ord. 48, passed 5-8-1969)
§ 440.02 LOCATION; EMPLOYEES; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Manager  shall , subject to the approval of Council, establish a
convenient location for the Parking Violations Bureau, appoint qualified city
employees to administer the Bureau and adopt rules and regulations for the
operation thereof.
(Ord. 48, passed 5-8-1969)
§ 440.03 DISPOSITION OF VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   No violation not scheduled in §
440.05 shall be disposed of by the Parking Violations Bureau. However, the fact
that a particular violation is scheduled shall not entitle the alleged violator
to disposition of the violation at the Bureau. In any case, the person in
charge of the Bureau may refuse to dispose of such violation, in which case any
person having knowledge of the facts may make a sworn complaint before any
court having jurisdiction of the offense as provided by law .
   (b)   A violation may be settled at the Parking Violations Bureau only at
the specific request of the alleged violator. No penalty for any violation
shall be accepted from any person who denies having committed the offense, and
in no case shall the person who is in charge of the Bureau determine, or
attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an
alleged violation. No person shall be required to dispose of a parking
violation at the Bureau. All persons are entitled to have any such violation
processed before a court having jurisdiction thereof if they so desire. The
unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the Bureau shall not
prejudice him or her or in any way diminish the rights, privileges and
protection accorded to him or her by law .
(Ord. 48, passed 5-8-1969)
§ 440.04 TICKETS AND NOTICES OF VIOLATION.
   The issuance of a traffic ticket or notice of violation by a police officer
of the city shall be deemed an allegation of a parking violation. Such traffic
ticket or notice of violation shall indicate the period of time within which
the person to whom the same was issued must respond before the Parking
Violations Bureau. It shall also indicate the address of the Bureau, the hours
during which the Bureau is open and the amount of the penalty scheduled for the
offense for which the ticket was issued. It shall also advise that a warrant
for the arrest of the person to whom the ticket was issued will be sought if
such person fails to respond within the time limit stated thereon.
(Ord. 48, passed 5-8-1969)
§ 440.05 SCHEDULE OF FINES.
   The following parking violations, some of which are based upon the Uniform
Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages, Public Act 62 of 1956 and
being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.951 to 257.951 and R 28.1001 et seq. of the Michigan
Administrative Code (the “UTC”), shall be punishable by the fines indicated:
Offense UTC Section Penalty
Offense                                                                        UTC Section Penalty
Parking too far from curb                                                      R 801, 802  $2
Angle parking violations                                                       R 803       $2
                                                                               (8.5)
                                                                               [Note: R
Obstructing traffic                                                            805,        $5
                                                                               28.1805
                                                                               Rescinded.]
                                                                               (8.10)
Prohibited parking (signs unnecessary)                                         [Note: R
                                                                               28.1810
                                                                               Rescinded.]
   (a) On sidewalk                                                                      $5
   (b) In front of drive                                                                $5
   (c) Within intersection                                                              $10
   (d) Within 15 feet of hydrant                                                        $5
   (e) On crosswalk                                                                     $5
   (f) Within 20 feet of crosswalk or 15 feet of corner lot lines                       $5
   (g) Within 30 feet of street  side traffic sign or signal                            $5
   (h) Within 50 feet of railroad crossing                                              $5
   (i) Within 20 feet of fire station entrance                                          $5
   (j) Within 75 feet of fire station entrance on opposite side of street               $5
(signs required)
   (k) Beside street  excavation when traffic obstructed                                $5
   (l) Double parking                                                                   $5
   (m) On bridge or viaduct or within tunnel                                            $10
   (n) Within 200 feet of accident where police are in attendance                       $3
   (o) In front of theater                                                              $3
   (p) Blocking emergency exit                                                          $5
   (q) Blocking fire escape or fire lane                                                $5
                                                                               (8.10 (r))
In prohibited zone (signs required)                                            [Note: R    $3
                                                                               28.1810
                                                                               Rescinded.]
In alley                                                                       R 813       $3
Parking for prohibited purpose                                                 R 814
   (a) Displaying vehicle for sale                                                      $3
   (b) Working or repairing vehicle                                                     $3
   (c) Displaying advertising                                                           $3
   (d) Selling merchandise                                                              $3
   (e) Storage over 48 hours                                                            $5
Wrong side of boulevard roadway                                                R 815       $2
                                                                               (8.16,
                                                                               8.17)
Loading zone violation                                                         [Note: R    $2
                                                                               28.1816,
                                                                               28.1817
                                                                               Rescinded.]
Bus, parking other than in bus stop                                            R 819       $3
Taxicab, parking other than in cab stand                                       R 819       $5
Bus and taxicab stand violations                                               R. 820      $3
                                                                               (5.58)
Failure to set brakes                                                          [Note: Rule $3
                                                                               not found.]
                                                                               (5.58)
Parking on grade when wheels not turned to curb                                [Note: Rule $2
                                                                               not found.]
 
(Ord. 48, passed 5-8-1969)
CHAPTER 450: PARKING GENERALLY
Section
450.01   Overnight parking
450.02   Parking on rights-of-way
450.03   Parking and driving on Board of Education property
450.04   Parking for handicapped persons
450.05   Parking at Grand Blanc City Fire Department
450.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Municipal violations bureaus in counties of 100,000 or more, see M.C.L.A. §
725.301
   Parking generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 257.672 et seq.
§ 450.01 OVERNIGHT PARKING.
   (a)   No owner or operator of any vehicle or trailer shall park such vehicle
or trailer on any street in the city between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. for longer
than three minutes for loading or unloading passengers, or for longer than 30
minutes for loading, unloading or delivering property .
   (b)   The Police Department and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty
are hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or to have removed and towed away
by a commercial towing service, any vehicle or trailer parked in any place in
the city in violation of this section.
   (c)   Vehicles or trailers so towed away for illegal parking shall be stored
in a safe place and shall be restored to the owner or operator of such vehicle
or trailer upon payment of the towing fees as charged by such commercial towing
service.
   (d)   The Chief of Police or any other person authorized by the Mayor and
Council shall cause signs to be posted in appropriate areas at major entrances
to the city indicating such limitation on overnight parking.
(Ord. 69, passed 9-8-1971)
§ 450.02 PARKING ON RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   Except as otherwise authorized by this traffic code or by other applicable
ordinances of the city, no person shall park a vehicle on any public right-of-
way. As used in this section, RIGHT-OF-WAY includes curbs, curbless areas,
sidewalks, roadways and grassy areas between sidewalks and roadways.
§ 450.03 PARKING AND DRIVING ON BOARD OF EDUCATION PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle on property owned by
the City Board of Education lying within either of the following areas, except
when necessary to avoid conflicts with other traffic or in compliance with the
direction of a police officer, at any place where signs are posted prohibiting
parking:
      (1)   The area known as the High School Complex and bounded by Holly Road
on the east, by Saginaw Street on the northeast, by Bush Street and the
extension of Bush Street beyond Davis on the north, by the railroad property on
the west and southwest and by the southern property line of the Board of
Education property between the railroad property and Holly Road on the south;
or
      (2)   The Indian Hills school property from Woodbridge to the easterly
line of Lafave Gardens.
   (b)   No person shall park any vehicle in any place on the property
described in division (a) above where signs designate reserved parking, unless
there is exhibited on the vehicle a permit authorizing parking in reserved
areas.
   (c)   No motor vehicle shall be operated on the above described property at
a speed in excess of 25 mph.
(Ord. 97, passed 1-14-1976)
§ 450.04 PARKING FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS.
   (a)   As used in this section, HANDICAPPER means a person who has physical
characteristics which limit ambulation or which necessitate the use of a
wheelchair for mobility, or who is blind.
   (b)   Any person who is the owner of private property available for public
use shall establish handicapped parking zones at the nearest entrance to a
building located on such private property available for public use. Property
with 40 parking spaces or less shall have at least one handicapped parking
space. Property with 41 to and including 150 parking spaces shall have two
handicapped parking spaces. Property with more than 150 parking spaces shall
have three handicapped parking spaces.
   (c)   The owner or managing agent of private property available for public
use shall apply to the city for approval of the proposed designated parking
spaces.
   (d)   No owner of private property available for public use shall fail to
have the required handicapped parking spaces or fail to obtain approval from
the city for proposed designated parking spaces.
(Ord. 124, passed 8-8-1979)
§ 450.05 PARKING AT GRAND BLANC CITY FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   No person shall park any vehicle in any place on the property of the
Grand Blanc City Fire Department where signs designate no parking.
   (b)   No person shall park any vehicle in any place on the property of the
Grand Blanc City Fire Department where signs designate reserved parking, unless
there is exhibited on the vehicle a permit authorizing parking in reserved
areas.
   (c)   The Police Department is hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or
to have removed and towed away by commercial towing service any vehicle or
trailer parked in violation of division (a) or (b) above. Vehicles or trailers
so towed away for illegal parking shall be stored in a safe place and shall be
restored to the owner or operator of such vehicle upon payment of the towing
and storage fees as charged by such commercial towing service.
(Ord. 1911-02, passed 12-11-2019)
§ 450.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Whoever violates §§
450.01,
450.02 or
450.03 is responsible for a civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil
fine of not more than $100 and costs in accordance with M.C.L.A. § 257.907, as
amended. However, any person electing to do so may settle such violation by
payment of a fine of $5 within a period stipulated on the traffic ticket or
notice of violation, in accordance with
Chapter 440.
   (b)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of §§
450.04 or
450.05 shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 90 days,
or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 1911-02, passed 12-11-2019)
CHAPTER 480: MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
Section
480.01   Speed limit in school zones
480.02   Operation of snowmobiles
480.99   Penalty
§ 480.01 SPEED LIMIT IN SCHOOL ZONES.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      SCHOOL. An educational institution operated by a local school district or
by a private, denominational or parochial organization, except an educational
institution containing only grades above the eighth grade.
      SCHOOL ZONE. School property  on which a school  building is located and
includes the area adjacent to the school  property  which is designated by the
signs required under this section and which is not more than 1,000 feet from
the property  line of the school  in either direction.
   (b)   Speed limit. During the times set forth in division (c) below, the
speed limit within a school zone  shall  be 25 mph.
   (c)   Time. During the time  in which the local school  district has
commenced school  for any given year, the speed limit shall  be in force 30
minutes before a regularly scheduled daily school  session and 30 minutes after
a regularly scheduled daily school  session. Permanent signs designating the
school zone  and the school  speed limit in the school zone  shall be posted in
conformity with the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(Ord. 129, passed 8-8-1979)
§ 480.02 OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.
   (a)   Adoption by reference. Part 821 §§ 324.82101 to 324.82161 of the
Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act
451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.82101 to 324.82161, as amended, is adopted
by reference, except as to those sections which pre-empt municipal enforcement,
as provided in the Act.
   (b)   References in Act. References in Part 821 of the Department of Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act to “municipality” and “local unit of
government” shall  mean the City of Grand Blanc.
   (c)   Penalties. The penalties provided by Part 821 of the Department of
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act are adopted by reference,
provided, however, that the city may  not enforce any provision of the Act for
which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days.
(Ord. 03-15, passed 2-12-2003)
§ 480.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is responsible for a
civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $100
and costs in accordance with M.C.L.A. § 257.907, as amended.
PART SIX: GENERAL OFFENSES CODE
      
Chap. 606. Alcoholic Beverages.
      
Chap. 610. Animals.
      
Chap. 618. Drugs.
      
Chap. 660. Offenses Relating to Persons.
      
Chap. 662. Offenses Relating to Property.
      
Chap. 666. Peace Disturbances.
      
Chap. 672. Railroads.
      
Chap. 676. Safety, Sanitation and Health.
      
Chap. 680. Sex Related Offenses.
      
Chap. 692. Weapons and Explosives.
      
Chap. 694. Law Enforcement.
CHAPTER 606: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
606.01   Sales to minors; prohibitions and misrepresentations
606.02   Transportation and possession by minors prohibited; exceptions;
impounding of motor vehicles by Police Department; appeals; transfer of title
prohibited
606.03   Purchase, consumption or possession by minors; fraudulent
identification; exceptions (Repealed)
606.04   Unlawful purchase, consumption or possession by minors; arrest based
upon reasonable cause or upon results of preliminary chemical breath analysis;
participation in undercover programs
606.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Intoxicating liquors generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1101 et seq.
   Sales on Sundays and municipal election days, see M.C.L.A.§§ 436.2111 et
seq.
§ 606.01 SALES TO MINORS; PROHIBITIONS AND MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (a)   No person under 21 years of age shall falsely represent himself or
herself to be 21 years of age or over, and thereby procure or attempt to
procure the sale or furnishing of any alcoholic liquor to himself or herself.
No person shall make false representations as to the age of another and thereby
procure or attempt to procure the sale or furnishing of any alcoholic liquor to
any person under 21 years of age.
   (b)   The person in charge of any beer garden, restaurant, tavern, store or
place where alcoholic liquor is sold or furnished for consumption either on or
away from the premises  may , at any time, demand of any person offering to
buy, buying, obtaining or drinking any alcoholic liquor in such establishment,
who may appear to him or her to be under 21 years of age, proof of age and
identity, and on failure of such person to produce the same, shall refuse to
serve, sell or furnish such person with any alcoholic liquor and may exclude
such person from such place of business. If any such person refuses to leave
such place of business, he or she shall be termed a disorderly person.
(Ord. 101, passed 3-9-1977; Ord. 142, passed 2-10-1982)
§ 606.02 TRANSPORTATION AND POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS;
IMPOUNDING OF MOTOR VEHICLES BY POLICE DEPARTMENT; APPEALS; TRANSFER OF TITLE
PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person under 21 years of age shall knowingly transport or possess,
in a motor vehicle, any alcoholic liquor, unless such person is employed by a
licensee, licensed under M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1101 et seq., as amended, and is
possessing, transporting or having such alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle
under the person’s control during regular working hours and in the course of
the person’s employment.
   (b)   Within 30 days after the conviction of any person for a violation of
division (a) above, which conviction has become final, a complaint may be made
by the arresting officer, or by that officer’s superior, before the Court from
which the warrant was issued, which complaint shall be under oath , shall
contain a description of the motor vehicle in which alcoholic liquor was
possessed or transported by a person under 21 years of age in committing the
offense, and shall pray that the motor vehicle be impounded as provided for in
this section. Upon the filing of the complaint, the Court shall issue an order
to the owner of the motor vehicle to show cause why the motor vehicle shall not
be impounded. The order to show cause shall have a date and a time fixed in the
order for a hearing, which date shall not be less than ten days after the
issuance of the order, and shall be served by delivering a true copy to the
owner of the motor vehicle not less than three full days before the date of
such hearing, or, if the owner cannot be located, by sending a true copy by
certified mail to the last known address of the owner . If the owner is a
nonresident of the State , service may be made upon the Secretary of State as
provided in § 403 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. § 257.403.
   (c)   If the Court determines, upon the hearing of the order to show cause,
from competent and relevant evidence, that, at the time of the commission of
the offense, the motor vehicle was being driven by any person under 21 years of
age with the express or implied consent or knowledge of the owner, or that the
use of the motor vehicle is not needed by the owner in the direct pursuit of
the owner’s employment or the actual operation of the owner’s business, the
Court shall authorize the impounding of the vehicle for a period (to be
determined by the Court) of not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days. The
Court’s order authorizing the impounding of the vehicle shall authorize a law
enforcement officer to take possession, without other process, of the motor
vehicle, wherever located, and to store the vehicle in a public or private
garage at the expense and risk of the owner of the vehicle. Appeal shall lie
from the order to the Circuit Court of the County and the provisions governing
the taking of appeals from judgment for damages shall be applicable to the
appeal. This division (c) shall not prevent any bona fide lienholder from
exercising rights under a lien.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly transfer title to a motor vehicle for the
purpose of avoiding the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 228-1, passed 4-7-1993)
§ 606.03 PURCHASE, CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION BY MINORS; FRAUDULENT
IDENTIFICATION; EXCEPTIONS. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 606.03 was repealed by Ordinance 245, passed July 8, 1998.
§ 606.04 UNLAWFUL PURCHASE, CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION BY MINORS; ARREST BASED
UPON REASONABLE CAUSE OR UPON RESULTS OF PRELIMINARY CHEMICAL BREATH ANALYSIS;
PARTICIPATION IN UNDERCOVER PROGRAMS.
   (a)   A person less than 21 years of age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, or
possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, except as provided in this
section, §
606.02 and M.C.L.A. § 257.624b(1). Notwithstanding M.C.L.A. § 436.1909, a
person less than 21 years of age who violates this division (a) is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by the following fines and sanctions, and is not subject
to the penalties prescribed in M.C.L.A. § 436.1909:
      (1)   For the first violation, a fine of not more than $100, and may be
ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or substance abuse
treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in § 100d of the Mental Health
Code, Public Act 258 of 1974, being M.C.L.A. § 330.1100d, and designated by the
Administrator of Substance Abuse Services, and may be ordered to perform
community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at
his or her own expense as described in division (c) below;
      (2)   For a second violation, a fine of not more than $200, and may be
ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or substance abuse
treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in § 100d of Public Act 258 of
1974, being M.C.L.A. § 330.1100d, and designated by the Administrator of
Substance Abuse Services, to perform community service, and to undergo
substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described
in division (c) below. The person is also subject to sanctions against his or
her operator’s or chauffeur’s license imposed in division (d) below; and
      (3)   For a third or subsequent violation a fine of not more than $500,
and may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or substance
abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in § 100d of Public Act
258 of 1974, being M.C.L.A. § 330.1100d, and designated by the Administrator of
Substance Abuse Services, to perform community service, and to undergo
substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described
in division (c) below. The person is also subject to sanctions against his or
her operator’s or chauffeur’s license imposed in division (d) below.
   (b)   A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a person less than
21 years of age, or notwithstanding division (a) above, a person less than 21
years of age who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor,
is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court shall order the Secretary of State to
suspend, pursuant to § 319(5) of Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. §§
257.1 through 257.923, for a period of 90 days, the operator’s or chauffeur’s
license of a person who is convicted of furnishing or using fraudulent
identification in violation of this division and the operator’s or chauffeur’s
license of that person shall be surrendered to the court. The court shall
immediately forward the surrendered license and an abstract of conviction to
the Secretary of State. A suspension ordered under this division (b) shall be
in addition to any other suspension of the person’s operator’s or chauffeur’s
license.
   (c)   The court may order the person found violating division (a) above to
undergo screening and assessment by a person or agency, in order to determine
whether the person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including
alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs.
   (d)   Immediately upon the entry of a conviction or a probate court
disposition for a violation of division (a) hereof, the court shall consider
all prior convictions or probate court dispositions of division (a) hereof, or
a local ordinance or law of another state substantially corresponding to
division (a) above, and shall impose the following sanctions:
      (1)   If the court finds that the person has one such prior conviction or
probate court disposition, the court shall order the Secretary of State to
suspend the operator’s or chauffeur’s license of the person for a period of not
less than 90 days or more than 180 days. The court may order the Secretary of
State to issue to the person a restricted license after the first 30 days of
the period of suspension in the manner described in division (e) below and
provided for in § 319 of Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.319. In
the case of a person who does not possess an operator’s or chauffeur’s license,
the Secretary of State shall deny the application for an operator’s or
chauffeur’s license for the applicable suspension period.
      (2)   If the court finds that the person has two or more such prior
convictions or probate court dispositions, the court shall order the Secretary
of State to suspend the operator’s or chauffeur’s license of the person for a
period of not less than 180 days or more than one year. The court may order the
Secretary of State to issue to the person a restricted license after the first
60 days of the period of suspension in the manner described in division (e)
below and provided for in § 319 of Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A.
257.319. In the case of a person who does not possess an operator’s or
chauffeur’s license, the Secretary of State shall deny the application for an
operator’s or chauffeur’s license for the applicable suspension period.
   (e)   In those cases in which a restricted license is allowed under this
section, the court shall not order the Secretary of State to issue a restricted
license unless the person states under oath , and the court finds based upon
the record in open court, that the person is unable to take public
transportation to and from his or her work location, place of alcohol or drug
education treatment, probation department, court-ordered community service
program or educational institution, and does not have any family members or
others able to provide transportation. The court order under division (d) above
and the restricted license shall indicate the work location of the person to
whom it is issued, the approved route or routes and permitted times of travel,
and shall permit the person to whom it is issued only to do one or more of the
following:
      (1)   Drive to and from the person’s residence and work location;
      (2)   Drive in the course of the person’s employment or occupation;
      (3)   Drive to and from the person’s residence and an alcohol or drug
education or treatment program as ordered by the court;
      (4)   Drive to and from the person’s residence and the court probation
department, or a court-ordered community service program, or both; and
      (5)   Drive to and from the person’s residence and an educational
institution at which the person is enrolled as a student.
   (f)   If license sanctions are imposed, immediately upon the entry of a
court-ordered sanction pursuant to division (d) above, the court shall order
the person convicted for the violation to surrender to the court his or her
operator’s or chauffeur’s license. The court shall immediately forward a notice
of court-ordered license sanctions to the Secretary of State. If the license is
not forwarded to the Secretary of State, an explanation of the reason why the
license is absent shall be attached. If the finding is appealed to the circuit
court, the court may , ex parte, order the Secretary of State to stay the
suspension issued pursuant to this section pending the outcome of the appeal.
Immediately following imposition of the sanction, the court shall forward a
notice to the Secretary of State indicating the sanction imposed.
   (g)   A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a person less than
21 years of age has consumed alcoholic liquor may require the person to submit
to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. A peace officer may arrest a person
based in whole or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath
analysis. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other
acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a criminal prosecution to
determine whether the person less than 21 years of age has consumed or
possessed alcoholic liquor. A person less than 21 years of age who refuses to
submit to a preliminary chemical breath test analysis as required in this
division (g) is responsible for a state civil infraction and may be ordered to
pay a civil fine of not more than $100.
   (h)   A city official entrusted with law enforcement, upon determining that
a person less than 18 years of age who is not emancipated pursuant to Public
Act 293 of 1968, being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.1 to 722.6, allegedly consumed,
possessed or purchased, or attempted to consume, possess or purchase, alcoholic
liquor in violation of division (a) above, shall notify the parent or parents,
custodian or guardian of the person as to the nature of the violation if the
name of a parent, guardian or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law
enforcement agency. The notice required by this division (h) shall be made not
later than 48 hours after the law enforcement agency determines that the person
who allegedly violated division (a) above is less than 18 years of age and not
emancipated pursuant to Public Acts 293 of 1968. The notice may be made by any
means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice, including, but not
limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first class mail. If a person
less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating division (a) hereof,
his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided
in this division.
   (i)   This section does not prohibit a person less than 21 years of age from
possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of
his or her employment, if employed by a person licensed by this Act, by the
Commission, or by an agent of the Commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not
possessed for his or her personal consumption.
   (j)   This section shall not be construed to limit the civil or criminal
liability of the vendor or the vendor’s clerk, servant, agent, or employee for
a violation of this Act.
   (k)   The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person less than 21 years of
age who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited post-secondary
educational institution in an academic building of the institution under the
supervision of a faculty member is not prohibited by this Act if the purpose of
the consumption is solely educational and is a necessary ingredient of the
course.
   (l)   The consumption by a person less than 21 years of age of sacramental
wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is
not prohibited by this Act.
   (m)   Division (a) hereof does not apply to a person less than 21 years of
age who participates in either or both of the following:
      (1)   An undercover operation in which the person less than 21 years of
age purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person’s
employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor’s office as part
of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action; or
      (2)   An undercover operation in which the person less than 21 years of
age purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the State
Police, the Commission or a local police agency as part of an enforcement
action, provided that any initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of
alcoholic liquor by the person less than 21 years of age is under the direction
of the State Police, the Commission or the local police agency and is part of
the undercover operation. The State Police, the Commission or a local police
agency shall not recruit or attempt to recruit a person less than 21 years of
age for participation in an undercover operation at the scene of a violation of
division (a) above, being M.C.L.A. § 436.1801 or M.C.L.A. § 257.624b.
   (n)   As used in this section:
      PROBATE COURT DISPOSITION. An order of disposition of the probate court
or the family division of the circuit court for a child found to be within the
provisions of Chapter XIIA of Public Act 288 of 1939, being M.C.L.A. §§ 712A.1
to 712A.32.
      WORK LOCATION. As applicable, either the specific place or places of
employment, or the territory or territories regularly visited by the person in
pursuance of the person’s occupation, or both.
(Ord. 245, passed 7-8-1998)
§ 606.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 610: ANIMALS
Section
610.01   Purpose
610.02   Definitions
610.03   Cruelty to animals; killing or injuring
610.04   Animal nuisances
610.05   Maximum number of animals permitted
610.06   Prohibited animals
610.07   Keeping of vicious dogs
610.08   Rabies prevention
610.09   Impounding; enforcement
610.10   Surrender of dogs
610.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Animal diseases generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 287.701 et seq.
   Animals generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 287.2 et seq., 750.49 et seq., 750.50b et
seq.
§ 610.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote harmonious relationships in the
interaction between man and animal by:
   (a)   Delineating the animal owner’s or harborer’s responsibility for the
acts and behavior of his or her animals at all times;
   (b)   Providing security to residents from annoyance, intimidation, injury
and health hazards by animals ;
   (c)   Encouraging responsible pet ownership; and
   (d)   Limiting the type, amount and control of animals within the city.
(Ord. 207, passed 9-13-1989)
§ 610.02 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   ANIMAL. Any mammal, domestic or wild, other than man, which may  be affected
by rabies. ANIMAL can also mean poultry , including, but not limited to,
chickens, ducks and geese, either domestic or wild.
   ANIMAL NUISANCE. A condition or situation when an animal :
      (1)   Runs uncontrolled;
      (2)   Molests or disturbs persons or vehicles by chasing, barking or
biting;
      (3)   Attacks other animals ;
      (4)   Damages property other than that of the owner or harborer ;
      (5)   Barks, whines, howls, honks, brays, cries, meows or makes other
noises excessively;
      (6)   Creates noxious or offensive odors;
      (7)   Defecates upon any public place or upon premises not owned or
controlled by the owner or harborer , unless the feces are promptly removed by
the animal  owner or harborer;
      (8)   Is unconfined at any time unless vaccinated against rabies within
the past year, and unless such animal has a tag on its collar showing such
current vaccination . This division (8) shall apply to any animal six months of
age or older; or
      (9)   Creates an insect breeding and/or attraction site due to an
accumulation of excreta.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. A licensed facility, public or private, used to confine and
house animals  that are seized, lost, abandoned or given over by owners .
   BITE. To be seized with the teeth or jaws so that a person  or animal  has
been nipped, gripped, wounded or pierced, and so that the saliva of the biting
animal has contacted the resulting break or abrasion of the skin.
   BOARDING KENNEL. A licensed facility other than an animal  hospital, the
city pound or an animal shelter  where animals, normally dogs  and cats , not
owned by the proprietor , are temporarily sheltered, fed, watered and exercised
in return for a fee.
   CAT. Any member of the animal  species Felis Catus six months or more in
age.
   CONTROL OF AN ANIMAL. That the same is on a leash not more than eight feet
in length, is on or within a vehicle being driven or parked, or is within the
property  limits of its owner  or harborer  or upon the premises  of another
person  with the consent of that person.
   DOG. Any member of the animal  species Canis Familiaris six months or more
in age.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Includes dogs , cats , domesticated sheep, horses, cattle,
goats, swine, fowl, ducks, geese, turkeys, confined domestic hares and rabbits,
pheasants and other birds and animals  raised and/or maintained in confinement.
   HARBORER. Any person  who provides food and shelter for any domesticated
animal  on other than a periodic or temporary basis.
   OWNER. Any person  having the right of property  in any animal , who keeps
an animal, who has an animal in his or her care or custody, or knowingly
permits an animal to remain on or about any premises  occupied by him or her.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust,
estate or other legal entity.
   POULTRY. Includes chickens, ducks, geese and other fowl.
   VACCINATION. The administration of antirabic vaccine by a licensed
veterinarian at such intervals as required by state  statutes and the State
Department of Agriculture.
   VICIOUS (DANGEROUS) ANIMAL. Any animal , domestic or wild, which may  attack
a person  where he or she may lawfully be at any time, without provocation, or
any animal that bites  or otherwise injures a human or other animal.
   VOICE CONTROL. Refers to the situation when an animal :
      (1)   Is physically capable of hearing normal commands;
      (2)   Is, at the time under consideration, within reasonable proximity to
the controller so that shouting or excessively loud commands are not necessary;
      (3)   Has been adequately trained in obedience so as to be capable of
understanding control commands; and
      (4)   Either continually demonstrates, or is able to demonstrate on
demand, response to a command that will cause the animal to immediately come
into proximity to the controller and cease any kind of aggressive behavior or
action that would be offensive to other persons or animals.
(Ord. 207, passed 9-13-1989)
§ 610.03 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; KILLING OR INJURING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (a)   Beat, underfeed, overload, overwork, torment, abandon or otherwise
inhumanely treat any domestic animal anywhere in the city;
   (b)   Kill or wound, or attempt to kill or wound, or take the eggs or young
of, any game or song bird;
   (c)   Knowingly poison or cause to be poisoned any domestic animal , except
that common rat poison mixed only with vegetable or grain substances may be
exposed for the protection of property ;
   (d)   Give away any domestic animal as a prize for or as an inducement to
enter any contest, game or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a
place of amusement; or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any
business agreement when the offer is for the purpose of attracting trade;
   (e)   Fail to provide a domestic animal with necessary food, bedding,
shelter or protection from the weather; or
   (f)   Willfully and maliciously kill, maim or injure any animal .
(Ord. 56, passed 2-11-1970; Ord. 207, passed 9-13-1989)
§ 610.04 ANIMAL NUISANCES.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of any dog , cat or other
domestic animal to cause or permit such animal to perform, create or engage in
any nuisance as defined by §
610.02. Any animal found acting in any way prohibited by this chapter, in the
determination of the city, shall be deemed a nuisance and its owner or harborer
shall be subject to enforcement action.
(Ord. 207, passed 9-13-1989)
§ 610.05 MAXIMUM NUMBER OF ANIMALS PERMITTED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any resident of the city to have more than
three animals , of any combination thereof, in any residence or apartment or on
any parcel of land within the city.
   (b)   No owner or person who has custody of a dog or cat that has puppies or
kittens may retain the puppies or kittens born of the dog or cat in such number
as exceeds the permissible number set forth in division (a) above, for more
than 12 weeks after the birth of the animals . If, after the expiration of such
12 weeks, there remain more than three dogs or three cats , or any combination
thereof, in any one residence or apartment, the owner or person in custody of
the dogs or cats shall be subject to enforcement action.
(Ord. 207, passed 9-13-1989)
§ 610.06 PROHIBITED ANIMALS.
   (a)   No person  shall bring into, keep, maintain, offer for sale or barter,
in the city, except if available for purchase in any licensed pet store, any of
the following:
      (1)   Any poisonous or venomous biting or injecting species of amphibian,
arachnid or reptile, including snakes;
      (2)   Any snake not indigenous to this state ;
      (3)   Any bees or beehive. Any beehive used or occupied by bees is hereby
declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to keep or maintain any
such hive in the city;
      (4)   Any domestic animal , as defined in §
610.02, other than dogs and cats , and any poultry or domestic fowl, other than
household pets such as canaries and parakeets;
      (5)   Any vicious (dangerous) animal ;
      (6)   Nonhuman primates, including, but not limited to, animals commonly
known as monkeys, chimpanzees, orangutans, gorillas, gibbons, apes, baboons,
marmosets, tamarins, lemurs, lorises and galagos; or
      (7)   Any cattle, horses, sheep, goats or other domestic animal not
already specified.
   (b)   This section shall not prohibit a circus or other entertainment
organization, or an educational, scientific or medical institution, which has
obtained any required permits, from keeping such animals where the same are
securely and humanely confined.
(Ord. 207, passed 9-13-1989)
§ 610.07 KEEPING OF VICIOUS DOGS.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, VICIOUS DOG means:
      (1)   Any dog with a propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, to
cause injury to, or to otherwise endanger the safety of, human beings or other
domestic animal ;
      (2)   Any dog which has previously attacked or bitten a human being or
other domestic animal other than under the type of circumstances that would be
justifiable; or
      (3)   Any dog which has behaved in such a manner that the owner thereof
knows or should reasonably know that the dog is possessed of tendencies to
attack or bite human beings or other domestic animal other than under the type
of circumstances that would be justifiable.
   (b)   The keeping of vicious dogs will be subject to the following
standards.
      (1)   Leash and muzzle. No person  shall  permit a vicious dog  to go
outside its kennel or pen unless such dog is securely leashed with a leash no
longer than four feet in length. No person shall permit such a dog to be kept
on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a
person is in physical control of the leash. Such dogs  may  not be leashed to
inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings and the like. In addition,
all such dogs on a leash outside the animal’s kennel must be muzzled by a
muzzling device sufficient to prevent such dog from biting persons or other
animals .
      (2)   Confinement. All vicious dogs  shall  be securely confined indoors
or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and
muzzled as provided above. Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides
and a secure top attached to the sides. All structures used to confine such
dogs must be locked with a key or combination lock when such animal (s) are
within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom or floor
attached to the sides of the pen, or the sides of the pen must be embedded in
the ground to a depth of not less than two feet. All structures erected to
house such dogs must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the
city. All such structures must be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in
a clean and sanitary condition.
      (3)   Escape from confinement. No vicious dog  may  be kept on a porch or
patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit
such building of its own volition. In addition, no such animal  may be kept in
a house or structure where window screens or screen doors are the only obstacle
preventing the dog from exiting the structure.
      (4)   Signs. All owners , keepers or harborers  of vicious dogs  within
the city shall , within ten days of the effective date of this chapter
(Ordinance 207, passed September 13, 1989) display in a prominent place on
their premises  a sign easily readable by the public using the words “BEWARE OF
DOG ”. In addition, similar signs are required to be posted on the kennel or
pen of such animal (s).
      (5)   Failure to comply. It shall  be unlawful for the owner , keeper  or
harborer  of a vicious dog  within the city to fail to comply with the
requirements and conditions set forth in this section. Any dog found to be the
subject of a violation of this section shall be subject to immediate seizure
and impoundment.
(Ord. 207, passed 9-13-1989)
§ 610.08 RABIES PREVENTION.
   (a)   Any person who has in his or her possession any animal which has
contracted rabies, which has been subjected to the same, which is suspected of
having rabies or which has bitten any person, shall , upon demand of any police
officer or health officer, produce and surrender up such animal to be held for
observation as hereinafter provided.
   (b)   Any person owning or harboring any animal which has been attacked or
bitten by any cat or other animal showing the symptoms of rabies shall
immediately notify the Police Department of his or her possession of such
animal.
   (c)   Any animal impounded for observation for rabies shall be held until
released by the Chief of Police or otherwise disposed of. Any animal impounded
for having bitten any person shall be held for not less than five days. If any
complaint has been made and filed before any court having jurisdiction of such
cases, whereby an order that such animal be killed or confined is sought, then
such animal shall be held for such further time until such case is finally
disposed of. All other impounded animals under this chapter shall be held for
not less than 48 hours and shall be released to their respective owners upon
payment of such reasonable fee as the City Manager  may establish, with the
approval of Council.
   (d)   The Police Department shall notify the owner of every animal which is
impounded, if the owner of such animal can be ascertained, as soon as possible
after such animal has been impounded.
   (e)   After such animal has been kept for 48 hours and has not been claimed
by its owner , such animal may be destroyed in a humane manner if it is
diseased, injured or of little value, or such animal may, at the discretion of
the Chief of Police, be sold or given away to any person whom the Chief of
Police believes will keep and care for such animal in a proper and humane
manner.
(Ord. 207, passed 9-13-1989)
§ 610.09 IMPOUNDING; ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   (1)   Any animal in the city which is found doing any of the acts
prohibited by, or is at large under circumstances prohibited by, this chapter,
or which is suspected of having rabies or of having bitten any person or
animal, may be seized and impounded by any police officer of the city.
      (2)   The person or owner in control of such animal  may also be subject
to a criminal citation.
   (b)   Council may , by resolution, authorize county officials to enforce or
assist in the enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 207, passed 9-13-1989)
§ 610.10 SURRENDER OF DOGS.
   Any dog , though confined within the property of its owner , which is doing
any of the acts which are prohibited by this chapter, shall be surrendered by
its owner to the possession of any police officer of the city upon demand or by
order of the court upon conviction of a violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 111, passed 10-12-1977)
§ 610.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 618: DRUGS
Section
618.01   Possession and distribution of controlled substances
618.02   Paraphernalia
618.03   Use or possession of tobacco products by minors
618.04   Transportation or possession of usable marihuana; violation as
misdemeanor
618.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Drugs and medicine generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 333.7201 et seq.
§ 618.01 POSSESSION AND DISTRIBUTION OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   (a)   No person shall possess, sell, offer for sale, use, distribute,
administer, dispense, prescribe or give away any narcotic, narcotic drugs,
marihuana or other controlled substance, as defined in M.C.L.A. 333.7201 et
seq., as amended. However, nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to
prohibit the possession, sale, offering for sale, distributing, administering,
dispensing or prescribing of any of the drugs or their derivatives mentioned in
this section in the manner and under the circumstances provided in division (b)
below.
   (b)   A manufacturer, wholesaler, pharmacist, medical doctor, osteopathic
physician, dentist, veterinarian, chiropodist or public or private hospital,
sanitarium or institution maintained or conducted in whole or in part for the
treatment of disability, disease, inebriety or drug addiction may purchase,
receive, possess, sell, distribute, prescribe, administer or dispense the
narcotic and dangerous drugs, controlled substances and marihuana described in
division (a) above, provided that he, she or it has complied with all
provisions as required by the United States Internal Revenue Code, as the same
now exists or may be hereafter amended, and M.C.L.A. 333.7201 et seq., as
amended. No medical doctor, osteopathic physician or other person specified in
this section, in any manner authorized to prescribe narcotic or dangerous
drugs, shall prescribe such drugs for his or her own use, nor shall any
druggist honor such a prescription. All narcotic or dangerous drugs obtained
pursuant to this section shall be kept in the original package or container in
which they were received, but this requirement shall not be construed to apply
to any duly licensed medical doctor, osteopathic physician, dentist,
veterinarian or chiropodist, or to any authorized person acting directly under
his or her supervision or control.
   (c)   Any fraud, scheme, device, trick, deceit, misrepresentation,
subterfuge or other form or concealment for the purpose of obtaining money or
any other thing of value by the sale, furnishing, supplying or giving away of
any substance represented to be marihuana or a drug as described in division
(a) above, when the same may or may not be such a drug, shall be deemed a
violation of this section.
(Ord. 113, passed 10-9-1977)
§ 618.02 PARAPHERNALIA.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
      COCAINE SPOON. A spoon with a bowl reasonably adapted or designed to hold
or administer cocaine as its primary use, and/or has been previously used to
hold or administer cocaine, and/or is otherwise unsuited for the typical,
lawful uses of a spoon. A cocaine spoon may  or may not be merchandised on a
chain and may or may not be labeled as COCAINE SPOON or COKE SPOON.
      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any drug, substance or immediate precursor
enumerated in Schedules 1 through 5, Act 368 of 1978, Public Health Code, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 333.7211 et seq., as amended.
      MARIHUANA OR HASHISH PIPE. A pipe characterized by a bowl which is
reasonably adapted or designed for smoking marihuana or hashish as its primary
use, rather than lawful smoking tobacco, and/or which has been previously used
for smoking marihuana or hashish, and which may  or may not be equipped with a
screen.
      PARAPHERNALIA. An empty gelatin capsule, hypodermic syringe or needle,
cocaine spoon, marihuana pipe, hashish pipe or any other instrument, implement,
or device which is primarily adapted, designed, and/or has been previously used
for the administration or use of any controlled substance.
      PERSON. Any individual, corporation, government, governmental subdivision
or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association.
   (b)   Prohibitions. No person shall  possess, sell, offer for sale, display,
furnish, supply or give away any empty gelatin capsule, hypodermic syringe or
needle, cocaine spoon, marihuana pipe, hashish pipe or any other instrument,
implement or device which is primarily adapted or designed for the
administration or use of any controlled substance, and/or has otherwise been
previously been used for the administration or use of any controlled substance.
   (c)   Exceptions. The prohibition contained in division (b) above shall  not
apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians,
technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical
laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists,
veterinarians, pharmacists, or embalmers in the normal lawful course of their
respective businesses or professions, nor to common carriers or warehouses or
their employees engaged in the lawful transportation of such paraphernalia, nor
to public officers or employees while engaged in the performance of their
official duties, nor to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma or other
medical condition requiring self-injection, nor to persons in lawful possession
of a license, or government authorized card authorizing the ingestion of
marihuana for medical purposes.
(Ord. 175, passed 6-11-1986; Ord. 1509-01, passed 10-14-2015)
§ 618.03 USE OR POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY MINORS.
   (a)   No person under 18 years of age shall possess or use cigarettes,
cigars, chewing tobacco, snuff, or tobacco in any other form in the city.
   (b)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
(Ord. 08-04, passed 3-12-2008)
§ 618.04 TRANSPORTATION OR POSSESSION OF USABLE MARIHUANA; VIOLATION AS
MISDEMEANOR.
   A person shall not transport or possess usable marihuana as defined in §
26423 of the Public Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §
333.26423, in or upon a motor vehicle or any self-propelled vehicle designed
for land travel unless the usable marihuana is one or more of the following:
   (a)   Enclosed in a case that is carried in the trunk of the vehicle; or
   (b)   Enclosed in a case that is not readily accessible from the interior of
the vehicle, if the vehicle in which the person is traveling does not have a
trunk.
(Ord. 2013-01, passed 4-17-2013)
§ 618.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 660: OFFENSES RELATING TO PERSONS
Section
660.01   Assault and assault and battery of individual; domestic violence
660.02   Menacing
660.03   Harboring runaway minors
660.99   Penalty
§ 660.01 ASSAULT AND ASSAULT AND BATTERY OF INDIVIDUAL; DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (a)   A person who assaults or assaults and batters an individual, if no
other punishment is prescribed by law , is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500, or
both.
      (1)   An individual shall commit an assault by, with intent, attempting
to commit a battery, or otherwise committing an unlawful act, which places
another in reasonable apprehension of receiving an immediate battery.
      (2)   An individual is guilty of assault and battery, by committing a
willful act of touching another person in consummation of an assault.
   (b)   A person who assaults or assaults and batters a family or household
member, in an act of domestic violence, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500, or
both.
      DOMESTIC VIOLENCE. The occurrence of any of the following by a person
that is not in act of self-defense:
         A.   Causing or attempting to cause physical or mental harm to a
family or household member;
         B.   Placing a family or household member in fear of physical or
mental harm;
         C.   Causing or attempting to cause a family or household member to
engage in involuntary sexual activity by force, threat of force, or duress; and
         D.   Engaging in activity toward a family or household member that
would cause a reasonable person to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated,
threatened, harassed or molested.
      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Any of the following:
         A.   A spouse or former spouse;
         B.   An individual with whom the person resides or has resided;
         C.   An individual with whom the person has or has had a dating
relationship (dating relationship means frequent intimate associations
primarily characterized by the expectation of affectional involvement. Dating
relationship does not include a casual relationship or an ordinary
fraternization between two individuals in a business or social context);
         D.   An individual with whom the person is or has engaged in a sexual
relationship;
         E.   An individual to whom the person is related or was formerly
related by marriage;
         F.   An individual with whom the person has a child in common; and
         G.   The minor children of any of the preceding persons.
(Ord. 102, passed 3-9-1977; Ord. 237, passed 10-11-2000; Ord. 02-04, passed 12-
11-2002)
§ 660.02 MENACING.
   No person shall , by a physical act, intentionally place or attempt to place
another person in fear of imminent physical injury or recklessly engage in
conduct which creates a substantial risk of physical injury to another person.
(Ord. 102, passed 3-9-1977)
§ 660.03 HARBORING RUNAWAY MINORS.
   (a)   No person shall knowingly and willfully aid or abet a minor child
under the age of 17 years to violate an order of any court, or knowingly or
willfully conceal a minor child having taken flight of the custody of the
court, a parent or legal guardian.
   (b)   No person shall be any act, or by any word, encourage, contribute
toward, cause or tend to cause any minor child under the age of 17 years to
become neglected or delinquent.
   (c)   A person who commits either of the above prescribed conduct shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or
a fine of not more than $500, or both.
(Ord. 08-03, passed 3-12-2008)
§ 660.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 662: OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
Section
662.01   Burglary
662.02   Theft
662.03   Robbery
662.04   Criminal trespass
662.05   Destruction of trees, shrubs, plants or soil
662.06   Property destruction
662.07   Defacing or damaging school property
662.08   Criminal tampering
662.09   Desecration
662.10   Loitering prohibited
662.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Malicious destruction of property, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.377a, 750.377b
   Malicious destruction of property by minors, see M.C.L.A. § 600.2913
   Theft generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.356 et seq.
   Real estate generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 554.1 et seq.
§ 662.01 BURGLARY.
   No person shall knowingly enter or remain unlawfully in a building with the
intent to commit therein a crime against a person or property .
(Ord. 106, passed 3-9-1977)
§ 662.02 THEFT.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      DECEPTION.
         A.   Occurs when a person knowingly:
            1.   Creates or confirms another’s impression which is false and
which the defendant does not believe to be true;
            2.   Fails to correct a false impression which the defendant
previously has created or confirmed;
            3.   Prevents another from acquiring information pertinent to the
disposition of the property involved;
            4.   Sells or otherwise transfers or encumbers property , failing
to disclose a lien, adverse claim or other legal impediment to the enjoyment of
the property , whether that impediment is or is not a matter of official
record; or
            5.   Promises performance which the defendant does not intend to
perform or knows will not be performed.
         B.   DECEPTION does not, however, include falsity as to matters having
no pecuniary significance or puffing by statements unlikely to deceive ordinary
persons in the group addressed.
         C.   PUFFING means an exaggerated commendation of wares in
communications addressed to the public or to a class or a group.
      DEPRIVE PERMANENTLY.
         A.   To withhold property or cause it to be withheld from a person
permanently or for so extended a period or under such circumstances that the
major portion of its economic value, or of the use and benefits thereof, is
lost to him or her;
         B.   To dispose of the property so as to make it unlikely that the
owner will recover it;
         C.   To retain the property with intent to restore it to the owner if
the owner purchases or leases it back or pays a reward or compensation for its
return;
         D.   To sell, give, pledge or otherwise transfer any interest in the
property ; or
         E.   To subject the property to the claim of a person other than the
owner .
      OBTAINS OR EXERTS CONTROL or OBTAINS OR EXERTS CONTROL OVER PROPERTY.
Includes, but is not limited to, the taking or carrying away of, or the sale,
conveyance or transfer of title to, interest in or possession of, property ,
and includes, but is not limited to, conduct heretofore defined or known as
common law  larceny by trespassory taking, common law  larceny by trick,
larceny by conversion, embezzlement, extortion or obtaining property  by false
pretenses.
      OWNER. A person, other than the defendant, who has possession or any
other interest in the property  involved, even though that interest or
possession is unlawful, and without whose consent the defendant has no
authority to exert control over the property .
      PROPERTY. Any money, personal property , real property , thing in action,
evidence of debt or contract, or article of value of any kind.
      THEFT.
         A.   To knowingly obtain or exert unauthorized control over property
of the owner thereof;
         B.   To knowingly obtain by deception control over property of the
owner thereof; or
         C.   To intend to permanently deprive the owner of such property .
   (b)   The crime of theft is committed when a person, under the definition of
theft in division (a) above, takes property of any value from the person of
another.
   (c)   The crime of theft is committed when a person takes property of any
value from the person of another or in a building or from a vehicle or from any
other location.
(Ord. 106, passed 3-9-1977)
§ 662.03 ROBBERY.
   No person, in the course of committing a theft, shall :
   (a)   Use force against the person of the owner of the property involved, or
of any other person present, with intent to overcome his or her physical
resistance or physical power of resistance; or
   (b)   Threaten the imminent use of force against the person of anyone who is
present with intent to compel acquiescence to the taking of or escaping with
the property involved.
(Ord. 106, passed 3-9-1977)
§ 662.04 CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   No person shall knowingly:
   (a)   Enter or remain unlawfully in a dwelling;
   (b)   Enter or remain unlawfully in or upon any premises ; or
   (c)   Enter or remain unlawfully in or upon premises which are enclosed in a
manner designed to exclude intruders or which are fenced.
(Ord. 103, passed 3-9-1977)
§ 662.05 DESTRUCTION OF TREES, SHRUBS, PLANTS OR SOIL.
   (a)   No person shall willfully, wantonly and without cause cut down,
destroy or injure any tree, shrub, grass, turf, plant, crops or soil of
another, that is standing, growing or located on the land of another. A person
convicted under this section shall be required to make full restitution for any
damage done.
   (b)   Within 30 days after the conviction of a person for a violation of
division (a) above, who committed the offense with a vehicle, as defined in §
79 of Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.79, a complaint may be made
by the arresting officer or the officer’s superior before the court from which
the warrant was issued, which complaint shall be under oath and shall contain a
description of the motor vehicle with which the offense took place, praying
that the motor vehicle be impounded as provided in this section. Upon the
filing of the complaint, the court shall issue an order to the owner of the
motor vehicle to show cause why the motor vehicle shall not be impounded. The
order to show cause shall have a date and time fixed in the order for hearing,
which date shall not be less than ten days after the issuance of the order, and
shall be served by delivering a true copy to the owner not less than three full
days before the date of hearing, or, if the owner cannot be located, by sending
a true copy by certified mail to the last known address of the owner. If the
owner is a nonresident of the state , service may be made upon the Secretary of
State as provided in § 403 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of
1949, as amended, being M.C.L.A. § 257.403. If the court determines upon the
hearing of the order to show cause, from competent and relevant evidence, that
at the time of the commission of the offense the motor vehicle was involved in
the commission of said offense, the court shall authorize the impounding of the
vehicle for a period (to be determined by the court) of not less than 15 days
nor more than 30 days. The court’s order authorizing the impounding of the
vehicle shall authorize a law enforcement officer to take possession, without
other process, of the motor vehicle, wherever located, and to store the vehicle
in a public or private garage at the expense and risk of the owner of the
vehicle. Appeal shall lie from the order to the Circuit Court of the county and
the provisions governing the taking of appeals from judgments for damages shall
be applicable to the appeal. This section shall not prevent a bona fide lien
holder from exercising rights under a lien.
   (c)   In a complaint under this section, it is sufficient to allege the
offense in the language of this section, and it is not necessary to allege that
the intent was malicious.
(Ord. 235, passed 4-17-1996)
§ 662.06 PROPERTY DESTRUCTION.
   (a)   No person, with intent to damage property and having no right to do so
or any reasonable grounds to believe that he or she has such a right, shall
damage any property of any value over $1.
   (b)   No person shall destroy, injure or deface, or in any manner interfere
with or hinder the use of, any public building or any public property
whatsoever.
(Ord. 56, passed 2-11-1970; Ord. 103, passed 3-9-1977)
§ 662.07 DEFACING OR DAMAGING SCHOOL PROPERTY.
   (a)   No person shall mark with any substance or in any other manner deface
or do damage to any building owned, occupied or otherwise used as a school in
the city.
   (b)   No person shall mark with any substance or in any other manner deface
or do damage to any fence, tree, lawn or other fixture situated on lands owned,
occupied or otherwise used by a school in the city.
(Ord. 58, passed 8-12-1970)
§ 662.08 CRIMINAL TAMPERING.
   No person, having no right to do so or any reasonable grounds to believe
that he or she has such a right, shall tamper with the property of another with
intent to cause substantial inconvenience to that person or to another.
(Ord. 106, passed 3-9-1977)
§ 662.09 DESECRATION.
   No person shall intentionally:
   (a)   Desecrate any public monument or structure or place of worship or
burial; or
   (b)   Desecrate in a public place the national or state flag or any other
subject of veneration by the public or a substantial segment thereof.
(Ord. 106, passed 3-9-1977)
§ 662.10 LOITERING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or prowls in a
place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law -abiding individuals under
circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon
appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or
manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object. Unless flight
by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a police officer
shall , prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the
person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted,
by requesting the person to identify himself or herself and to explain his or
her presence or conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this
section if the police officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if
it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and if it
had been believed by the police officer at the time, would have dispelled the
alarm. Any police officer may arrest any person suspected of being a loiterer
or prowler without a warrant if it reasonably appears the delay in arresting
the suspect caused by obtaining a warrant would result in the suspect's escape.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being warned by a
police officer, to loiter, stand, sit, or lie in or upon any public or quasi-
public sidewalk , street , curb, crosswalk, walkway area, park, mall or that
portion of private property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or
obstruct unreasonably the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon. It
shall be unlawful for any person to block, obstruct, or prevent free access to
the entrance to any building open to the public.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any
thoroughfare or place open to the public for the purpose of inducing, enticing,
soliciting, or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution. The
circumstances considered in determining whether such action is consistent with
the intent to induce, entice, solicit, or procure another to commit an act of
prostitution include but are not limited to, the person is a known prostitute
or panderer and repeatedly beckons in the attempt to stop or engage male or
female passersby in conversation or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor
vehicles by engaging their operators by hailing, waving of arms, or other
bodily gestures. The violator's conduct must be such as to demonstrate a
specific intent to induce, entice, solicit, or procure another to commit an act
of prostitution. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this division
unless the arresting officer first affords the person an opportunity to explain
his or her conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating this division if
it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and consists of a
lawful purpose.
   (d)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACE has the following
definition unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning: an area generally visible to public view, including streets,
sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles
(whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general public, including
those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and
entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
(Ord. 2305-04, passed 6-14-2023)
§ 662.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 666: PEACE DISTURBANCES
Section
666.01   Disorderly conduct
666.02   Profane language
666.03   Public intoxication
666.04   Peace disturbances in schools
666.05   Open house parties
666.06   Noise
666.07   School fighting
 
666.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Disorderly conduct generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.167 et seq.
   Gambling, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.301 et seq.
   Prostitution, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.448 et seq.
§ 666.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall engage in disorderly conduct in the city. A person
shall be deemed to be engaged in disorderly conduct if he or she is:
      (1)   A person of sufficient ability who refuses or neglects to support
his or her family;
      (2)   A common prostitute;
      (3)   A window peeper;
      (4)   A person who engages in an illegal occupation or business;
      (5)   A person in the possession of alcoholic beverages on any public
school grounds within the city;
      (6)   A person who is engaged in indecent or obscene conduct in a public
place ;
      (7)   A vagrant;
      (8)   A person found begging in a public place ;
      (9)   A person who, without lawful authority, disturbs any lawful
assembly or meeting;
      (10)   A person who obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
      (11)   A person who congregates with other persons in a public place and
refuses to comply with a lawful order of the police to disperse;
      (12)   A person who creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition
by any act that serves no legitimate purpose; or
      (13)   A person who telephones any other person repeatedly or causes any
person to be telephoned repeatedly for the sole purpose of harassing or
molesting such other person or his or her family, whether or not conversation
ensues, except for telephone calls made for legitimate business purposes, or
who uses any threatening, vulgar, indecent, obscene, immoral or insulting
language over a telephone.
   (b)   Municipal civil infraction. In addition to the criminal penalties, as
set forth in this section, and any amendments thereto, and hereby adopting the
text for the definition of disorderly conduct and criminal penalties for said
conduct, said actions may be treated as a municipal civil infraction, as set
out in §
202.98.
(Ord. 167, passed 9-10-1986; Ord. 2305-05, passed 6-14-2023; Ord. 2502-03,
passed 3-12-2025)
§ 666.02 PROFANE LANGUAGE.
   No person shall use profane or obscene language in a public place in the
city.
(Ord. 56, passed 2-11-1970)
§ 666.03 PUBLIC INTOXICATION.
   No person shall be intoxicated in a public place and either directly
endanger the safety of another person or of property or act in a manner that
causes a public disturbance.
(Ord. 167, passed 9-10-1986)
§ 666.04 PEACE DISTURBANCES IN SCHOOLS.
   (a)   As used in this section, STUDENT means any person of school age and
enrolled in the school at which he or she is then present.
   (b)   No person, while on public or private grounds adjacent to any building
in which a school or any class thereof is in session, shall willfully make or
assist in making any noise or diversion which disturbs or tends to disturb the
peace, quiet or good order of such school or class thereof.
   (c)   No person, while on public or private grounds adjacent to any building
or land owned, occupied or otherwise used by a school in the city, in or on
which building or land any gathering or function is in progress, whether in the
day or night, shall willfully make or assist in making any noise or diversion
which disturbs or tends to disturb the peace, quiet or good order of such
gathering of function.
   (d)   No person, while in any building owned, occupied or otherwise used by
a school in the city, shall utter any profane, indecent or immoral language
towards any person or while within the hearing of any other person.
   (e)   No person, not a student or employee of any school located in the
city, or not a parent or guardian of any student enrolled therein, shall remain
in any school during normal school hours without securing the written
permission of the principal or person in charge of the school.
   (f)   No person, not a student or employee of any school located in the
city, or not a parent or guardian of any student enrolled therein, shall remain
on any lands owned, occupied or used by any school in the city, and adjacent to
a school, without securing the written permission of the principal or person in
charge of the school.
(Ord. 58, passed 8-12-1970)
§ 666.05 OPEN HOUSE PARTIES.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      ADULT. A person 17 years of age or older.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage containing more than 0.5% of alcohol by
weight. The percentage of alcohol by weight shall  be determined in accordance
with M.C.L.A. § 436.1105, as amended.
      CONTROL. Any form of regulation or dominion, including a possessory
right.
      DRUG. A controlled substance as defined now or hereafter by the Public
Acts of the state . Currently, controlled substances are defined by M.C.L.A. §§
333.7211 et seq., as amended.
      MINOR. A person not legally permitted, by reason of age, to possess
alcoholic beverages pursuant to M.C.L.A.§ 436.1109, as amended.
      OPEN HOUSE PARTY. A social gathering of persons at a residence , other
than the owner  or persons with rights of possession, or their immediate family
members.
      RESIDENCE. A home, apartment, condominium or other dwelling unit, and
includes the curtilage of such dwelling unit.
   (b)   No adult having control of any residence shall allow an open house
party to take place at such residence if any alcoholic beverage or drug is
possessed or consumed at such residence by any minor, where the adult knew or
reasonably should have known that an alcoholic beverage or drug was in the
possession of or being consumed by a minor at such residence, and where the
adult failed to take reasonable steps to prevent such possession or consumption
of the alcoholic beverage or drug at such residence.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to legally protected religious
observances or legally protected educational activities.
(Ord. 176, passed 6-11-1986)
§ 666.06 NOISE.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      COMMERCIAL AREA. A parcel of land  zoned for or legally used for
commercial purposes. A parcel of land  which is zoned B-1, B-2, B-3 or OS-1, or
which is legally being devoted to a use which is a principal permitted use in
such zoning district, is presumed to be such an area.
      CONSTRUCTION. Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial
repair, alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition.
      CONTINUOUS NOISE. Any noise whose level varies less than five dB(A)
during a period of at least five minutes.
      DAYTIME. Unless otherwise specifically noted, means the hours from 7:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
      dB(A). Decibels on the A-weighted network of a sound-level meter as
specified in American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Standards 5-1.4,
1971.
      DEMOLITION. Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces or similar
property .
      EMERGENCY. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property  damage which demands immediate action.
      IMPULSIVE NOISE. A short burst of sound not exceeding ten seconds in
duration.
      INDUSTRIAL AREA. A parcel of land  zoned for or used for industrial
purposes. A parcel of land  which is zoned I-1 or I-2 or is legally being
devoted to a use which is a principal permitted use in such zoning district is
presumed to be such an area.
      INTERMITTENT NOISE. Any noise whose level remains constant and which goes
on and off during a course of measurement of at least ten seconds, or goes on
and off during a period of at least five minutes, but which exceeds ten seconds
in duration each time that it is on.
      NIGHTTIME. Unless otherwise specifically noted, means the hours from 10:
00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
      NOISE. Any sound occurring on either a perpetual, continuous,
intermittent or impulsive basis. It also means the intensity, frequency,
duration and character of sound, including sound and vibration of subaudible
frequencies.
      NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any noise which:
         A.   Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals;
         B.   Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensibilities;
or
         C.   Endangers or injures personal or real property .
      PERPETUAL NOISE. Any noise whose level varies less than three dB(A)
during a period of at least 30 minutes.
      PERSON. Any individual, association, partnership or corporation.
      REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY. An imaginary line along the ground surface and
its vertical extension, which separates the real property  owned by one person
from that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding real
property  divisions.
      RECEIVING LAND USE. The use (commercial, industrial or residential) of
the land  on or at which a noise is received.
      RESIDENTIAL AREA. A parcel of land  zoned for or legally used for
residential purposes. A parcel of land  which is zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-T, LDMS
or HDMS, or which is legally being devoted to a use which is a principal
permitted use in such zoning district, is presumed to be such an area.
      WEEKDAY. Any day, Monday through Friday, which is not a legal holiday.
   (b)   Prohibited acts. It shall  be unlawful for any person to unreasonably
make, continue or cause to made or continued any noise disturbance as follows.
Noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any
public space or public right-of-sway shall  be exempt from the provisions of
this section:
      (1)   Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices.
Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio,
television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier or similar
device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound:
         A.   In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a real
property boundary;
         B.   In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance at 50 feet from
such device, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public right of way or
public space or in a boat on public waters; or
         C.   In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance to any person
other than the operator of the device, when operated by any passenger on a
common carrier.
      (2)   Loudspeakers; public address systems.
         A.   Using or operating, for any noncommercial purpose, any
loudspeaker, public address system or similar device during the nighttime so
that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential real
property boundary.
         B.   Using or operating, for any commercial purpose, any loudspeaker,
public address system or similar device so that:
            1.   The sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a real
property boundary; or
            2.   During the nighttime or on a public right-of-way or public
space.
      (3)   Street sales. Offering for sale or selling anything by shouting or
outcry within a residential or commercial area of the city, except with a
permit or license issued pursuant to any other provision of these codified
ordinances;
      (4)   Animals and birds. Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or
bird which frequently or for continued durations, howls, barks, meows, squawks
or makes other sounds which create a noise disturbance across a residential
real property  boundary;
      (5)   Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or
other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans
or similar objects during the nighttime in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance across a residential real property  boundary;
      (6)   Vehicle or motorboat repairs and testing. Repairing, rebuilding,
modifying or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motorboat in such a
manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property
boundary;
      (7)   Places of public entertainment. Operating, playing or permitting
the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical
instrument, sound amplifier or similar device which produces, reproduces or
amplifies sound in any place of public entertainment at a sound level greater
that 100 dB(A) as read by the slow response of a sound-level meter at any point
that is normally occupied by a customer, unless a conspicuous and legible sign
is located outside such place near each public entrance, stating “Warning:
Sound Levels Within May Cause Permanent Hearing Impairment”;
      (8)   Explosives, firearms and similar devices. The use or firing of
explosives, firearms or similar devices which create impulsive sound so as to
cause a noise disturbance across a real property  boundary or in a public space
or right-of-way;
      (9)   Motorboats. Operating or permitting the operation of any motorboat
on any lake, river, stream or other waterway in such a manner as to exceed a
sound level of 85 dB(A) measured from a distance of 50 feet or from the nearest
shoreline, whichever distance is less; and
      (10)   Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any
mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool,
snowblower or similar device used outdoors in residential areas during the
nighttime so as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property
boundary, except in an emergency.
   (c)   Impulsive noise levels; prohibitions.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful
for any person to operate or cause or permit to be operated any source of
impulsive noise within the city which exceeds the maximum permissible sound
levels established in this division (c), when measured at or within the real
property boundary line of the receiving land use.
      (2)   Maximum permissible sound levels for receiving land uses are hereby
established as follows:
 
                 Daytime  Nightime
Residential area 80dB(A)  70dB(A)
Commercial area  90dB(A)  80dB(A)
Industrial area  100dB(A) 90dB(A)
 
   (d)   Intermittent noise levels; prohibitions.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful
for any person to operate or cause or permit to be operated any source of
intermittent noise within the city which exceeds the maximum permissible sound
levels established in this division (d), when measured at or within the real
property boundary line of the receiving land use.
      (2)   Maximum permissible sound levels for receiving land uses are hereby
established as follows:
 
                 Daytime Nightime
Residential area 70dB(A) 60dB(A)
Commercial area  75dB(A) 65dB(A)
Industrial area  80dB(A) 15dB(A)
 
   (e)   Continuous noise levels; prohibitions.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful
for any person to operate or cause or permit to be operated any source of
continuous noise within the city which exceeds the maximum permissible sound
levels established in this division (e), when measured at or within the real
property line of the receiving land use.
      (2)   Maximum permissible sound levels for receiving land uses are hereby
established as follows:
 
                Daytime Nightime
Residential area 60dB(A) 50dB(A)
Commercial area  65dB(A) 60dB(A)
Industrial area  70dB(A) 65dB(A)
 
   (f)   Perpetual noise levels; prohibitions.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful
for any person to operate or cause or permit to be operated any source of
perpetual noise within the city which exceeds the maximum permissible sound
levels established in this division (f), when measured at or within the real
property boundary line of the receiving land use.
      (2)   Maximum permissible sound levels for receiving land uses are hereby
established as follows:
 
                Daytime Nightime
Residential area 50dB(A) 45dB(A)
Commercial area  55dB(A) 50dB(A)
Industrial area  60dB(A) 55dB(A)
 
   (g)   Exemptions. The provisions of divisions (c) through (f) above shall
not apply to the following:
      (1)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency;
      (2)   The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work;
      (3)   Warning devices necessary for public safety, such as police, fire
and ambulance sirens and horns;
      (4)   Motor vehicles and equipment for which noise levels are regulated
by Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.707c, as amended, and/or the
traffic code of the city;
      (5)   Aircraft and trains;
      (6)   The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or
repair of any building as follows:
         A.   Between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays; or
         B.   At any other time if a permit for the same has been secured from
the Building Department and if the Department finds the following facts to
exist:
            1.   Issuance of the permit is in the interest of public health or
safety;
            2.   The public health and safety will not be impaired; or
            3.   The permit is necessary to avoid substantial loss or
inconvenience to an interested party.
      (7)   The operation of domestic tools, such as lawn mowers, snowblowers,
edgers and the like, when such tools are operated in a manner and frequency
that is normal and customary in the community.
   (h)   Complaints. A citizen will not be required to sign a complaint
pertaining to a violation of this section if such complaint can be validly
signed by the enforcing officer.
   ILLUSTRATIVE GUIDELINES (DIVISIONS (c) THROUGH (f) ABOVE)
 
            Impulsive Intermittent     Continuous       Perpetual
Receiving   Noise     Noise            Noise            Noise
Land Use    (0 to 10  (10 seconds to 5 (5 minutes to 30 (over 30 minutes)
            seconds)  minutes)         minutes)
            Day Night Day Night        Day Night        Day Night
Residential 80  70    70  60           50  50           45
Commercial  90  80    75  65           65  60           55  50
Industrial  100 90    85  75           70  65           60  55
 
   Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.707c, referred to in division (g)(4)
above, establishes the following levels for motor vehicles:
 
Vehicle Size
Speed Limit      8,500 Lbs. Or More Motorcycles or Mopeds All Other
35 mph or less   86dB(A)            82dB(A)               76dB(A)
More than 35 mph 90dB(A)            86dB(A)               82dB(A)
Noise Around Our Homes
Noise Source Sound Level for Operator (in dB(A))
Noise Around Our Homes
Noise Source            Sound Level for Operator (in dB(A))
Refrigerator            40
Floor fan               35 to 70
Clothes dryer           55
Washing machine         47 to 78
Dishwasher              54 to 85
Hair dryer              59 to 80
Vacuum cleaner          62 to 85
Sewing machine          64 to 74
Electric shaver         75
Food disposal (grinder) 67 to 93
Electric lawn edger      
Home shop tools          
Gasoline power mower     
Gasoline riding mower    
Chain saw                
Stereo                   
 
Intensity Levels and Human Speech-Hearing
dB
  Faint speech at three foot distance
  Whisper (average)
  Very quiet speech (faint)
  Threshold of hearing (young adult)
 
(Ord. 228, passed 11-10-1993)
§ 666.07 SCHOOL FIGHTING.
   (a)   Definitions.
      FIGHTING. Personal violence between two or more person s which includes,
but is not limited to, punching, grabbing, wrestling, pulling, shoving,
slapping, or other un-consented physical contact or threat of physical contact.
      SCHOOL FIGHTING. Fighting during school, any event held before school,
any event held after school, or any social or sporting event hosted at school.
      SCHOOL PROPERTY. The real property owned or leased by a school,
including, but not limited to, property used for a school sponsored event, a
bus, school provided transportation, or any location during transfer to and
from school or any school sponsored or related event. SCHOOL PROPERTY includes
property not owned by the school, where a school sponsored event is occurring,
including adjacent parking areas or other areas used for travel to the location
of the event.
   (b)   Prohibited conduct. No person s shall engage, participate or otherwise
be involved in any school fighting or fighting on school property.
   (c)   Penalty. Any person(s) failing to comply with the above section is
responsible for a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than $200,
plus costs and any court ordered remedial requirements. A second offense or
subsequent violation shall result in a fine of up to $500, plus costs and any
court ordered remedial measures. Should the court order any remedial measures,
including but not limited to community service and/or anger management classes,
the person (s) ordered to participate in the remedial measures are responsible
for any and all costs associated with said remedial measures.
(Ord. 2502-02, passed 3-12-2025)
§ 666.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   See §
202.99 if no specific penalty is provided.
   (b)   A person served with an appearance ticket for a violation of §
666.06 may waive his or her rights to an arraignment on such charge and
voluntarily enter a plea of guilty thereto and pay a fine of $50 at the office
of the district court clerk, but only if said person has never before been
convicted of any violation of such section.
(Ord. 228, passed 11-10-1993)
CHAPTER 672: RAILROADS
Section
672.01   Street obstructions
672.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Notice of hearing of planning municipal commission re master plan, see
M.C.L.A. § 125.3839
   Railroad crossings, see M.C.L.A. §§ 462.101 et seq.
   Railroads generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 462.2 et seq., 462.101 et seq., 750.511
et seq.
   Railroad property, see M.C.L.A. §§ 462.101 et seq.
§ 672.01 STREET OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (a)   No railroad company shall permit any of its trains to obstruct any
vehicular traffic on public streets or highways for longer than five minutes at
any one time.
   (b)   No railroad company shall permit successive train movements to
obstruct any vehicular traffic on any public street or highway until all
vehicular traffic previously delayed by such train movement has been cleared or
a period of five minutes has elapsed between train movements.
   (c)   Each offense under this section shall be a separate violation.
However, blockings caused by accident or mechanical failure shall not be
offenses under this section, provided that the engineer or person in charge of
the train advises the city office, at the time of such blocking, of the reason
for the blocking, and, in addition thereto, submits to the city, within ten
days thereafter, through his or her superior, a written report of the reasons
for the blocking. Failure to comply with both of these reporting requirements
shall cause the blocking to constitute an offense under this section.
(Ord. 105, passed 3-9-1977)
§ 672.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 676: SAFETY, SANITATION AND HEALTH
Section
676.01   Long grass and weeds
676.02   Disabled motor vehicles
676.03   Abandoned refrigerators and airtight containers
676.04   Littering; undesirable accumulations
676.05   Spitting
676.06   Discharging weapons and playing games on streets
676.07   Bungee jumping
676.08   Odor causing nuisance
676.09   Property maintenance
676.99   Penalty
Constitutional reference:
   Health and sanitation generally, see Mich. Const. Art. 4, § 51
Statutory reference:
   Health and sanitation generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 333.1101 et seq., 750.466
et seq.
   Health and sanitation in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.3, 117.4i
   Municipal health departments, see M.C.L.A. §§ 333.1101 et seq.
   Public safety generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.493 et seq.
§ 676.01 LONG GRASS AND WEEDS.
   (a)   Prohibitions. It is unlawful for any owner , lessee or occupant , or
any agent, servant, representative or employee of such owner , lessee or
occupant  having control of an occupied or vacant (two acres or less) lot  or
land , or any part thereof in the city in areas zoned as single-family,
residential districts (R-1, R-2, R-3), multiple family (HDMF and LDMF), two-
family (R-T), commercial (OS, B-1, B-2, B-3) to permit the following:
      (1)   Permit or maintain on any such lot  or land any growth or brush,
grass, noxious weeds or other vegetation to a height greater than six inches or
any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush;
      (2)   Permit poison ivy, ragweed or other poisonous plants, or plants
detrimental to health to grow on any such lot  or land ;
      (3)   Permit dead trees to accumulate within 30 feet from any side and
rear property lines that abut an occupied  lot .
   (b)   Vacant land . Where any person is the owner  of vacant land  which is
over two acres in size, or any property  devoted to any use other than
agriculture, the owner must cut back at least 50 feet from the property line
that abuts a street  and cut back 50 feet from any side and rear property lines
that abut an occupied  lot .
   (c)   Park land . Land that has been designated or zoned as park land , must
be cutback at least ten feet.
   (d)   Penalties.
      (1)   If the provisions of this section are not fully complied with, the
city shall serve either personally, or by certified or regular mail, written
notice upon the owner , lessee or occupant , or any person having the care or
control of any such lot  or land to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
If the person upon whom the notice is served fails to cut and remove such
weeds, grass or other vegetation within five days after the personal notice or
the posting of certified mail, or if no owner can be found of such lot, the
Department of Public Works Superintendent shall cause such weeds, grass and
other vegetation to be removed and the actual cost of such cutting and removal
plus an additional 50% of said cost shall be certified by the Department of
Public Works Superintendent and shall become and be a lien upon the property on
which such weeds, grass and other vegetation were located, and shall l be
assessed and collected in the same manner provided in the City Charter for
collection of taxes.
      (2)   Should the owner , lessee or occupant , or any person having the
care or control of such lot  or land , and upon whom the notice of violation of
this section is served, prevents the Department of Public Works employee or
agent from cutting and/or removing such weeds, grass, or other vegetation, that
person shall be responsible for a civil infraction and be ordered to pay a
civil fine of $500 for each violation.
(Ord. 04-01, passed 5-25-2005; Ord. 2008-01, passed 8-12-2020; Ord. 2512-01,
passed 1-14-2026)
§ 676.02 DISABLED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   The purpose of this section is to regulate and control the storage and
maintenance of junk automobiles and other motor vehicles not movable under
their own power on private premises within the city, in order to promote the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. For the
purpose of this section, the fact that a person who allows the storage or
maintenance of such a vehicle on his or her premises or land does not own a
proprietary interest in such vehicle, shall be immaterial.
   (b)   As used in this section:
      DISABLED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle which is incapable of being
self-propelled upon public streets or which cannot be legally operated upon the
public streets and highways of the city. Such term includes, but is not limited
to, any motor vehicle which does not meet the requirements of the state  for
legal operation, including any motor vehicle which does not have required
current license plates.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. A machine propelled by power, other than human power,
designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or
slides, and to transport persons or property  or to pull machinery, including,
without limitation, automobiles, truck trailers, motorcycles, tractors, buggies
and wagons.
   (c)   No person shall park or store a disabled motor vehicle or part thereof
on any premises in the city unless such vehicle or part thereof is kept in a
wholly enclosed structure. However, one disabled motor vehicle may be kept
outside in the side or rear yard of a residential dwelling for the purpose of
service and repair of such vehicle for a period not to exceed 45 days. Further,
a disabled motor vehicle may be kept outside in an orderly manner, by those
establishments whose business is to service, repair or transport such vehicles,
for a period not to exceed ten days.
   (d)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to enforce this section.
(Ord. 35, passed 5-11-1967)
§ 676.03 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.
   No person shall leave, outside of any building or dwelling in a place
accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box,
refrigerator or other container of any kind which has an airtight snaplock or
other device thereon without first removing the snaplock or door from such ice
box, refrigerator or container.
(Ord. 22, passed 12-9-1953)
§ 676.04 LITTERING; UNDESIRABLE ACCUMULATIONS.
   (a)   Declaration of nuisance. The acts and conditions described in this
section are hereby declared to be nuisances and may  be abated in the manner
prescribed by law .
   (b)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      ABANDONED PROPERTY. Deteriorated, wrecked or derelict property  in an
unusable condition, having no value other than a nominal scrap or junk value,
if any, and which has been left unprotected from the elements, including, but
not limited to, deteriorated, wrecked, inoperative or partially dismantled
motor vehicles (except motor vehicles subject to removal under M.C.L.A. §
257.252d, as amended), trailers, semitrailers (without cabs), boats, machinery,
refrigerators, washing machines, plumbing fixtures, furniture and any other
similar items in such condition.
      ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any employee of the city so designated by Council.
      LITTER. All rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper,
glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris or other foreign substances.
      PRIVATE PREMISES. A dwelling, house, building or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
including any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule and
mailbox belonging or pertinent to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure, and any portion of a street  right of way immediately adjoining such
premises , which right of way separates such premises  from a roadway.
      PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY OR WATER. Includes, but is not limited to the
following:
         A.   The right-of-way of a road or highway, a body of water or water
course or the shore of a beach of the body of water or watercourse, including
the ice above the water;
         B.   A park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or
recreation area; and
         C.   Residential or farm properties or timberlands.
      VEHICLE. Every motor vehicle registered under the Michigan Vehicle Code,
Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 to 257.923.
      VESSEL. A vessel registered under M.C.L.A. §§ 324.80301 to 324.80322
   (c)   Individual violations.
      (1)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon a sidewalk ,
parkway, gutter, street , alley or other public place in the city, except in
public receptacles and authorized receptacles for collection, or at an official
collection or disposal site.
      (2)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or
unoccupied private property in the city, whether owned by such person or not,
except that the owner or person who is in control of such occupied private
property  may maintain receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
place.
      (3)   A person shall not knowingly, without the consent of the public
authority having supervision of public property or the owner of private
property , dump, deposit, place, throw or leave, or cause or permit the
dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of, litter on public or
private property or water other than property designated and set aside for such
purposes.
      (4)   A person who removes a vehicle that is wrecked or damaged in an
accident on a highway, road, or street  shall remove all glass and other
injurious substances dropped on the highway, road, or street as a result of the
accident.
   (d)   Property owner violations.
      (1)   Any person who accumulates or permits the accumulation of litter on
property on which it is prohibited by this section, shall be deemed to create a
public nuisance by such action, and the enforcement officer or his or her duly
authorized assistant is hereby authorized to enter into and upon such property
to abate such nuisance.
      (2)   The cost of the removal of the litter shall be paid by the owner of
the premises from which it is removed. If the owner fails to pay such cost, the
City Treasurer is hereby authorized to hold a due process hearing. After such
hearing, if the decision of the hearing officer is that the charges are just
and owing to the city, the same may be added to the next ad valorem tax roll
delivered to the City Treasurer for collection and collected in the same manner
as ad valorem taxes are collected.
      (3)   A.   Whenever the enforcement officer finds an item or items of
abandoned property or litter on private premises in the city in violation of
this section, he or she shall cause a notice to be placed upon such item or in
the immediate vicinity of several such items in substantially the following
form:
 
NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY:
This property, to wit: (setting forth a brief description of the property),
located at (setting forth a brief description of the location), is improperly
stored in violation of §
676.04 of the codified ordinances of the City of Grand Blanc and must be
removed within ____ days from the date of this notice; otherwise, it shall be
removed by the City of Grand Blanc and the cost of removal shall be charged to
the owner of these premises.
 
         B.   Such notice shall  be not less than eight inches by ten inches
and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to the
elements. In addition to posting, the enforcement officer shall give notice to
the owner /occupant  of the premises  by first class mail addressed to such
person’s address as contained on the tax records of the city.
         C.   If, at the expiration of the time stated in such notice, the
items described therein have not been removed, the enforcement officer may
cause such items to be removed, and the cost of removal shall be charged, paid
and collected in the manner provided in this section.
         D.   The person affected by such notice may , prior to the date set
for removal of the property , request a hearing by filing such request with the
City Manager . Thereupon the City Manager  shall appoint a hearing officer to
conduct a public hearing in order for the person requesting the hearing to have
an opportunity to show cause why he or she should not remove the property in
question or why the city should not dispose of such property .
   (e)   Enforcement and penalty.
      (1)   The enforcement officer, at his or her discretion, may serve upon
an individual found violating any of the provisions of this section, a notice
of violation directing such person to correct the violation within 24 hours,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. Such notice shall advise such person
that his or her failure to correct such violation within such time shall result
in enforcement action pursuant to this section.
      (2)   The prosecution for a violation of divisions (c) and (d) above may
be commenced by the issuance of an appearance ticket. The enforcement officer
or his or her duly authorized assistant may issue appearance tickets for
violations of such divisions.
      (3)   A person served with an appearance ticket may waive his or her
right to an arraignment on such charge and voluntarily enter a plea of guilty
and pay a fine of $100 at the office of the District Court Clerk if such person
has never before been convicted of a violation above.
      (4)   A person electing arraignment on a first offense and found guilty
of violating division (c) or (d) above, or a person found guilty of violating
division (c) or (d) above on a second or subsequent occasion, shall be punished
as provided in §
676.99.
      (5)   Municipal civil infraction for littering. In addition to the
criminal penalties, as set forth in this section, and any amendments thereto,
and hereby adopting the text for the definition of littering and criminal
penalties for said conduct, said actions may be treated as a municipal  civil
infraction, as set forth in §
202.98.
(Ord. 145, passed 8-11-1982; Ord. 236, passed 10-11-2000; Ord. 2502-03, passed
3-12-2025)
§ 676.05 SPITTING.
   No person shall spit upon any public sidewalk , upon the floors or interior
of any public conveyance or upon the floors or walls of any theater, hall,
assembly room, church, school, public building or place of public resort.
(Ord. 56, passed 2-11-1970)
§ 676.06 DISCHARGING WEAPONS AND PLAYING GAMES ON STREETS.
   No person shall throw any stone or other missile dangerous to the public,
use any bow and arrow or sling shot, discharge any firearm, play ball or any
other game, or throw, catch or strike any ball, in any street in the city.
(Ord. 14, passed 7-30-1940)
§ 676.07 BUNGEE JUMPING.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      PARTICIPANT. Any person who takes part in the act of bungee jumping.
      PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint
venture, estate, trust or group of individuals, however organized.
      PROMOTER. Any person, including a landowner and/or lessee, who, by any
means, promotes, urges, encourages, incites or advances the participation of
other persons to engage in bungee jumping.
   (b)   Prohibited. No person shall  engage, as a participant or promoter, in
the activity of bungee jumping within the city.
(Ord. 226, passed 9-9-1992)
§ 676.08 ODOR CAUSING NUISANCE.
   (a)   Definitions.
      OFFENSIVE ODOR. A strong and/or foul odor which includes, but is not
limited to, odors caused by the following:
         A.   Animals;
         B.   Stagnant pools;
         C.   Garbage or trash;
         D.   Chemicals or industrial activities;
         E.   Exposed compost;
         F.   Burning garbage, rubber and/or other materials or substances; or
         G.   Growth, cultivation, and/or excessive use or consumption of
marihuana.
   (b)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   A person is prohibited from causing or allowing the transmission or
emission of an odor from his or her property that:
         A.   A reasonable person would consider an offensive odor ;
         B.   Endangers the public health or welfare; or
         C.   Unreasonably interferes with another person's health, safety,
peace, comfort or enjoyment of property.
      (2)   Exceptions. Offensive odors do not include ordinary odors
associated with cooking or preparing food.
   (c)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Determination of foul odor. The City of Grand Blanc Code
Enforcement Officer or a City of Grand Blanc Police Officer shall determine
that an odor violates this section by detecting an odor that he or she
determines is exceedingly pungent or foul and of such intensity that it does
any of the following:
         A.   Potentially causes distress, discomfort or injury to a person
with ordinary sensibilities;
         B.   Substantially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of
residential dwellings by a person of ordinary sensibilities; or
         C.   Has the propensity to induce nausea in a person of ordinary
sensibilities.
      (2)   Notice. Prior to commencing prosecution under this section, the
City of Grand Blanc Code Enforcement Officer or a City of Grand Blanc Police
Officer shall give notice to the person charged with violating this section.
Said notice shall be in writing, and shall be served upon said person(s) or, at
the option of the City of Grand Blanc Code Enforcement Officer or a City of
Grand Blanc Police Officer, by posting a copy of this notice on the land or
attaching a copy of the notice to the building or structure. In addition, a
copy of the notice shall be sent by first class mail to the occupant(s) and
owner(s) of the land, building or structure at the last known address.
   (d)   Penalty.
      (1)   Any person(s) failing to comply with a notice of violation shall be
deemed guilty of a municipal civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not less
than $100 and not more than $1,000 per violation; and/or costs, assessments,
damages and expenses as provided by M.C.L.A. § 600.8727(3).
      (2)   Each day that a violation of this section exists shall constitute a
separate violation of this section.
(Ord. 2410-01, passed 11-13-2024)
§ 676.09 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   CORNER LOT. As defined in Article II: Construction of Language and
Definitions,
Section 201 of the City of Grand Blanc Zoning Ordinances.
      (2)   FRONT YARD. As defined in Article II: Construction of Language and
Definitions,
Section 201 of the City of Grand Blanc Zoning Ordinances. A corner lot may have
two FRONT YARDS.
      (3)   OCCUPANT. Any person, other than a legal or equitable title holder,
occupying or possessing all or part of a building, structure, dwelling or
property.
      (4)   OWNER. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in all or
part of a building, structure, dwelling or property.
      (5)   PERSON. All natural persons, firms, co-partnerships, corporations,
and all associations of natural persons, incorporated or unincorporated,
whether acting by themselves, or by an agent or employee.
      (6)   SIDE YARD. As defined in Article II: Construction of Language and
Definitions,
Section 201 of the City of Grand Blanc Zoning Ordinances.
   (b)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   With the exception of ornamentation, vegetation, and flowers, no
items or materials of any kind shall be placed, stored or kept in the  front
yard or  side_yard .
      (2)   Campers, trailers and recreational vehicles are excluded from the
prohibited conduct outlined in this section.
   (c)   Occupant responsibility for maintenance. It is the responsibility of
the  3  of each and every lot or parcel of land within the City of Grand Blanc
to keep the entire premises free and clear of all unlawful items and illegal
conditions as described in this section. The  4  and  5  are jointly
responsible for the maintenance of the lot or parcel of land.
   (d)   Owner responsibility for maintenance. It is the responsibility of the
6  of each and every lot or parcel of land within the City of Grand Blanc to
keep the entire premises free and clear of all unlawful items and illegal
conditions as described in this section. The  7  and  8  are jointly
responsible for the maintenance of the lot or parcel of land.
   (e)   Enforcement. Prior to commencing prosecution under this section, the
City of Grand Blanc Code Enforcement Officer shall give notice to the  9
charged with violating this section. Said notice shall be in writing, and shall
be served upon said  10 (s) or, at the option of the City of Grand Blanc Code
Enforcement Officer, by posting a copy of this notice on the land or attaching
a copy of the notice to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the
notice shall be sent by first class mail to the  11  and  12  of the land,
building or structure at the last known address.
   (f)   Penalty. Any  13 (s) failing to comply with a notice of violation
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to 90 days in jail
and/or a fine of up to $500, or both. Each day that a violation continues after
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 2410-02, passed 11-13-2024)
 
Notes
      Yards: The open spaces on the same lot with a main building  unoccupied and
      unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this
      Ordinance, and as defined herein:
         a.   Front yard: An open space  extending the full width of the lot, the depth
      of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
      nearest point of the main building .
front    b.   Rear yard: An open space  extending the full width of the lot, the depth
yard  of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the
      nearest point of the main building . In the case of a corner lot , the rear yard
      may  be opposite either street  frontage.
         c.   Side yard: An open space  between a main building  and the side lot line,
      extending from the front yard  to the rear yard , the width of which is the
      horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the nearest
      point of the main building .
      Yards: The open spaces on the same lot with a main building  unoccupied and
      unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this
      Ordinance, and as defined herein:
         a.   Front yard: An open space  extending the full width of the lot, the depth
      of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
      nearest point of the main building .
side     b.   Rear yard: An open space  extending the full width of the lot, the depth
yard  of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the
      nearest point of the main building . In the case of a corner lot , the rear yard
      may  be opposite either street  frontage.
         c.   Side yard: An open space  between a main building  and the side lot line,
      extending from the front yard  to the rear yard , the width of which is the
      horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the nearest
      point of the main building .
3     OCCUPANT. Any person, other than a legal or equitable title holder, occupying or
      possessing all or part of a building, structure, dwelling or property.
4     OCCUPANT. Any person, other than a legal or equitable title holder, occupying or
      possessing all or part of a building, structure, dwelling or property.
5     OWNER. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in all or part of a
      building, structure, dwelling or property.
6     OWNER. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in all or part of a
      building, structure, dwelling or property.
7     OCCUPANT. Any person, other than a legal or equitable title holder, occupying or
      possessing all or part of a building, structure, dwelling or property.
8     OWNER. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in all or part of a
      building, structure, dwelling or property.
      PERSON. All natural persons, firms, co-partnerships, corporations, and all
9     associations of natural persons, incorporated or unincorporated, whether acting
      by themselves, or by an agent or employee.
      PERSON. All natural persons, firms, co-partnerships, corporations, and all
10    associations of natural persons, incorporated or unincorporated, whether acting
      by themselves, or by an agent or employee.
11    OCCUPANT. Any person, other than a legal or equitable title holder, occupying or
      possessing all or part of a building, structure, dwelling or property.
12    OWNER. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in all or part of a
      building, structure, dwelling or property.
      PERSON. All natural persons, firms, co-partnerships, corporations, and all
13    associations of natural persons, incorporated or unincorporated, whether acting
      by themselves, or by an agent or employee.
§ 676.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 680: SEX RELATED OFFENSES
Section
680.01   Indecent exposure
680.99   Penalty
§ 680.01 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   No person shall make any lewd or indecent exposure of his or her person in
the city.
(Ord. 7, passed 5-28-1930)
§ 680.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 692: WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES
Section
692.01   Hunting; discharging weapons
692.02   Possession of dangerous weapons
692.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Arson, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.71 et seq.
   Construction or possession of explosive devices, see M.C.L.A. § 750.211a
   Storage and transportation of explosives, see M.C.L.A. § 750.200
§ 692.01 HUNTING; DISCHARGING WEAPONS.
   No person shall hunt game or discharge any firearm, air rifle, bow and arrow
or other dangerous weapon within the city without first obtaining a special
permit therefor from Council.
(Ord. 15, passed 7-30-1940)
§ 692.02 POSSESSION OF DANGEROUS WEAPONS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of a knife
with a blade more than three inches in length, any blackjack, slingshot, billy
(club), metallic knuckles, karate sticks, nunchucks, throwing stars, bludgeon
or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument, in any of the streets,
alleys, parks, boulevards, or other public property or schools in the city, or
in any dance hall, theater, amusement park, liquor establishment, store or
other private property generally frequented by the pubic for purposes of
education, recreation, amusement, entertainment, sport, shopping or commerce.
   (b)   The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to any
person in possession of any such weapon or instrument, when carried or used in
good faith as a tool of honest work, trade, business, sport or recreation, when
a person in possession of such weapon or instrument is actively engaged in
going to or returning from such honest work, trade, business, sport or
recreation, or is transporting such weapon or instrument directly to his or her
residence or place of business immediately after purchase, or when licensed by
the state to carry such a concealed weapon, subject to any and all restrictions
upon such license.
   (c)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500, or imprisoned for not more
than 93 days, or both.
(Ord. 08-02, passed 3-12-2008)
§ 692.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 694: LAW ENFORCEMENT
Section
694.01   False reporting
694.02   Resisting fingerprinting
694.03   Resisting arrest; obstruction of justice
§ 694.01 FALSE REPORTING.
   (a)   A person who intentionally makes a false report, including the
commission of a crime or threat, or intentionally causes a false report,
including the commission of a crime or threat, to be made to a city peace
officer, police agency, 9-1-1 operator, or any other city employee or
contractor or employee of a contractor who is authorized to receive such
reports, knowing the report is false, commits a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500, or
both.
   (b)   The Court may order a person convicted of the conduct described under
division (a) above to pay to the city the costs of responding to the false
report and/or threat, to include but not necessarily be limited to, the use of
police or fire emergency response vehicles.
(Ord. 06-09, passed 10-11-2006)
§ 694.02 RESISTING FINGERPRINTING.
   (a)   A person shall not refuse to allow or resist the taking of his or her
fingerprints (felony and misdemeanor arrests) as authorized or otherwise
required by law .
   (b)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of
not more than $500, or both.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 3-12-2008)
§ 694.03 RESISTING ARREST; OBSTRUCTION OF JUSTICE.
   (a)   Prohibitions. A person shall  not willfully and knowingly resist,
obstruct, oppose, assault, batter, or endanger any peace officer, code
enforcement officer, City Attorney, judge or person duly authorized to serve
process, rule or order issued by lawful authority, in his or her attempt at
execution or enforcement of any ordinance , by-law  or rule, or while otherwise
acting in the performance of his or her duties.
   (b)   Penalty. A person who violates this section shall  be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500 and/or imprisoned for not
more than 93 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed as to each such act against a particular officer or official.
   (c)   Non-exclusive remedy. Prosecution under this section does not prohibit
an individual from being charged with, convicted of, or punished for any other
violation of law  that is committed by that individual while violating this
section.
(Ord. 08-11, passed 10-8-2008)
PART EIGHT: BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE
   TITLE TWO - Business Regulation
      
Chap. 802. Businesses in General.
      
Chap. 806. Cable Communications Systems.
      
Chap. 810. Drive-In Restaurants.
      
Chap. 812. Mobile Food Vehicle Vendors.
      
Chap. 818. Garage Sales.
      
Chap. 850. Peddlers.
      
Chap. 852. Public Gatherings.
      
Chap. 860. Precious Metal and Gem Dealers.
      
Chap. 870. Taxicabs.
      
Chap. 872. Open-Air Markets.
      
Chap. 874. Marihuana Establishments.
   TITLE FOUR - Taxation
      
Chap. 882. Real Estate Tax.
TITLE TWO - BUSINESS REGULATION
      
Chap. 802. Businesses in General.
      
Chap. 806. Cable Communications Systems.
      
Chap. 810. Drive-In Restaurants.
      
Chap. 812. Mobile Food Vehicle Vendors.
      
Chap. 818. Garage Sales.
      
Chap. 850. Peddlers.
      
Chap. 852. Public Gatherings.
      
Chap. 860. Precious Metal and Gem Dealers.
      
Chap. 870. Taxicabs.
      
Chap. 872. Open-Air Markets.
      
Chap. 874. Marihuana Establishments.
CHAPTER 802: BUSINESSES IN GENERAL
Section
802.01   Title and purpose
802.02   Applicability and scope; exemptions and limitations
802.03   Applications
802.04   Fees
802.05   License period
802.06   Initial license; endorsement by Clerk
802.07   Applicant’s buildings and premises to comply with city ordinances and
policies
802.08   Change of location after issuance
802.09   Posting of license
802.10   Denial, suspension, and revocation
802.11   Determination of cause
802.12   Privacy
802.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Control of outdoor advertising by home rule municipalities, see M.C.L.A. §
117.4i
   Coordinated collection of State license fees, see M.C.L.A. § 205.1
   Liability insurance for municipalities, see M.C.L.A. § 691.1409
§ 802.01 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   (a)   This chapter shall be known and cited as the "City of Grand Blanc
Business Licensing Ordinance."
   (b)   The critical governmental purposes of this chapter are:
      (1)   To provide for a comprehensive database of businesses and
individuals conducting business within the city for effective first responder
and emergency services through more efficient wayfinding, the ability to access
up-to-date emergency contact information, identification of the types and
quantities of any hazardous materials at the site, and the identification of
"lock box" and other security and alarm information;
      (2)   To provide for better efficiency and economy in furnishing public
utility services;
      (3)   To track and analyze business trends, patterns, and needs in the
community;
      (4)   To provide a means by which illicit businesses and activities may
be identified, stopped, and eliminated from the city;
      (5)   To expedite notice to local businesses regarding important city
concerns, such as snow emergencies, business opportunities, business
development, consumer trends, and marketing; and
      (6)   To assist with more comprehensive and informed planning and zoning
uses of land and structures.
(Ord. 2512-05, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 802.02 APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE; EXEMPTIONS AND LIMITATIONS.
   (a)   In general. It shall  be unlawful for any person to operate, engage
in, or conduct a business without a valid license issued pursuant to this
chapter. For purposes of this section, the term VALID LICENSE means a license
that is not pending, expired, suspended, or revoked.
   (b)   Scope. For purposes of this chapter, the term BUSINESS means a
commercial activity engaged in for monetary gain or livelihood, and includes
but is not limited to, the following operations and activities:
      (1)   Any business, trade, or commercial activity that is physically
conducted or operated, in whole or in part, within the city, whether or not
specifically enumerated herein;
      (2)   Amusement device establishments;
      (3)   Arcade, billiards, or similar type of recreation activity;
      (4)   Auctioneer;
      (5)   Antique shop;
      (6)   Apartment building or complex;
      (7)   Athletic club;
      (8)   Banquet facility;
      (9)   Bar, club, pub, tavern, or similar establishment;
      (10)   Bicycle sales and rentals;
      (11)   Boat/watercraft sales and rentals;
      (12)   Body art facility;
      (13)   Bowling alley;
      (14)   Carnival, circus, and/or festival companies (business offices);
      (15)   Christmas tree sale;
      (16)   Convalescent home or center;
      (17)   Convenience store;
      (18)   Dance studio/dance hall;
      (19)   Daycare/child care;
      (20)   Driver training;
      (21)   Equipment sales;
      (22)   Exercise, tanning, and/or similar spa or facility;
      (23)   Fumigator/exterminator;
      (24)   Gas station;
      (25)   Golf course/driving range;
      (26)   Grocery store;
      (27)   Group home;
      (28)   Hair salon;
      (29)   Hall rental;
      (30)   Home rental, rooming house, and/or bed and breakfast;
      (31)   Hotel/motel;
      (32)   HVAC services/sales;
      (33)   Ice cream store or truck;
      (34)   Jeweler;
      (35)   Junk yard/junk dealer;
      (36)   Lawn care and/or landscaping service;
      (37)   Live entertainment;
      (38)   Massage establishment or school;
      (39)   Massage therapist, masseuse, and/or masseur;
      (40)   Moving services;
      (41)   Nail salon;
      (42)   Pawn shop;
      (43)   Personal entertainment services, including but not limited to
escorts, modeling, psychic readings, and tarot;
      (44)   Pet store or animal facility;
      (45)   Recycling;
      (46)   Restaurant, cafe, and/or coffee shop;
      (47)   Retail sales;
      (48)   Sales and sales solicitations;
      (49)   Scrap yard;
      (50)   Secondhand merchant;
      (51)   Shoe repair;
      (52)   Shopping centers;
      (53)   Smoking-related sales, including but not limited to tobacco,
vaping, and hookah;
      (54)   Snow removal service;
      (55)   Sports exhibitors;
      (56)   Storage, including but not limited to vehicle storage/parking;
      (57)   Tailor;
      (58)   Temporary sales, such as going out of business, estate, and fire
sales;
      (59)   Theaters;
      (60)   Trade centers/trade shows/booths;
      (61)   Transient merchant;
      (62)   Transportation service;
      (63)   Tree service;
      (64)   Vehicle, boat, and watercraft parts sales;
      (65)   Vehicle customization;
      (66)   Vehicle repair;
      (67)   Vehicle sales and rentals;
      (68)   Vehicle washing/detailing;
      (69)   Venues providing live entertainment for their patrons;
      (70)   Any business, trade, or activity required by any other chapter of
this code to be licensed.
   (c)   Exemptions.
      (1)   The provisions of this chapter regarding auctioneers shall not
apply to governmental employees, sheriffs, constables, or other public or court
officers or to any person acting under the license, direction, or authority of
any court, state or federal, selling property in the course of their official
duties or to any person selling property under and by virtue of any state or
federal law or regulation.
      (2)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any business or
activity which is licensed pursuant to the laws of the State of Michigan and/or
of the United States of America, but only to the extent that the involved
activity actually requires the license and the State of Michigan and/or United
States of America actually regulates the business or activity. The fact that
the county regulates a business or other activity does not have any bearing on
it being required to have a city license.
         A.   For purposes of illustration only, and not for purposes of
limitation, a business may offer the services of employees licensed by the
State of Michigan, but the business itself may not be licensed by the State of
Michigan. Such a business is still required to be licensed to operate within
the city pursuant to this chapter.
         B.   Any business that is exempt from the licensing requirements of
this chapter due to state or federal licensing must still submit a properly-
completed business registration to the City Clerk, so that the purposes of this
chapter may be fulfilled for every business, regardless of a licensing
exemption.
   (d)   Limitations. The requirements of this chapter are only meant to apply
to businesses or activities which:
      (1)   Engage in the business or activity within the city; and
      (2)   Actually involve contact between the customer, patron, or
prospective customer and the
business or activity.
   (e)   Licenses non-transferable. All licenses issued under this chapter are
non-transferable. Upon the transfer of ownership of any business, the new owner
shall  obtain a new license for the business in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and shall  pay the required fee.
(Ord. 2512-05, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 802.03 APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for a business license required by this chapter shall be made
in writing to the City Clerk on the form provided by the City Clerk. Each
application shall include, at a minimum:
   (a)   Name of the applicant, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Name depicted on signage at the business site (if any);
      (2)   Name depicted on literature/letterhead;
      (3)   Name depicted on marketing materials and solicitations; and
      (4)   Corporate name as listed on state and local filings (if different).
   (b)   Business address of the applicant within the city (if any);
   (c)   Mailing address (if different);
   (d)   Information relating to the primary owners, management agent(s), and/
or emergency contact(s) of the applicant, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Full legal name and preferred nickname;
      (2)   Residential address;
      (3)   Business telephone number(s);
      (4)   Personal telephone number(s);
      (5)   Business e-mail address(es);
      (6)   Alarm company information;
      (7)   Lock box information;
      (8)   Approximate or average number of employees; and
      (9)   Preferred addresses and telephone numbers for emergency contact.
   (e)   Type and nature of business, including all primary and secondary
purposes and activities;
   (f)   Short narrative statement explaining how the business is operated and
its activities;
   (g)   Description of licensing required by other agencies and/or
governmental entities, and status of that licensing (including copies of same);
   (h)   Certification by an owner or person responsible for any code or law
violations that all inspections, permits, and use approvals have been obtained
from the city and any other applicable governmental entity (by way of example,
a local health department); and
   (i)   Such additional information as may be required by another provision of
this code, or as required by city officials in order to issue the license or
registration sought by the applicant.
(Ord. 2512-05, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 802.04 FEES.
   (a)   Each applicant shall pay a general business license fee applicable to
all businesses required to be licensed under this chapter as established in the
city's annual fee schedule for general business licenses. Until the fee is
paid, the City Clerk will not accept an application or deem it to be complete.
Fees shall not be prorated. In the event a license is denied, the city shall
refund the application fee.
   (b)   Exemptions. The business license fee for charitable organizations will
be waived if the license application is deemed by the City Clerk to have been
completed properly and filed timely, and if the charitable organization also
submits documentation satisfactory to the City Clerk evidencing the charitable
status of the applicant organization or corporation. Otherwise, the fee
provision of this section shall  apply, as well as any applicable late fee
established by the annual appropriations ordinance. An applicant claiming an
exemption under this section must still qualify for and obtain a business
license.
      (1)   The term CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION means any corporation or
organization which conducts business wholly for charitable, eleemosynary, or
philanthropic purposes from which profit is not derived, directly or
indirectly, by any person, and which is exempt from paying federal income tax
or recognized by the Federal Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3)
corporation by virtue of its charitable endeavors. Qualification under the
federal tax laws for charitable organization status shall be prima facie
evidence that the business is engaged in the charitable purposes described
above.
      (2)   Applicants claiming an exemption under this section shall have the
burden of establishing entitlement to the exemption to the satisfaction of the
City Clerk.
      (3)   An applicant for which an exemption under this section is denied
may appeal the denial, pursuant to the appeal process set forth in this
chapter, to the License Appeal Committee.
(Ord. 2512-05, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 802.05 LICENSE PERIOD.
   (a)   Unless otherwise provided elsewhere in this code, every license issued
by the City Clerk shall be for the period of time the business is located in
the City of Grand Blanc under the same ownership. The licensee must enclose
payment with the properly and fully completed form and submit all required
information to the City Clerk within 30 days of opening in the city.
   (b)   Any business found to be operating without a required business license
may , in addition to any citations that may be issued, be afforded 30 days to
obtain a license before being required to cease operations, but only if the
business operations are otherwise lawful and have been granted all other
required approvals from the city and any other agency with jurisdiction over
the business. Submission of a complete application or renewal, including all
required fees, shall allow the business to continue operations pending a final
determination by the City Clerk.
   (c)   If the business or ownership has changed since the preceding license
was approved; a new application needs to be submitted.
   (d)   If the business moves within the city, an updated application needs to
be submitted with no fee charged for the update.
(Ord. 2512-05, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 802.06 INITIAL LICENSE; ENDORSEMENT BY CLERK.
   (a)   After the effective date of this chapter, every existing or new
business in the city that is required by this chapter to be licensed must
submit the required business license application and fee(s) by April 1, 2026 in
order to continue or begin operations. Existing businesses that fail to comply
shall cease operations on May 1, 2026 until an application is submitted. Upon
acceptance of a complete and proper application by the City Clerk, including
applicable fees, an existing business may resume operations until the following
April 1 or until the application is denied, whichever shall occur first. New
businesses, however, shall not begin operations until a license has been issued
in accordance with this chapter.
   (b)   A late fee established by the city's annual fee schedule shall apply
to all initial business license applications that are submitted late by any
business existing and operating on the effective date of the ordinance that
enacted the requirements of this chapter.
   (c)   Each license issued by the city shall be endorsed by the City Clerk.
(Ord. 2512-05, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 802.07 APPLICANT'S BUILDINGS AND PREMISES TO COMPLY WITH CITY ORDINANCES AND
POLICIES.
   No license shall be issued if the building(s) or premises to be used for the
business do not fully comply with existing city ordinances and policies, or if
the business is not current on its water bill, property tax, false alarm
payments, or any other obligation to the city, or if the business or use of the
premises is not in compliance with zoning regulations unless otherwise
permitted by law.
(Ord. 2512-05, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 802.08 CHANGE OF LOCATION AFTER ISSUANCE.
   The location of any licensed business may be changed, provided ten days
notice thereof is given to the City Clerk in the absence of any provision to
the contrary and provided all other city requirements are met. Upon receipt of
such notice, the City Clerk shall refer the notice to the departments and
offices set forth in this chapter for investigating license applications so
they may advise the City Clerk whether the new location is in compliance with
all laws, codes, regulations, and ordinances.
(Ord. 2512-05, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 802.09 POSTING OF LICENSE.
   Any person conducting a licensed business in the city shall keep his or her
license posted in a prominent place on the premises used for such business so
that it is readily visible to all patrons, employees, and visitors. Individuals
engaging in mobile business activities within the city shall post the license
in a prominent place on any mobile conveyance utilized for the business
activities, or if no mobile conveyance is used or part of the business
operation, shall display a copy of the license to any person with whom the
individuals interact while undertaking such mobile business activities upon
request of such person.
(Ord. 2512-05, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 802.10 DENIAL, SUSPENSION, AND REVOCATION.
   (a)   When the City Clerk believes that cause exists to deny, suspend, or
revoke a license, the City Clerk shall provide written notice to the business
or operator at issue. The notice shall explain the nature of the cause and
indicate that the applicant/licensee must submit written documentation within
14 days of the date the notice is sent to show cause why the license should not
be denied, suspended, or revoked. The notice shall be sent by first-class mail
to the applicant/licensee at its last known business address. The notice will
be deemed to be sent when mailed, whether actually received or not. If the
applicant/licensee does not submit any written documentation to show cause why
the license should not be denied, suspended, or revoked, the City Clerk shall
issue a formal notice, within five days after the 14-day show cause period has
expired, indicating the license is denied, suspended, or revoked if such
outcome remains warranted under the circumstances in the determination of the
City Clerk. The notice shall advise the applicant/licensee of its right to
appeal to the License Appeal Committee by filing a written request to appeal
with the City Clerk's office within 14 days of the date the notice was
deposited in the mail.
   (b)   If submitted by the business as set forth in division (a), the City
Clerk shall review any written show cause documentation within 14 days of
receipt, or as soon thereafter as circumstances allow.
   (c)   Within five days of reviewing the written documentation from the
business, or as soon thereafter as circumstances allow, the City Clerk shall
render a decision approving, denying, suspending, revoking, or affirming the
license. The City Clerk shall immediately notify the applicant/licensee of the
decision in writing by first-class mail. If the decision is to deny, suspend,
or revoke the license, the City Clerk shall also notify the applicant/licensee
of its right to appeal the decision to the License Appeal Committee by filing a
written request to appeal with the City Clerk's office within 14 days of the
date the notice was deposited in the mail.
   (d)   If an applicant's license is denied, or if a licensee's license is
suspended or revoked, in accordance with a decision of the City Clerk that the
applicant/licensee does not appeal within the time provided, the applicant/
licensee shall not thereafter conduct, operate, or carry on the business for
which it applied for licensing or for which it was licensed unless and until
the license is restored or a new license is issued. Violations of this section
shall be punishable as set forth in
Chapter 1 of the City Code, and the city may take additional abatement action
through the Board of Ordinance Appeals or the court system to ensure
enforcement of the denial, suspension, or revocation.
   (e)   For purposes of this chapter, suspension of a license may be
indefinite pending remediation of a condition that warranted the suspension.
The City Clerk may impose remediation deadlines, the expiration of which may be
tolled for good faith progress or circumstances beyond the licensee's control,
or which may result in revocation of the license.
(Ord. 2512-05, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 802.11 DETERMINATION OF CAUSE.
   The term CAUSE, as used in this chapter for applicants and licensees, means
and includes the following acts, omission, or events when done, not done, or
caused by a licensee, the licensee's officers or principal employees, or the
licensee's employees when acting within the scope of their employment pursuant
to their supervisor's direction:
   (a)   The doing or omitting of any act or permitting any condition to exist
in connection with any business for which a license is issued under the
provisions of this chapter, or any premises or facilities used in connection
therewith, which act, omission, or condition is injurious to the health,
safety, or welfare of the public; is unlawful or fraudulent; is unauthorized or
beyond the scope of the license granted; or is forbidden by the provisions of
this code or rule or regulation of the city, or any state or federal law,
applicable to the business for which the license was issued;
   (b)   The conviction of the licensee for any crime involving moral
turpitude;
   (c)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or any false statement made in the
application for license or registration;
   (d)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (e)   Conducting a business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health,
safety, or welfare of the public;
   (f)   Failure or inability of a licensee to meet and satisfy the
requirements and provisions of this chapter, every ordinance of the city, and
every requirement of state and federal law;
   (g)   Failure to pay personal property taxes, water and/or sewer charges, or
any other obligation owed to the city.
(Ord. 2512-05, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 802.12 PRIVACY.
   The City Clerk shall withhold from public disclosure any personal
information provided to the city pursuant to the requirements of this chapter,
except where disclosure is required by law.
(Ord. 2512-05, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 802.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   No person shall engage in or conduct any business for which a license
is required by this chapter without having first obtained such a license, or
when such a license is expired, suspended, and/or revoked. Owners, managers,
and persons with apparent authority over operation of the business may all be
jointly and severally deemed responsible. Citations for any violation of this
chapter may be issued by the City Clerk, any police officer, or any code
officials of the city, and such violations shall be punishable as municipal
civil infractions as set forth in
Chapter 1.
   (b)   No person shall knowingly provide false information to the city in an
application for, or as part of a renewal of, a license required by this
chapter.
   (c)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to limit the
remedies otherwise available to the city to address any violation of this
chapter, including but not limited to license suspension, license revocation,
and abatement proceedings for ongoing violations.
(Ord. 2512-05, passed 1-14-2026)
CHAPTER 806: CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, formerly a codification of Ordinance 168, passed November 11,
1985, was repealed and re-enacted in its entirety upon the adoption of
Ordinance passed September 5, 2001, codified herein.
Section
806.01   Agreement
806.02   Definitions
806.03   Grant of rights
806.04   Public ways
806.05   Customer service
806.06   Access to the system
806.07   Indemnity and insurance
806.08   Fees and payments
806.09   Rates and regulation
806.10   Term
806.11   Transfers, ownership and control
806.12   Defaults
806.13   Remedies
806.14   Provision of information
806.15   General
Appendix A.   FCC customer rules as modified by franchise
Appendix B.   Guarantee in lieu of bond
Appendix C.   FCC definition of control
Appendix D.   Shared EG channel information
Appendix E.   Sample contract for PEG channel
Statutory reference:
   Cables improperly located; insurance, see M.C.L.A. § 500.3123
   Construction and maintenance of facilities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 22247.183 et
seq.
   Television and radio generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 484.301 et seq., 750.507 et
seq.
§ 806.01 AGREEMENT.
   The provisions of this chapter constitute an agreement entered into as of
September 1, 2001, by and between the city (hereinafter referred to as
“municipality ”) and Comcast Cablevision Corporation, a Michigan corporation,
authorized to do business at 29777 Telegraph Road, Southfield Michigan
(hereinafter referred to as “company ”).
(Ord. passed 9-5-2001)
§ 806.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADDITIONAL INSUREDS. Has the same meaning as “indemnitees” in §
806.07(b).
   AFFILIATE (AND ITS VARIANTS). Any entity controlling, controlled by or under
common control with the entity in question.
   AUTHORIZED AREA. The entire area from time to time within the corporate
limits of municipality , excluding, however, all areas that are within such
limits solely due to agreements executed under the authority of Public Act 425
of 1984, being M.C.L.A. §§ 124.21 et seq., unless such agreements expressly
reference cable services , cable systems  or the cable television business .
   CABLE GROSS REVENUES or GROSS REVENUES.
      (1)   All of the amounts earned or accrued by company , or an entity in
any way affiliated with the company, in whatever form and from all sources
derived from the operation of the cable system within the authorized area or
company’s provision of cable services within the authorized area; provided,
however, that revenue derived from the provision of cable modem service  shall
be included in cable gross revenues only to the extent that such services
continue to be considered cable services under governing federal law .
      (2)   CABLE GROSS REVENUES shall  include without limitation all
subscriber and customer revenues earned or accrued, including revenues for
basic cable services ; additional tiers; premium services; pay per view;
program guides; installation, disconnection or service call fees; fees for the
provision, sale, rental, or lease of converters, remote controls, additional
outlets and other customer premises  equipment; franchise fees  paid by
subscribers; and revenues and compensation from home shopping programming.
      (3)   Advertising revenues and other revenues whose source cannot be
identified with a specific subscriber shall be allocated to municipality based
upon the percentage of subscribers residing in municipality compared to that
served from the head-end serving municipality.
      (4)   CABLE GROSS REVENUES shall  exclude:
         A.   Uncollected accounts during the period, computed on a fair basis
consistently applied;
         B.   Revenues derived from services delivered to municipality , if
any;
         C.   Taxes collected for direct pass-through on behalf of a government
agency; and
         D.   Revenue received from an affiliate to lease portions of the cable
system where that affiliate is separately authorized to occupy the right-of-
way.
   CABLE MODEM SERVICE. Services such as the RoadRunner TM or @Home TM services
which are provided over a cable system  through means of a modem which converts
the service from the electronic format necessary to transmit the service
through the cable system wires into an electronic format that can be
transmitted to a customer’s computer.
   CABLE SERVICES.
      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
other programming services; and
      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection
or use of such video programming or other programming service (where “video
programming” means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable
to programming provided by, a television broadcast station).
   CABLE SYSTEM or SYSTEM. A facility consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable services  which is provided to
multiple subscribers within the authorized area , but such term does not
include:
      (1)   A facility that serves only to re-transmit the television signals
of one or more television broadcast stations;
      (2)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-
of-way;
      (3)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, being 47
U.S.C. §§ 201 et seq., as amended, except that such a facility shall be
considered a cable system (other than for purposes of § 621(c) of such Act,
being 47 U.S.C. § 541(c)) to the extent such facility is used in the
transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of
such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services;
      (4)   An open video system that complies with § 653 of Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934, being 47 U.S.C. § 573, as amended; or
      (5)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
   CABLE TELEVISION BUSINESS. The provision by the company  of cable services
solely by means of the cable system .
   COMPANY. Have the meaning set forth in §
806.01.
   DROP. The cable or wire that connects the distribution portion of a cable
system  to a customer’s premises .
   EFFECTIVE DATE. Has the meaning set forth in §
806.15.
   EVENT OF DEFAULT. Has the meaning defined in §
806.12.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   FLINT METROPOLITAN AREA. The City of Burton, Grand Blanc Charter Township,
the City of Mount Morris, the City of Grand Blanc, the City of Flushing, Flint
Charter Township, Mount Morris Township, Genesee Charter Township, the City of
Clio, Vienna Charter Township, Flushing Township, the City of Swartz Creek,
Mundy Township, the Village of Holly, Holly Township, the City of Flint, Rose
Township, Richfield Township and Gaines Township.
   FRANCHISE or FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. Means this document.
   FRANCHISE FEE. The fee set forth in §
806.08.
   MUNICIPALITY. Has the meaning set forth in §
806.01.
   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS. Has the meaning set forth in §
806.05.
   PEG CHANNEL OPERATOR. A person authorized by municipality  to administer and
operate a PEG channel and shall  include municipality. If several persons share
the administration and operation of a PEG channel each person shall be a
separate PEG channel operator.
   PEG CHANNELS. Has the meaning set forth in §
806.06.
   PUBLIC WAYS. All dedicated public rights-of-way, streets, highways, and
alleys. PUBLIC WAYS shall  not include property  of municipality  which is not
a dedicated public right-of-way, street, highway, or alley .
   SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as CABLE SYSTEM.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The offering of telecommunications directly to
the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly
to the public, regardless of the facilities used. The transmission, between or
among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing,
without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES shall  not include cable services .
   UNCURED EVENT OF DEFAULT. Has the meaning defined in §
806.12.
(Ord. passed 9-5-2001)
§ 806.03 GRANT OF RIGHTS.
   (a)   Permission/franchise .
      (1)   Subject to all the terms and conditions contained in this franchise
, the Charter of municipality and applicable ordinances of municipality as from
time to time in effect, municipality hereby grants company permission to erect,
construct, install, and maintain a cable system to provide cable services
(including cable modem service so long as it is considered a cable service
under applicable law ) in the authorized area and to transact a cable
television business in such area. Company agrees, subject to its right to
transfer the cable system set forth in §
806.11, throughout the term of this franchise agreement to:
         A.   Erect, construct, install and maintain such a cable system ; and
         B.   Transact such a cable television business in the authorized area
.
      (2)   This franchise  may be amended by mutual agreement to allow the
provision of such additional services as may be agreed to by company and
municipality , or permission for the provision of additional services may be
granted by a separate document.
   (b)   Nonexclusive. This franchise  and all rights granted hereunder are
nonexclusive. Municipality  reserves the right to grant such other and future
franchises as it deems appropriate. This franchise does not establish any
priority for the use of the public rights-of-way by company  or by any present
or future franchisees or other permit holders. In the event of any dispute as
to the priority of use of the public rights-of-way the first priority shall  be
to the public generally, the second priority to municipality in the performance
of its various functions, and thereafter, as between franchisees and other
permit holders, as determined by municipality in the exercise of its powers,
including the police power and other powers reserved to and conferred on it by
the state .
   (c)   Universal service. Company  shall  provide cable services  to any and
all persons requesting same at any location within the authorized area . Due to
the density of population within municipality , company agrees not to impose on
any subscriber located within municipality any line extension charge or
comparable charge for extending company’s cable system  to the subscriber’s
location.
   (d)   Channels. Company  shall  make a minimum of 75 activated and
programmed channels available to subscribers in municipality , but not less
than the minimum number  of channels which company agrees in writing to provide
to other municipalities in the Flint Metropolitan Area .
   (e)   Emergencies. Municipality  may  remove or damage the cable system  in
the case of fire, disaster, or other emergencies threatening life or property .
In such event neither municipality nor any agent, contractor or employee
thereof shall  be liable to company  or its customers or third parties for any
damages caused them or the cable system, such as for, or in connection with,
protecting, breaking through, moving, removal, altering, tearing down, or
relocating any part of the cable system.
   (f)   Alert system. The cable system  shall  include an emergency alert
system (“EAS”) as prescribed by FCC  and the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992, being 47 U.S.C. § 521-555, as amended.
Company  shall  transmit on such system federal, state  and local EAS messages.
Municipality  and company will agree on the procedures for municipality to
follow to expeditiously use such system in the event of an emergency.
   (g)   Compliance with applicable law. In constructing, maintaining, and
operating the cable system , company  will act in a good and workmanlike
manner, observing high standards of engineering and workmanship and using
materials which are of good and durable quality. Company shall  comply in all
respects with all applicable codes, including the National Electrical Safety
Code (latest edition); National Electric Code; all standards, practices,
procedures and the like of the National Cable Television Association; the
requirements of utilities whose poles and conduits it uses; and all applicable
federal, state , and local laws.
   (h)   Maintenance and repair. Company  shall  keep and maintain a proper and
adequate inventory of maintenance and repair parts for the cable system  and a
workforce of skilled technicians for its repair and maintenance.
   (i)   Easement usage. To the extent allowed by applicable state  and federal
law , this franchise agreement  authorizes the construction of the cable system
over public ways , and through easements, within the authorized area  and which
have been dedicated for compatible uses, subject to the requirements in the
balance of this section. In using all easements, company  shall  comply with
all federal, state  and local laws and regulations governing the construction,
installation, operation and maintenance of a cable system. Without limitation,
company shall ensure that:
      (1)   The safety, functioning and appearance of the property and the
convenience and the safety of other persons not be adversely affected by the
installation or construction of facilities necessary for the cable system ;
      (2)   The cost of the installation, construction, operation or removal of
such facilities be borne by company ; and
      (3)   The owner of the property be justly compensated by company for any
damages caused by the installation, construction, operation or removal of such
facilities by company.
   (j)   Other permits.
      (1)   This franchise does not relieve company of the obligation to obtain
permits, licenses and other approvals of general applicability from
municipality necessary for the construction, repair or maintenance of the cable
system or provision of cable services or compliance with other municipal codes,
ordinances and permissions, such as compliance with right-of-way permits,
building permits and the like.
      (2)   Prior to performing any work in the public ways (or having such
work done on its behalf) company will obtain any necessary permit for same from
municipality .
      (3)   This franchise does not constitute a municipal grant of the permit
which may be required by state  law for access to and the ongoing use of
rights-of-way, easements and public places by certain providers of
telecommunications services . Any permit which may be required by Public Act
179 of 1991, being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.2101 through 484.2701 or other state  law
must be obtained separately from municipality .
   (k)   Street cut identification. Company  shall  notify municipality  in
writing of the exact location of each cut made by it or on its behalf in the
surface of any paved street .
(Ord. passed 9-5-2001)
§ 806.04 PUBLIC WAYS.
   (a)   No burden on public ways . Company  shall  not erect, install,
construct, repair, replace or maintain its cable system  in such a fashion as
to unduly burden the present or future use of the public ways. If municipality
in its reasonable judgment determines that any portion of the cable system is
an undue burden, company at its expense shall modify its system or take such
other actions as municipality may  determine are in the public interest to
remove or alleviate the burden, and company shall do so within the time period
reasonably established by municipality.
   (b)   Minimum interference. The cable system  shall  be erected and
maintained by company  so as to cause the minimum interference with the use of
the public ways  and with the rights or reasonable convenience of property
owners who adjoin any of the public ways.
   (c)   Restoration of property.
      (1)   Company  shall immediately restore at its sole cost and expense, in
a manner approved by municipality , any private property or portion of the
public ways that is in any way disturbed by the construction, operation,
maintenance or removal of the cable system to as good or better condition than
that which existed prior to the disturbance, and shall at its sole cost and
expense immediately restore and replace any other property , real or personal,
disturbed, damaged or in any way injured by or on account of company or by its
acts or omissions, to as good or better condition as such property was in
immediately prior to the disturbance, damage or injury. Such a restoration
shall start promptly but no more than 15 days from company creation of the
problem in question.
      (2)   Company  shall promptly reimburse municipality for the cost of
municipality repairing any municipal property harmed by company (should
municipality choose to conduct such repairs at its expense). In such event the
amounts due and owing municipality shall increase by 0.5% per month starting
with the second month after company being invoiced for the cost of such repair.
   (d)   Relocation of facilities. Company  shall  at its own cost and expense,
protect, support, disconnect or remove from the public ways  any portion of the
cable system  when required to do so by municipality  due to street  or other
public excavation, construction, repair, grading, regrading or traffic
conditions; the installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, or municipally-
owned facilities of any kind; or the vacation, construction or relocation of
streets or any other type of structure or improvement of a public agency or any
other type of improvement necessary for the public health, safety or welfare.
   (e)   Emergency notification. Company  shall  provide municipality  with a
24 hour emergency telephone number  at which a named responsible adult
representative of company (not voice mail or a recording) can be accessed in
the event of an emergency.
   (f)   Private property. Company  shall  be subject to all laws and
regulations regarding private property  in the course of constructing,
installing, operating or maintaining the cable system  in municipality .
Company shall comply with all zoning and land  use restrictions as may
hereafter exist or may hereafter be amended.
   (g)   Underground facilities. Company’s cable, wires and other equipment
shall  be placed at least two feet underground wherever existing utilities are
underground. If municipality  in the future requires that, in a specific area
or areas of municipality, utilities shall place their cables, wires or other
equipment at least two feet underground, then company  also shall place its
existing and its future cables, wires or other equipment underground within a
reasonable period of time, not to exceed six months, of notification by
municipality and without expense or liability therefor to municipality. In
those developing areas where underground facilities are required and meet the
standards, company shall install the necessary cables, wires or other equipment
at the same time and utilize the same trenches as other utility companies, such
as telephone or electric utilities. All underground cable plant shall maintain
at least a six-foot separation from water mains or sewer mains unless a lesser
separation is approved by municipality.
   (h)   New developments. Company  shall  install its cable system  (excluding
only drops  to individual dwelling units) in all new subdivisions and
developments (which, when fully developed will meet the standards) on the date
on which electric or telephone facilities are installed in such subdivision or
development unless company is not notified of the subdivision or development.
After cable system installation, company shall be capable of providing cable
service to any dwelling unit in such subdivision or development solely by the
construction of a drop  to the subscriber premises  when such dwelling unit is
constructed. Company shall  be required to comply with the preceding provisions
only if it either receives adequate prior notice of the availability of an open
common trench or had an opportunity to attend the preconstruction meeting for
the subdivision or development in question.
   (i)   Temporary relocation. Upon 15 business days’ notice, company  shall
temporarily raise or lower its wires or other equipment upon the request of any
person including without limitation, a person holding a building moving permit
issued by municipality . Company may  charge a reasonable rate, paid in
advance, for this service not to exceed its actual direct costs.
   (j)   Vacation. If a street  or public way where company  has facilities is
vacated, eliminated, discontinued or closed, company shall  be notified of same
and all rights of company under this franchise agreement  to use same shall
terminate and company shall immediately remove the cable system  from such
street  or public way unless company obtains all necessary easements from the
affected property  owners to use the former street  or public way or a court
orders the provision of such easements. Where reasonably possible and to the
extent consistent with the treatment of other utility facilities in the former
street  or public way, municipality  shall reserve easements for company to
continue to use the former street  or public way. Company shall bear the cost
of any removal or relocation of the cable system unless the vacation is
primarily for the benefit of a private party, in which case the private party
shall bear such costs. Company shall be provided 30 days’ notice of any
proposed vacation proceedings involving its facilities.
   (k)   Discontinuance and removal of the cable system . Upon the revocation,
termination or expiration of this franchise , unless an extension is granted,
company  shall  immediately (subject to the notice provision of § 806.15(b))
discontinue the provision of cable services  and all rights of company to use
the public ways  shall cease. Company, at the direction of municipality , shall
remove its cable system, including all supporting structures, poles,
transmission and distribution system and other appurtenances, fixtures or
property  from the public ways, in, over, under, along, or through which they
are installed within six months of the revocation, termination or expiration of
this franchise. Company shall also restore any property , public or private, to
the condition in which it existed prior to the installation, erection or
construction of its cable system, including any improvements made to such
property  subsequent to the construction of its cable system. Restoration of
municipal property , including, but not limited to, the public ways shall be in
accordance with the directions and specifications of municipality, and all
applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, at company’s sole expense. If such
removal and restoration is not completed within six months after the
revocation, termination or expiration of this franchise, all of company’s
property  remaining in the affected public ways shall, at the option of
municipality, be deemed abandoned and shall, at the option of municipality,
become its property  or municipality may  obtain a court order compelling
company to remove same. In the event company fails or refuses to remove its
cable system or to satisfactorily restore all areas to the condition in which
they existed prior to the original construction of the cable system,
municipality, at its option, may perform such work and collect the costs
thereof from company. No surety on any performance bond nor any letter of
credit shall be discharged until municipality has certified to company in
writing that the cable system has been dismantled, removed, and all other
property  restored, to the satisfaction of municipality.
   (l)   Underground street crossing.
      (1)   Whenever company must place the cable system or other facilities
beneath the traveled or paved portion of the streets or public ways , unless
otherwise approved in advance by municipality , company shall do so by boring
(directional or otherwise) and not by excavation of a trench in which to place
cable conduit. Boring (directional or otherwise) shall be done wherever
possible so that the excavations necessary for it are not in the paved portion
of the right-of-way.
      (2)   If company does a bore (directional or otherwise) underneath a
street or public way, then company will notify municipality at least two weeks
in advance of same. If municipality so desires, company will then increase the
size of the bore (directional or otherwise) with municipality to pay only the
incremental cost of making the bore (directional or otherwise) larger.
Municipality (but not third parties unless approved by company) may then use
any additional space or capacity created by increasing the size of the bore
(directional or otherwise) without additional charge or expense.
   (m)   Tree trimming. Company  may  trim trees upon and overhanging the
public ways  so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into
contact with the cable system . Company shall  minimize the trimming of trees
to trimming only those trees which are essential to maintain the integrity of
the system. No trimming shall be performed in the public ways without
previously informing municipality  at least two weeks in advance. All trimming
of trees, except in an emergency, on public property  shall have the prior
approval of municipality and except in an emergency all trimming of trees on
private property  shall require the consent of the property  owner .
   (n)   As-builts/location of facilities. Company  shall  keep accurate,
complete and current maps and records of the cable system  and its facilities
and shall provide copies to municipality  as set forth below.
      (1)   Company  shall furnish two complete sets of “as-built” maps and
records to municipality and company shall provide municipality copies of any
new or revised “as-built” or comparable drawings as and if they are generated
for portions of company’s facilities located within municipality (and in no
event later than 90 days after construction (or reconstruction) and activation
of any portion of the cable system ). Upon request by municipality in an
emergency, company as soon as possible (but no more than one business day from
the request) shall inform municipality of any changes from such maps and
records previously supplied and shall mark up any maps provided by municipality
so as to show the location of the cable system.
      (2)   The “as-built” maps shall include at a minimum all system and
facility routings and shall be drawn to a scale and upon such media as required
by the Manager .
      (3)   Within two years of the effective date , company  shall develop a
geographical information system (GIS) compatible layer, using a program and
format which accurately displays its “as-built” cable system . This layer shall
be kept current continuously, updated at least quarterly. The GIS layer,
including but not limited to, all databases, plots and computer discs shall be
provided to municipality , upon request, in a standardized, non-proprietary
format at no cost to municipality. In addition, company shall provide
information and assistance on the GIS program it is using and its
implementation so as to aid municipality in converting the layer into a form
easily used by municipality and in using the layer.
      (4)   On or before the effective date , company  shall deliver to
municipality a current complete set of as-built maps and records.
   (o)   Engineering matters.
      (1)   Company  shall provide municipality with a named responsible adult
representative of company (not voice mail or a recording) to be contacted on
engineering and right of way related matters.
      (2)   Company  shall attend all preconstruction meetings when notified of
same by municipality .
(Ord. passed 9-5-2001)
§ 806.05 CUSTOMER SERVICE.
   (a)   Negative options. Company  will not engage in the practice of
“negative option” marketing and will not charge a subscriber for any optional,
a la carte or premium service or equipment which the subscriber has not
affirmatively requested.
   (b)   Customer service standards. Company  will comply with the customer
service rules of the FCC  as in effect on the effective date  with the
following modifications:
      (1)   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS therein shall  mean 24 hours a day, seven
days a week for telephone service availability, and at least 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, plus weekend or evening hours, for local office
hours.
      (2)   In 47 C.F.R. § 76.309 subsection (c)(2)(ii) on service calls
“promptly” is changed to “the same day service is requested (for requests made
prior to 3:00 p.m.)” and in the second sentence “the same day service is
requested (for requests made prior to 3:00 p.m.)” is added after “service
problems” and “(for requests made after 3:00 p.m. on the previous day)” is
added at the end.
      (3)   A copy of the FCC Customer Service Rules modified to reflect the
preceding changes is shown in Appendix A.
   (c)   Reservation. Municipality  reserves the right by ordinance  to alter
or amend the customer service and consumer protection matters set forth in this
section, including adopting ordinances  stricter than or covering items not
presently set forth in this section. Company  reserves the right to object to
any such ordinance  and nothing contained herein shall  be read as advance
consent by company to such modifications. Municipality agrees to meet with
company on the matters in question prior to taking such action, and to provide
company with at least two months notice of such action.
   (d)   Free service. During the term of this franchise , company  will
provide the following free service:
      (1)   Company will provide without any installation charge or monthly
charge one free outlet at each municipal building, in each public library and
each public school and college in the authorized area . If requested, company
will add additional outlets at the preceding facilities (such as to some or all
classrooms and auditoriums, but not to dormitories) and will do so at its
standard hourly service charge. Such outlets shall be used only for cable
television purposes. Except as set forth in division (d)(3) below, none of the
preceding entities receiving service shall be charged any fee during the term
of this franchise for those channels comprising basic service or any expanded
basic service. No channels may be resold.
      (2)   In addition, one service outlet (which shall be at municipality’s
city/township hall) shall receive without charge all video programming provided
by company whether of a premium, pay-per-view or other nature. Such service
shall be provided in such a manner that municipality  may monitor the
programming and use of the cable system for compliance with this franchise
agreement , FCC technical standards, and other applicable law . The services
provided according to the preceding sentences shall be in an office location
and not in a location conducive to public viewing.
      (3)   For the preceding facilities, if the drop to the facility is more
than 200 feet, the owner of the facility will be charged only the incremental
cost for drops or line extensions beyond 200 feet. Drops or installations of
less than 200 feet shall be free for the preceding facilities.
   (e)   Access to service. Company  shall  not deny service, deny access, or
otherwise discriminate on the availability or rates, terms or conditions of
cable services  provided to subscribers on the basis of race, color, creed,
religion, ancestry, national origin, sex, disability, age, familial status,
marital status, location within municipality , or status with regard to public
assistance. Company shall comply at all times with all applicable federal,
state  and local laws and regulations relating to nondiscrimination. Company
shall not deny or discriminate against any group of actual or potential
subscribers in municipality on access to or the rates, terms and conditions of
cable services because of the income level or other demographics of the local
area in which such group may  be located.
   (f)   Programming lockout. Company  shall  provide all subscribers with the
option of obtaining a device by which the subscriber can prohibit the viewing
of a particular cable service during periods selected by the subscriber.
   (g)   Pay-per-view. Subscribers shall  be given the option of not having
pay-per-view or per program service available at all or only provided upon the
subscriber providing a security number  selected by an adult representative of
the subscriber.
   (h)   Blocking. Upon request by a subscriber, and within a reasonable period
of time, for a fee company  shall  use a notch filter or equivalent to block
such subscriber from receiving both the audio and video portions (even though
this may  create problems on adjacent channels) of a channel on which
programming is provided on a per program or pay per view basis.
   (i)   Municipal contacts. Company  shall  provide a separate phone number
and management level person at company for municipality  to contact. Such
person and number  shall be for the use of municipality and not for the general
public. Any such calls shall be returned within one business day. On any
complaints registered by municipality to such person company shall within three
business days provide municipality in writing its plan for resolution of such
complaint.
   (j)   Credit. If for any reason within company’s control, service on all
channels is interrupted for a period in excess of 24 hours then company  shall
, upon request from a subscriber, credit the subscriber’s account for the
period of interrupted service.
   (k)   Office/phone.
      (1)   Company  shall maintain an office to serve the purpose of paying
bills; receiving and responding to requests for service; receiving and
resolving customer complaints regarding cable service, equipment malfunctions,
billing and collection disputes; and similar matters. Such office shall be
located within ten miles of company’s existing facility at 3008 Airpark Drive,
Flint, or at such other location as municipality and company shall from time to
time agree. Company shall have a local telephone number or toll-free telephone
number for use by subscribers toll-free 24 hours per day, seven days per week.
The office of company shall be open to receive inquiries or complaints in
person or by telephone during normal business hours .
      (2)   Upon request, company  shall provide reports to municipality
quarterly showing on a consistent basis, fairly applied, the number of
telephone calls received by company and in addition measuring company’s
compliance with the standards of FCC Rules 76.309 (c)(1)(ii) and (iv), and
76.309 (c)(2)(i), (ii), and (iv) (a copy of the current Rules are as shown in
Appendix A). Such report shall show company’s performance, excluding periods of
abnormal operating conditions, and if company contends any such conditions
occurred during the period in question, it shall also describe the nature and
extent of such conditions and show company’s performance including the time
periods such conditions were in effect.
   (l)   Continuity of service. Company  shall  interrupt service only with
prior notice to subscribers, good cause and for the shortest time possible
except:
      (1)   In emergency situations;
      (2)   As required by the FCC ; and
      (3)   Service may be interrupted between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. for
routine testing, maintenance and repair, without notification. In the event of
a system upgrade, company shall both minimize any interruptions in service
caused by the upgrade, and shall meet with municipality in advance to advise
municipality of the nature, geographic extent and duration of any interruptions
and obtain and where possible respond to municipality’s comments on same.
Company shall credit subscribers on a pro rata basis for services not received
during an interruption.
   (m)   Log of complaints. Company  shall  maintain a written log of all
subscriber complaints or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of
access and reproduction in printed form of all subscriber complaints. Such log
shall list the date and time of such complaints, identifying (to the extent
allowed by law ) the subscribers and describing the nature of complaints and
when and what actions were taken by company in response thereto. Such log shall
be kept at company’s local office reflecting the operations to date for a
period of at least three years, and shall be available for municipality’s
inspection during normal business hours . Upon request, company shall provide
municipality  with a copy of the log or summary of it.
   (n)   Identification. All service personnel of company  or its contractors
or subcontractors who have as part of their normal duties contact with the
general public shall  wear on their clothing a clearly visible identification
card bearing their name and photograph. Company shall  account for all
identification cards at all times. Every service vehicle of company, its
contractors and subcontractors shall be clearly identified as working for
company, such as by magnetic door signs.
   (o)   Disconnection.
      (1)    Company  may only disconnect a subscriber if at least 45 days have
elapsed after the due date for payment of the subscriber’s bill and company has
provided at least ten days written notice (such as in a bill) to the subscriber
prior to disconnection, specifying the effective date after which cable
services are subject to disconnection; provided, however, notwithstanding the
foregoing, company may disconnect a subscriber at any time if company in good
faith and on reasonable grounds determines that the subscriber has tampered
with or abused company’s equipment; or is or may be engaged in the theft of
cable services; or that the subscriber’s premises wiring violates applicable
FCC standards. Company may not disconnect a subscriber for failure to pay
amounts due to a bona fide dispute as to the correct amount of the subscriber’s
bill.
      (2)   Company  shall promptly disconnect any subscriber who so requests
disconnection. No period of notice prior to requested termination of service
may be required to subscribers by company. No charge may be imposed upon the
subscriber for any cable service delivered after the effective date of the
disconnect request. Except for pay-per-view services, if the subscriber fails
to specify an effective date for disconnection the effective date shall be
deemed to be the day following the date the disconnect request is received by
company.
   (p)   Late payment.
      (1)   Each bill shall specify on its face in a fashion emphasizing same
(such as bold face type, underlined type or a larger font) the date after which
a late payment charge (however denominated or described), if any, shall be
added to the subscriber’s bill.
      (2)   No late payment charges, however denominated, shall be added to a
subscriber’s bill less than 21 calendar days after the mailing of the bill to
the subscriber.
      (3)   All cable payment charges shall be separately stated on the
subscriber’s bill and include the word “late” (or synonym denoting lack of
timeliness in payment) in the description of them.
      (4)   Late payment charges imposed by company upon subscribers shall be
reasonably related to company’s cost of administering and collecting delinquent
accounts.
   (q)   Privacy and monitoring. Neither company  and its agents nor
municipality  and its agents shall  tap or monitor, or arrange for the tapping
or monitoring, or permit any other person to tap or monitor, any cable, line,
signal, input device or subscriber facility for any purpose, without the
written authorization of the affected subscriber. Such authorization shall be
revocable at any time by the subscriber without penalty by delivering a written
notice of revocation to company; provided, however, that company may  conduct
system-wide or individually addressed “sweeps” solely for the purpose of
verifying system integrity, checking for illegal taps or billing.
   (r)   Subscriber information. Company  shall  comply with the provisions of
federal law  regarding recording and retaining subscriber information.
   (s)   FCC technical standards. Company  shall  meet or exceed the FCC’s
technical standards that may  be adopted from time to time.
      (1)   Upon request, company  shall provide municipality with a report of
such testing.
      (2)   Company  shall establish the following procedure for resolving
complaints from subscribers about the quality of the television signal
delivered to them. All complaints shall go initially to a customer service
representative and then to the manager of company’s local office for resolution
within ten days. If not resolved at that level, they shall be referred to
municipality and then to the FCC .
      (3)   Municipality at its expense and with notice to company  may test
the cable system in cooperation with company for compliance with the FCC
technical standards once per year and more often if there are a significant
number of subscriber complaints. Company shall reimburse municipality for the
expense of any test (not to exceed $5,000 per calendar year for tests) which
shows a material noncompliance with such standards (but not a noncompliance
disclosed by company in the report it provides municipality).
   (t)   Backup power.
      (1)   Company  shall install an electric generator which starts
automatically in the event of loss of conventional power to provide electric
service to the cable system head-end and associated equipment in the event of a
power failure. Company shall also provide battery backup power (or an electric
generator) at all other locations on company’s cable system where the loss of
electric power might disrupt the provision of cable service within municipality
such that the cable system and each portion of it shall operate for at least
four hours even if electric service from conventional utility lines is
interrupted.
      (2)   Company or an affiliate  may not use a permanent or semi-permanent
internal combustion engine (such as a gasoline or natural gas powered electric
generator) located in the streets or public ways to provide backup power at any
point or points on the cable system without municipality’s prior written
approval. The preceding sentence does not apply to such engines located inside
buildings or on land owned by company or an affiliate. Municipality’s approval
may be granted subject to conditions, such as relating to testing times (e.g.,
not in the middle of the night), screening, noise levels, and temperature and
safe discharge of hot exhaust gases.
   (u)   Undergrounding. If a subscriber requests underground cable service,
company  may , in addition, charge any subscriber the differential between the
cost of aerial and underground installation of the drop  to the subscriber.
This provision shall  not apply where undergrounding is required by
municipality’s ordinance  or policy. If municipality’s ordinance  or policy
requires a new subscriber to have underground cable service, company may charge
its normal installation fee.
   (v)   Bond.
      (1)   Company  shall provide municipality no later than 30 days after the
acceptance of this franchise , a performance bond from a security company
meeting the standards of §
806.10 in the amount $20,000 in form reasonably acceptable to municipality as
security for the faithful performance by company of the provisions of this
agreement, and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency
of municipality having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under this
franchise, and the payment of company of any claims, liquidated damages, liens
or taxes due municipality which arise by reason of the construction, operation,
maintenance or repair of the cable system or provision of cable services .
      (2)   The condition of such bond should be that if company fails to make
timely payment to municipality or its designee of any amount or sum due under
this franchise ; or fails to make timely payment to municipality of any taxes
due; or fails to repay to municipality within ten days of written notification
that such repayment is due, any damages, costs or expenses which municipality
shall be compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of company in
connection with this franchise; or fails, after 30 days notice of such failure
from municipality, to comply with any provisions of this franchise which
municipality reasonably determines can be remedied by an expenditure of the
money (including, without limitation, the assessment of liquidated damages),
then municipality may demand and receive payment under such bond.
      (3)   In lieu of providing a bond, company  may provide a guarantee from
an entity acceptable to municipality substantially in the form set forth in
Appendix B.
      (4)   The rights reserved by municipality with respect to this section,
are in addition to all other rights of municipality whether reserved by this
franchise or authorized by law , and no action, proceeding or exercise of a
right with respect to such articles shall affect any other rights municipality
may have, except that municipality shall not be entitled to multiple remedies
for the same violation.
   (w)   Notice. If company  or its affiliates contend that company (or an
affiliate ) is permitted to provide any telecommunications service  or non-
cable service in municipality  on the basis of or as the result of this
franchise agreement , in whole or in part, then company shall  give written
notice of same to municipality at least 60 days before offering any such
services in municipality.
   (x)   Internet/cable modem service .
      (1)   A.   Company will not prevent subscribers utilizing the cable
system for internet or cable modem service from:
            1.   Communicating with persons of the subscriber’s choice;
            2.   Sending and receiving information of the subscriber’s choice;
and
            3.   Accessing and using web sites of the subscriber’s choice.
         B.   This section shall not extend to any communications, information
or service which is not protected by the First Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution.
      (2)   Municipality and company have negotiated without reaching agreement
with respect to so-called “open access” for internet service providers and
certain related issues. The parties reserve their claims and contentions with
respect to these issues.
   (y)   Liquidated damages. Company  acknowledges that noncompliance with the
customer service rules of the FCC  (such rules as currently in effect set forth
in Appendix A) will harm subscribers and municipality  and the amounts of
actual damages will be difficult or impossible to ascertain. Municipality may
therefore assess the following liquidated damages against company for
noncompliance with such customer service rules. Each day on which a violation
of such FCC Rules occurs constitutes a separate offense, except that a
violation by company of a quarterly standard shall  constitute a single offense
for such quarter.
      (1)   First noncompliance with a given standard - $2,000;
      (2)   Second noncompliance with a given standard within four consecutive
calendar quarters - $4,000;
      (3)   Third and subsequent noncompliances with a given standard within
six consecutive calendar quarters - $6,000; and
      (4)   Liquidated damages shall be assessed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in §
806.13.
(Ord. passed 9-5-2001)
§ 806.06 ACCESS TO THE SYSTEM.
   (a)   PEG channels -general. When requested by municipality , company  shall
provide on the cable system  in the basic tier of service (and in the lowest
tier of service if different) the following public, educational and government
channels, collectively known as “PEG channels.” Company shall not exercise any
editorial control over the content provided on such PEG channels.
      (1)   One public access channel for use by members of the general public,
to be administered and operated by company until municipality :
         A.   Designates an institution or institutions to administer such
channel; and
         B.   Notifies company either that each such institution has in full
force and effect a contract between municipality and the institution
administering the public access channels) or that there need not be such a
contract. This public access channel shall be shared by all municipalities and
residents served by company in the Flint Metropolitan Area .
      (2)   One educational channel administered and operated by area K-12
public school districts or their designees, upon municipality having notified
company either that each such institution has in full force and effect a
contract between municipality and the institution administering the educational
channel or that there need not be such a contract.
      (3)   One government channel (which may be administered and operated by
municipality ) on which the programming shall be provided by municipality,
municipality’s designee, or such other units of state or local government as
municipality may from time to time appoint.
      (4)   A sample of a contract with a PEG channel operator referenced in
divisions (a)(2) and (a)(3) above as set forth in Appendix B.
   (b)   Initial PEG channels ; allocation.
      (1)   Municipality initially requests (and company  shall provide):
         A.   The public access channel described in division (a) above;
         B.   A combined education/government channel to be operated and
administered by the Grand Blanc Public Schools as the PEG channel operator and
shared by several municipalities and school districts as set forth in Appendix
D; and
         C.   A combined education/government channel to be operated and
administered by the Holly Public Schools as the PEG channel operator and shared
by several municipalities and school districts as set forth in Appendix D.
      (2)   Municipality , on six months’ written notice to company  may
allocate or reallocate the administration and operation of the PEG channels
among and between different uses and PEG channel operators . This expressly
includes municipality requiring several different persons to share or jointly
use a given PEG channel or conversely allowing one or more persons currently
sharing such a channel to have a channel on which they are the sole user.
   (c)   Company use.
      (1)   Municipality  may from time to time adopt and revise rules and
procedures as to when and how company may use the PEG channels for the
provision of video programming when the PEG channels are not being used for
their respective purposes. Company will use the PEG channels solely in
accordance with such rules and procedures and otherwise shall have no
responsibility or control with respect to the operation of such channels except
as provided by law .
      (2)   With municipality’s agreement, company  may provide programming on
any PEG channel which is underutilized, however the content of such programming
shall be generally consistent with the nature of the PEG channel in question
(for example, C-Span, C-Span 2, educational programming or the like to be
provided on the shared PEG channel).
   (d)   Lines and facilities.
      (1)   Company  shall provide and maintain at its expense the lines and
facilities necessary for it to receive PEG channel programming for simultaneous
distribution on the cable system . This shall include company providing the
lines, modulators and facilities (such as two-way activated drops ) necessary
to provide live program origination capability from the studios (or other
similar fixed signal origination point) for the PEG channels set forth in §
I.C, II.C or III.C (whichever is applicable) of Appendix D (but not video
production or playback equipment).
      (2)   Company  shall provide and maintain at its expense remote signal
input points (meaning signal input points for PEG programming from locations
that are used intermittently but repeatedly such as from a community center,
high school auditorium, football field or the like) at the locations set forth
in § I.D, II.D or III.D (whichever is applicable) of Appendix D.
      (3)   Municipality  may change the locations set forth in Appendix D,
however, municipality (or third party, not company ) shall bear the additional
cost (if any) to company due to such change.
   (e)   Studio, van. Company  shall  continue to make available to
municipality  and the PEG channel operators  on a non-exclusive shared basis
the existing studio and existing mobile production van for the production and
presentation of programming on the PEG channels .
      (1)   The studio may be either:
         A.   Company’s current studio which is used both by company for its
local origination programming and by the PEG channels (or persons creating
programming for the PEG channels) throughout the Flint Metropolitan Area ; or
         B.   A separate, stand-alone studio administered by a non-profit
organization or local unit of government serving all or a portion of the Flint
Metropolitan Area (including such a studio which is combined or associated with
related non-profit or governmental activities and organizations, such as a
theater, radio station or computer/internet training/hosting/production site).
      (2)   The studio shall be the former of the two options until otherwise
elected by municipality and other municipalities in the Flint Metropolitan Area
served by company who collectively have at least 50% of the cable subscribers
in the Flint Metropolitan Area then being served by company.
   (f)   PEG access assistance. Company  shall  provide to municipality  grants
for capital facilities for the PEG channels  on the dates and in the amounts
set forth below where CAPITAL FACILITIES means those facilities that qualify as
same under Federal Cable Act § 622(g)(2)(c); 47 U.S.C. § 542(g)(2)(c). Company
will not directly or indirectly challenge any classification by municipality or
a PEG channel operator  of an item as a capital facility if such classification
is arguably correct. However, company reserves its rights regarding any third
party challenge to a “capital facilities” classification by municipality or a
PEG channel operator. Municipality shall  allocate such grants among the PEG
channel operators as it determines is in the public interest, may  place such
grants in an interest bearing account for such allocation in a subsequent year,
or may direct company to pay the grant directly to the PEG channel operators as
municipality determines is in the public interest. The grants and their timing
are as follows:
      (1)   Within 30 days of the effective, date , $22,500. This grant is for
a suitcase studio and related equipment.
      (2)   Annual grants on September 1, 2001, and on September 1 of each
successive year (until replaced by municipality’s electing grants pursuant to
division (f)(3) below). The amount of the annual grant shall be the number of
cable subscribers in municipality served by company on July 1 preceding the
September 1 in question times $1.75 with the $1.75 figure to be adjusted
annually starting with the September 1, 2002, grant for inflation computed
according to the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, Detroit
1982—1984 =100, with January, 2000, as the base point.
      (3)   If and when the separate stand alone studio described in division
(e)(2) above is elected by municipality pursuant to division (e)(1) above or if
municipality otherwise takes action with some or all municipalities in the
Flint Metropolitan Area such that company no longer has to maintain a studio,
van, personnel and their associated and related costs (for providing a public
access channel) as generally described in this section, then (instead of the
sums set forth in division (f)(2) above), company will pay municipality 0.5% of
company’s cable gross revenues computed and paid quarterly in the same manner
as which company pays franchise fees under §
806.08 of this chapter. Because such payment in parts offset operational costs
(salaries and the like) which company would otherwise incur, any payments under
this division (f)(3) may be used by municipality or PEG channel operators for
operational costs associated with PEG channels as well as for “capital
facilities”.
      (4)   For the purpose of computing the preceding grants, for multiple
dwelling units or bulk service, the number of cable subscribers shall be the
number of dwelling units (or other ultimate, individual customers) actually
served.
   (g)   Separate checks. To assist municipality  in separating checks for
capital facilities or PEG support from franchise fees  all payments to company
pursuant to division (f) above shall  be by separate checks and shall not be
combined with checks representing payments of franchise fees under §
806.08 of this chapter.
   (h)   Encouragement of public access channel. Company  shall use reasonable
efforts to publicize and promote the public access channel and to encourage
members of the public to provide programming on the public access channel.
   (i)   Company publicity. Company shall  undertake the following publicity
activities at its own expense:
      (1)   Company  shall make available at no charge to municipality or to
PEG channel operators designated by municipality unsold advertising avails into
which company inserts advertising, up to a maximum of three, 30-second spots
per channel, per day, for spots promoting public, educational and government
access programming.
      (2)   Company  shall list all public, educational, and governmental
access channels on all print and cablecast electronic program guides, with
individual, unique descriptions on each channel, such as “municipal channel”,
“schools channel”, “schools/municipal channel”, “public access channel” and so
on.
      (3)   Company  shall include written information about public,
educational and governmental access programming and activities in its customer
handbook, and in materials given to new subscribers.
   (j)   Municipal publicity. Municipality  shall  undertake the following
publicity activities at its own expense:
      (1)   Describing the public access channel, shared schools/municipal
channel (and such other PEG channels as may from time to time exist) at least
yearly in any newsletter which municipality provides its residents;
      (2)   At least yearly similarly describing the contact person and
procedures for persons to put programming on the public access channel, and the
procedures for becoming qualified to use the studio, suitcase studios and
mobile van; and
      (3)   Where appropriate, setting minimum programming (as opposed to
bulletin board) and original programming requirements for PEG channel operators
.
(Ord. passed 9-5-2001)
§ 806.07 INDEMNITY AND INSURANCE.
   (a)   Disclaimer of liability. Municipality  shall  not at any time be
liable for injury or damage occurring to any person or property  from any cause
whatsoever arising out of the construction, maintenance, repair, use,
operation, condition or dismantling of company’s cable system  or company’s
provision of cable service.
   (b)   Indemnification. Company  shall , at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify and hold harmless municipality  and its affiliates, now existing or
hereinafter created, and their respective officers, boards, commissions,
attorneys, agents and employees (hereinafter referred to as “indemnitees”),
from and against:
      (1)   Any and all liability, obligation, damages, penalties, claims,
liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation,
reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys), whether legal or equitable, which
may be imposed upon, incurred by or be asserted against the indemnitees by
reason of any act or omission of company , its personnel, employees, agents,
contractors, subcontractors or affiliates, which may arise out of or be in any
way connected with the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
condition of the cable system or other company property (including those
arising from any matter contained in or resulting from the transmission of
signals over the system and including any claim or lien arising out of work,
labor, materials or supplies provided or supplied to company, its contractors
or subcontractors), the provision of cable services , other services or
company’s failure to comply with any federal, state or local statute, ordinance
or regulation.
      (2)   Any claim asserted or liability imposed upon the indemnitees for
personal injury or property damage to any person arising out of the
installation, operation, or maintenance or condition of the cable system or
company’s failure to comply with any federal, state or local statute, ordinance
or regulation.
   (c)   Assumption of risk. Company  undertakes and assumes for its officers,
agents, contractors and subcontractors and employees, all risk of dangerous
conditions, if any, other than those created through or maintained as a result
of gross negligence, on or about any municipality  owned or controlled property
, including public ways , and company hereby agrees to indemnify and hold
harmless the indemnitees against and from any claim asserted or liability
imposed upon the indemnitees for personal injury or property  damage to any
person arising out of the installation, operation, maintenance or condition of
the cable system  or other property  or company’s failure to comply with any
federal, state  or local statute, ordinance  or regulation.
   (d)   Defense of indemnitees. In the event any action or proceeding shall
be brought against the indemnitees by reason of any matter for which the
indemnitees are or may  be indemnified hereunder, company  shall, upon notice
from any of the indemnitees, at company’s sole cost and expense, resist and
defend the same with legal counsel reasonably acceptable to municipality;
provided, however, that company shall not admit liability in any matter on
behalf of the indemnitees without the written consent of municipality.
   (e)   Notice, cooperation and expenses. Municipality  shall  give company
prompt notice of the making of any claim or the commencement of any action,
suit or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this section. Nothing
herein shall  be deemed to prevent municipality from cooperating with company
and participating in the defense of any litigation by municipality’s own
counsel at its’ expense.
   (f)   Insurance. At all times during the term of this franchise , including
any time for removal of facilities or restoration, company  shall  obtain,
maintain and pay all premiums for all insurance policies described in this
section. Within 30 days from the effective date  of this franchise, company
shall file with municipality  certificates of insurance evidencing coverage.
Failure to obtain and maintain any insurance policy required by this section
shall be deemed a material breach, of this franchise and may  be grounds for
termination of this franchise.
      (1)   Property damage liability. One million dollars per occurrence with
a $10,000,000 umbrella policy. The property  damage insurance required by this
section shall  indemnify, defend and hold harmless company and municipality
and the respective officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees of each
from and against all claims made by any person for property  damage caused by
the operations of company  under the franchise  herein granted or alleged to
have been so caused or alleged to have occurred.
      (2)   Comprehensive public liability. One million dollars per occurrence
with a $10,000,000 umbrella policy. The comprehensive public liability
insurance required by this section shall  include coverage for sudden and
accidental environmental contamination and coverage for property  damage from
perils of explosion, collapse or damage to underground utilities, commonly
known as XCU coverage, and shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless company
and municipality  and the respective officers, boards, commissions, agents, and
employees of each from any and all claims made by any person on account of
injury to, or death of a person or persons caused by the operations of company
under this franchise , alleged to have been so caused or alleged to have
occurred.
      (3)   Comprehensive automobile liability. One million dollars
($1,000,000) per occurrence with a $10,000,000 umbrella policy. The
comprehensive automobile liability insurance required by this section shall
indemnify, defend and hold harmless company  and municipality  and the
respective officers, boards, commissions, employees and agents of each from any
and all claims made by any person on account of collision, personal injury or
property  damage caused by use of any owned, hired, or non-owned motor vehicles
used in conjunction with the rights herein granted or alleged to have been so
caused or alleged to have occurred.
      (4)   Workers’ compensation. Workers’ compensation coverage which meets
all requirements of any applicable state  workers’ compensation or comparable
laws.
   (g)   Cancellation or change. The insurance policies called for herein shall
require 30 calendar  days written notice to municipality  and company  of any
cancellation or change in the amount of coverage. Company shall in the event of
any cancellation notice, obtain, maintain, pay all premiums for, and file with
municipality written evidence of payments of premiums for an appropriate
replacement insurance policies so canceled within 30 calendar  days following
receipt by municipality or company of notice of cancellation.
   (h)   No limitation of liability. No recovery by municipality  of any sum by
reason of any insurance policy required by this franchise  shall  be any
limitation upon the liability of company  to municipality or to other persons.
   (i)   Qualified carriers. All insurance shall  be effected under valid and
enforceable policies insured by insurance carriers licensed to do business in
the state  or by surplus line carriers on the State Insurance Commissioner’s
approved list of companies qualified to do business in the state . All
insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated A+ or better by
A.M. Best Company .
(Ord. passed 9-5-2001)
§ 806.08 FEES AND PAYMENTS.
   (a)   Franchise fee . Company  shall  pay municipality  throughout the term
of this franchise  an amount equal to 5% of company’s cable gross revenues .
Once per calendar  year municipality by resolution may  elect to reduce such
percentage to a smaller percentage, and by resolution in a subsequent calendar
year may change or revoke such election. Such payments shall be made quarterly,
and are due within 45 days after the end of each calendar  quarter.
      (1)   Each payment shall be accompanied by a written report to
municipality , verified by an appropriate representative of company containing
an accurate statement in summarized form of company’s cable gross revenues and
the computation of the payment amount.
      (2)   Municipality  may audit company to verify the accuracy of franchise
fees paid municipality. Any additional amount due municipality shall be paid
within 30 days of municipality’s submitting an invoice for such sum, and if
such sum shall exceed 4% of the total franchise fee which the audit determines
should have been paid for any calendar year, company shall pay municipality’s
cost of auditing that calendar year as well.
      (3)   If company collects from subscribers that portion of the franchise
fee attributable to non-subscriber revenues (examples being revenues from tower
rentals, advertising or home shopping network commissions) then company shall
annually monitor the amount of collections from subscribers during the prior
year and promptly correct any material over collection or under collection.
Company shall provide documentation of the preceding to municipality , upon
request.
   (b)   Discounted rates. Company  intends to market services on a “bundled”
basis and to fairly reflect an appropriate and reasonable division of revenue
among the various services offered. Whether or not company separates services
on a customer’s bill, it will provide to municipality  the amounts upon which
it will pay a telecommunications services , and the amount upon which it will
pay the franchise fee . Should company engage in a billing practice that, in
the determination of the municipality, does not fairly reflect an appropriate
split of revenue between cable service and telecommunications services,
municipality will notify grantee in writing of its determination. If the
parties do not resort to methods of dispute resolution, including litigation,
the parties will meet and discuss in good faith whether the billing practices
result in an unfair payment of fees to municipality. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, if federal or state  law  establishes the method by which the
division of revenues should occur or that jurisdiction to establish such
guidelines appropriately rests with another body, such law  shall  supersede
the requirements of this division and be deemed by the parties to control.
   (c)   Other payments.
      (1)   The preceding fees and payments are in addition to all sums which
may be due municipality for property taxes (real and personal), income taxes,
license fees, permit fees or other fees, taxes or charges of general
applicability which municipality may from time to time impose.
      (2)   Company  shall pay municipality’s cost of newspaper publication
associated with adoption of this franchise . It is agreed such costs do not
constitute a franchise fee or any part thereof.
   (d)   Interest. All sums not paid when due shall  bear interest at the rate
of 1% per annum computed monthly, and if so paid with interest within 30 days
of due date, shall not constitute an event of default  under §
806.12.
   (e)   Prior fees. Company  shall  pay all franchise fees  due under any
prior franchise  between company and municipality  when they would have been
due under such prior franchise.
(Ord. passed 9-5-2001)
§ 806.09 RATES AND REGULATION.
   (a)   Rates. Company’s rates and charges for the provision of cable service
(and for related services, such as equipment rental, deposits, and downgrade
fees) shall  be subject to regulation by municipality  as expressly permitted
by law .
   (b)   Regulation. Municipality  reserves the right to regulate company , the
cable system  and the provision of cable service as expressly permitted by
federal, state  or local law .
   (c)   Notice of certain costs. In order that municipality  may  consider
whether to waive obligations of this franchise  under §
806.15(e)(1), company  shall  notify municipality in writing upon request at
least annually of the identity of all costs which company claims are external
costs potentially entitled to pass through to subscribers under the FCC  Rules
or successor rules with a similar effect. Such notice shall state  the
approximate amount such costs may be on subscribers’ monthly bills and set
forth the computation of such amount. Such notice shall be provided on a date
set by municipality, and unless changed by municipality, on each annual
anniversary thereof.
   (d)   Senior discount. Municipality  encourages company  to offer discounted
rates to senior citizens, who are often on fixed incomes. Company acknowledges
municipality’s endorsement of such discounts, and has agreed to begin to offer
a senior discount as set forth in separate correspondence to municipality. This
provision is not intended to alter or modify either parties’ rights or
obligations as set forth in federal regulations relating to rate regulation.
(Ord. passed 9-5-2001)
§ 806.10 TERM.
   (a)   Initial term. The term of this franchise  shall  be until September
15, 2016.
   (b)   Termination. This franchise  and all rights of company  thereunder
shall  automatically terminate on the expiration of the term of this franchise,
unless an extension is granted. Municipality  shall give company 60 days’
notice prior to taking action to enforce such termination.
(Ord. passed 9-5-2001)
§ 806.11 TRANSFERS, OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL.
   (a)   Consent required.
      (1)   Neither company nor any other person may transfer the cable system
or the franchise without the prior written consent of municipality , which
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. Within 45 days of
receiving a request for transfer, municipality shall, in accordance with FCC
rules and regulations, notify company in writing of the information it requires
to determine the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the
transferee. If municipality has not taken action on company’s request for
transfer within 120 days after receiving such request, consent to the transfer
shall be deemed given.
      (2)   The preceding prohibition shall not apply to the replacement or
sale of components of the cable system in the course of ordinary maintenance or
day-to-day operation.
   (b)   Transfer or transferred. TRANSFER or TRANSFERRED shall  mean:
      (1)   Any form of sale, conveyance, assignment, lease, sublease, merger,
pledge, deed, grant, mortgage, transfer in trust, encumbrance or hypothecation,
in whole or in part, whether voluntary or involuntary of any right, title or
interest of company in or to this franchise or to the cable system ;
      (2)   Any change in actual working control (by whatever manner exercised)
or in the effective control of company , such as that described in 47 C.F.R. §
76.501 and following, including the notes thereto (but excluding footnote 2f),
as in effect on the date of this franchise (as set forth in Appendix C);
      (3)   A change in limited partnership, limited liability corporation or
similar interests representing 10% or more of an equity interest in company ,
including the right to require voting control without substantial additional
consideration (such as compared to consideration previously provided).
   (c)   Applications for consent. If company  seeks to obtain the consent of
municipality  to any transactions or matters otherwise prohibited by this §
806.11, company shall  submit an application for such consent in the form
required by municipality and shall thereafter submit or cause to be submitted
to municipality all such documents and information as municipality may
request.
      (1)   Municipality  shall not unreasonably withhold its consent to any
proposed transfer, and may grant its consent outright, may grant such consent
with conditions which it finds are in the public interest, or may deny consent.
      (2)   Company  shall pay on municipality’s behalf or reimburse
municipality for all costs incurred by municipality due to any proposed
transfer.
§ 806.12 DEFAULTS.
   (a)   Events of default. The occurrence at any time during the term of the
franchise , of any one or more of the following events, shall  constitute an
event of default  by company  under this franchise.
      (1)   The failure of company to pay the franchise fee on or before the
due dates specified herein unless such fees are being disputed by company in
good faith.
      (2)   Company’s material breach or violation of any of the terms,
covenants, representations or warranties contained herein or company’s failure
to perform any obligation contained herein.
      (3)   The entry of any judgment against company in excess of $500,000,
which remains unpaid and is not stayed pending rehearing or appeal, for 45 or
more days following entry thereof which may significantly impair company’s
provision of cable service in municipality .
      (4)   The dissolution or termination, as a matter of law , of company or
any general partner of company.
      (5)   If company files a voluntary petition in bankruptcy; is adjudicated
insolvent; obtains an order for relief under § 301 of the Bankruptcy Code (11
U.S.C. § 301); files any petition or fails to contest any petition filed
against it seeking any reorganization, arrangement, composition, readjustment,
liquidation, dissolution or similar relief for itself under any laws relating
to bankruptcy, insolvency or other relief for debtors; seeks or consents to or
acquiesces in the appointment of any trustee, receiver, master, custodian or
liquidator of company, or any of company’s property and/or franchise and/or of
any and all of the revenues, issues, earnings, profits or income thereof; makes
an assignment for the benefit of creditors; or fails to pay company’s debts
generally as they become due.
   (b)   Uncured events of default.
      (1)   Municipality  shall give company written notice of any event of
default and company shall have the following reasonable time period to cure
same; for an event of default which can be cured by the immediate payment of
money to municipality or a third party, company shall cure such default within
30 days of the date such sum of money was due and payable; for an event of
default by company which cannot be cured by the immediate payment of money to
municipality or a third party, company shall have the longer of:
         A.   Sixty days from written notice from municipality to company of an
occurrence of such event of default ; or
         B.   If more than 60 days is reasonably needed to cure the event of
default , such additional time (not to exceed six months) from written notice
from municipality to company which is reasonably needed.
      (2)   If any event of default is not cured within the time period allowed
for curing the event of default, as provided for herein, such event of default
shall , without notice, become an uncured event of default , which shall
entitle municipality to exercise the remedies provided for in §
806.13.
(Ord. passed 9-5-2001)
§ 806.13 REMEDIES.
   (a)   Remedies. Upon the occurrence of any uncured event of default  as
described in §
806.12, municipality  shall  be entitled to exercise any and all of the
following remedies:
      (1)   The commencement of an action against company at law for monetary
damages;
      (2)   The assessment of liquidated damages as set forth herein except
that municipality  shall not recover both liquidated damages and actual damages
for an uncured event of default either under this section or any other
provision of this franchise ;
      (3)   The commencement of an action in equity seeking injunctive relief
or the specific performance of any of the provisions which, as a matter of
equity, are specifically enforceable; and
      (4)   Municipality  shall have the right to forfeit and terminate the
franchise and upon the forfeiture and termination thereof the franchise shall
be automatically deemed null and void and have no force or effect, company
shall remove the cable system from municipality as and when requested by
municipality and municipality shall retain any portion of the franchise fee and
other fees or payments paid to it, or which are due and payable to it, to the
date of the forfeiture and termination. Municipality’s right to forfeit and
terminate the grant of the franchise pursuant to this section shall use the
procedures of division (c) below and is not a limitation on municipality’s
right of revocation.
   (b)   Liquidated damages. Liquidated damages in the amounts set forth below
may  be awarded municipality  (individually and on behalf of subscribers) from
company . Company acknowledges that the amounts of actual damages for the
violations and uncured events of default set forth below will be difficult or
impossible to ascertain; that the liquidated damages set forth below are a
reasonable approximation of actual damages; that the actual damages are often
incurred by municipality and subscribers and, while cumulatively large, are too
small to be worth while for individual subscribers to pursue; and that this
division (b) is intended to provide compensation to municipality and its
subscribers and is not a penalty. The amount of the liquidated damages are as
follows:
      (1)   For violations of §§
806.07 and
806.11 of this chapter, proven under division (c) below, liquidated damages not
to exceed $2,000 per day; and
      (2)   For uncured events of default other than violations of §§
806.07,
806.08 and
806.11, proven under division (c) below, liquidated damages not to exceed $500
for each day that the uncured event of default continues.
   (c)   Procedures. Liquidated damages may  be awarded (and this cable
franchise  forfeited or terminated) in accordance with the following procedure.
      (1)   Following notice from municipality , which notice, at
municipality’s election may be combined with the notice described in division
(c)(2) below, company  shall meet with municipality to attempt to resolve the
issue of what liquidated damages, if any, shall be awarded (or forfeiture or
termination of this cable franchise ). If there is no resolution of such issue
within 20 days of the mailing of the notice described in the first sentence,
then municipality’s legislative body may assess liquidated damages (or forfeit
or terminate this franchise) as described below.
      (2)   Company  shall be given notice of municipality’s intent to assess
liquidated damages (or forfeit or terminate this franchise ) at least 20 days
in advance of the meeting of the legislative body at which such damages are
assessed (or cable franchise forfeiture or termination considered).
      (3)   Company  may appear at the meeting of the legislative body at which
such damages are assessed (or cable franchise forfeiture or termination
considered) either in person, by agent, or by letter (or other writing) to
submit its views with respect to the proposed assessment (or the proposed
forfeiture or termination) or company may request a hearing. The legislative
body may conduct the hearing or, in its sole discretion, may by resolution
appoint a committee or subcommittee of the legislative body or a hearing
officer to conduct the hearing and submit a proposal for decision to it,
pursuant to procedures established by resolution. The hearing shall afford
company appropriate due process. The commission may, by resolution, establish
other procedural matters in connection with the hearing.
      (4)   The legislative body may then assess liquidated damages in amounts
not exceeding those set forth above (or forfeit or terminate the cable
franchise ).
      (5)   Any such assessment by municipality  shall be a monetary obligation
of company to municipality in the amount determined by the legislative body;
and shall be paid in full by company within 15 business days of the date of
assessment by the legislative body unless such payment is stayed by agreement
or court order. Any forfeiture or termination shall be effective 15 days from
the date of the legislative body decision to forfeit or terminate unless stayed
by agreement or court order.
      (6)   Only after assessment of liquidated damages (or forfeiture or
termination) may  company appeal such assessment (or forfeiture or termination)
to an appropriate state or federal court or agency, but only if such
assessment, forfeiture or termination is arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of
discretion.
   (d)   Remedies not exclusive. The rights and remedies of municipality  set
forth in this franchise  shall  be in addition to and not in limitation of, any
other rights and remedies provided by law  or in equity. Municipality and
company  understand and intend that such remedies shall be cumulative to the
maximum extent permitted by law  and the exercise by municipality of any one or
more of such remedies shall not preclude the exercise by municipality, at the
same or different times, of any other such remedies for the same uncured event
of default .
(Ord. passed 9-5-2001)
§ 806.14 PROVISION OF INFORMATION.
   (a)   Filings. Upon request, company  shall  provide municipality  with
copies of all documents which company sends to the FCC  and all records
required by company to be maintained under § 76 of the FCC regulations (47
C.F.R. § 76) or successor sections, upon request of municipality.
   (b)   Lawsuits. Upon request, company  shall  provide municipality  with
copies of all pleadings in all lawsuits pertaining to the granting of this
franchise  and the operation of the cable system  to which it is a party within
30 days of company’s receipt of same.
(Ord. passed 9-5-2001)
§ 806.15 GENERAL.
   (a)   Entire agreement. This franchise agreement , including Appendices A
through E, contains the entire agreement between the parties and all prior
franchises, negotiations and agreements are merged herein and hereby
superseded, except that any obligation of company  to indemnify municipality
under a prior franchise  or agreement shall  be continuing as to those matters
(if any) occurring during the term of said prior franchise or agreement on
which company  was obligated to indemnify municipality.
   (b)   Notices.
      (1)   Except as otherwise specified herein, all notices, consents,
approvals, requests and other communications (herein collectively “notices”)
required or permitted under this franchise agreement  shall be given in writing
and mailed by registered or certified first-class mail, return receipt
requested addressed as follows:
   If to municipality :      City Manager
               City of Grand Blanc
               203 E. Grand Blanc Road
               Grand Blanc, MI 48439
 
               Attorney
               Varnum, Riddering, Schmidt & Howlett, LLP
               Box 352
               Grand Rapids, MI 49501-0352
   If to Company :      Vice President, Regulatory Affairs
               Comcast Cable Communications, Inc.
               29777 Telegraph Road, Suite 4400B
               Southfield, MI 48034.
 
               Vice President and General Manager
               Comcast Cable Communications
               3008 Airpark Drive South
               Flint, MI 48507
      (2)   All notices shall be deemed given on the day of mailing. Either
party to this franchise agreement  may change its address for the receipt of
notices at any time by giving notice thereof to the other as provided in this
section. Any notice given by a party hereunder must be signed by an authorized
representative of such party.
   (c)   Conferences. The parties hereby agree to meet at reasonable times on
reasonable notice to discuss any aspect of this franchise agreement , the
provision of cable services  or the cable system  during the term of this
franchise agreement.
   (d)   Governing law. This franchise agreement  shall  be construed pursuant
to the laws of the state  and the United States of America.
   (e)   Waiver of compliance. No failure by either party to insist upon the
strict performance of any covenant, agreement, term or condition of this
franchise agreement , or to exercise any right, term or remedy consequent upon
a breach thereof shall  constitute a waiver of any such breach or such
covenant, agreement, term or condition. No waiver of any breach shall affect or
alter this franchise agreement, but each and every covenant, agreement, term or
condition of this franchise agreement shall continue in full force and effect
with respect to any other then existing or subsequent breach thereof.
      (1)   Municipality  may waive any obligation of company under this
franchise agreement , in whole or in part, at any time. This includes, but is
not limited to, instances of a claim or showing by company that the costs
associated with the provision being waived would increase the rates company is
legally allowed to charge subscribers, such as a claim that such costs are an
“external cost” which allow company to increase its rates under the FCC rules.
      (2)   Municipality grants this franchise solely for a cable system and
for transaction of a cable television business . Company  may assert claims to
the effect that once its facilities have been placed in the streets and public
ways it will be entitled under federal law to use them for other purposes
without the consent or authorization of municipality and without necessarily
paying compensation therefore. Municipality disputes any such claim.
Municipality further asserts that if any such claims by company were to be
sustained there would be, among other things, an unconstitutional taking of
municipality’s property in violation of the Fifth Amendment of the United
States Constitution. Company disputes this claim. Neither the issuance nor the
acceptance of this franchise constitutes or will be claimed to constitute a
waiver or relinquishment of any rights or defenses of either municipality or
company in connection with these disputed issues. Municipality and company
acknowledge that this section is not intended to be a comprehensive statement
of their respective claims and positions and that they intend to defer all
disputes that may arise out of or relate to use by company of its facilities in
the streets and public ways for purposes other than a cable system.
      (3)   Company asserts that municipality’s franchise fees are limited by
federal statute to 5% of revenues from “cable services ,” all as defined in §
622 of the Telecommunications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 542. Municipality
asserts that any such limit is unconstitutional, among other things an
unconstitutional taking of municipality’s property in violation of the Fifth
Amendment of the United States Constitution. Company disputes this claim.
Neither the issuance nor the acceptance of this franchise constitutes or will
be claimed to constitute a waiver or relinquishment of any rights or defenses
of either municipality or company in connection with these disputed issues.
Municipality and company acknowledge that this section is not intended to be a
comprehensive statement of their respective claims and positions and that they
intend to defer all disputes that may arise out of or relate to statutory
limits on franchise fees.
   (f)   Independent contractor relationship. The relationship of company  to
municipality  is and shall  continue to be an independent contractual
relationship, and no liability or benefits, such as worker’s compensation,
pension rights or liabilities, insurance rights or liabilities or other
provisions or liabilities, arising out of or related to a contract for hire or
employer/employee relationship, shall arise or accrue to either party or either
party’s agents or employees as a result of the performance of this franchise
agreement , unless expressly stated in this franchise agreement.
   (g)   Severability. If any section, paragraph or provision of this franchise
agreement  shall  be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the
invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph or provision shall
not affect any of the remaining provisions of this franchise agreement.
   (h)   Effective date . This franchise agreement  shall  be effective as of
September 1, 2001 (“effective date”). Any prior franchise  shall terminate as
of midnight of the day immediately preceding the effective date of this
franchise agreement, except as provided in division (a) above.
   (i)   FCC Rules. A copy of the FCC customer service rules as modified above
and in effect on the date of this franchise agreement  are shown in Appendix A.
A copy of FCC Rule 76.501 as in effect on the date of this franchise agreement
is shown in Appendix C.
   (j)   Captions. All captions are for convenience of use and have no
substantive effect, except for those captions in §
806.02 of this franchise agreement .
   (k)   Conflicts. In the event of a conflict between this franchise agreement
and the provisions of any prior franchise  or any franchise, permit, consent
agreement or other agreement with company , the provisions of this franchise
agreement shall  control.
   (l)   Force majeure. In the event company’s performance of any of the terms,
conditions or obligations required by this franchise agreement  is prevented by
a cause or event, not within company’s reasonable control, it shall  be deemed
excused for the period of such inability and no penalties or sanctions shall be
imposed as a result thereof. Causes or events not within the control of company
shall include acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances,
failure or loss of utilities, explosions, acts of public enemies and natural
disasters.
   (m)   Franchise agreement  accepted. Company  further acknowledges by
acceptance of this franchise agreement that it has carefully read the terms and
conditions of this franchise agreement and accepts the lawful obligations
imposed thereby. As of the effective date , and without waiving any rights
company may  have to challenge the lawfulness or enforceability of the
franchise agreement in the future, company does not contend that any provision
of the franchise agreement is unlawful or unenforceable.
   (n)   Waiver of compliance. No failure by either party to insist upon the
strict performance of any covenant, agreement, term or condition of this
franchise agreement , or to exercise any right, term or remedy upon a breach
thereof shall  constitute a waiver of any such breach or such covenant,
agreement, term or condition. No waiver of any breach shall affect or alter
this franchise agreement, but each and every covenant, agreement, term or
condition of this franchise agreement shall continue in full force and effect
with respect to any other then existing or subsequent breach thereof.
   (o)   Reserved rights. Municipality  reserves all rights and powers under
its police powers or conferred by federal, state  or local law . In particular,
municipality reserves the right to amend its municipal code and cable ordinance
as it determines shall  be conducive to the health, safety, welfare and
accommodation of the public. Municipality agrees that by accepting this
franchise  company  has not waived its right to object to the application to it
of actions by municipality pursuant to its reserved rights or police powers.
(Ord. passed 9-5-2001)
APPENDIX A: FCC CUSTOMER RULES AS MODIFIED BY FRANCHISE
 
47 C.F.R. § 76.309 Customer service obligations.
   (a)   A cable franchise authority may enforce the customer service standards
set forth in paragraph (c) of this section against cable operators. The
franchise authority must provide affected cable operators 90 days’ written
notice of its intent to enforce the standards.
   (b)   Nothing in this rule should be construed to prevent or prohibit:
      (1)   A franchising authority and a cable operator from agreeing to
customer service requirements that exceed the standards set forth in division
(c) of this appendix;
      (2)   A franchising authority from enforcing, through the end of the
franchise term, pre-existing customer service requirements that exceed the
standards set forth in division (c) of this appendix and are contained in
current franchise agreements ;
      (3)   Any state or any franchising authority from enacting or enforcing
any consumer protection law , to the extent not specifically preempted herein;
or
      (4)   The establishment or enforcement of any state or municipal law or
regulation concerning customer service that imposes customer service
requirements that exceed, or address matters not addressed by the standards set
forth in division (c) of this appendix.
   (c)   Effective July 1, 1993, a cable operator shall be subject to the
following customer service standards:
      (1)   Cable system office hours and telephone availability.
         A.   The cable operator will maintain a local, toll-free or collect
call telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours
a day, seven days a week.
            1.   Trained company representatives will be available to respond
to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours .
            2.   After normal business hours , the access line may be answered
by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine.
Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a
trained company representative on the next business day.
         B.   Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a
customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when
the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time
shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90% of
the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
         C.   The operator will not be required to acquire equipment or perform
surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above
unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply.
         D.   Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a
busy signal less than 3% of the time.
         E.   Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open
at least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located.
      (2)   Installations, outages and service calls. Under normal operating
conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less than 95%
of the time measured on a quarterly basis:
         A.   Standard installations will be performed within seven business
days after an order has been placed. “Standard” installations are those that
are located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system.
         B.   Excluding conditions beyond the control of the operator, the
cable operator will begin working on “service interruptions” the same day
service is requested (for requests made prior to 3:00 p.m.) and in no event
later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. The cable operator
must begin actions to correct other service problems the same day service is
requested (for requests made prior to 3:00 p.m.) and the next business day
after notification of the service problem (for requests made after 3:00 p.m. on
the prior business day).
         C.   The “appointment window” alternatives for installations, service
calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at
maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours . (The operator
may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal
business hours for the express convenience of the customer.)
47 C.F.R. § 76.1602 Customer service--general information.
   (a)   A cable franchise authority may enforce the customer service standards
set forth in division (b) of this appendix against cable operators. The
franchise authority must provide affected cable operators 90 days written
notice of its intent to enforce standards.
   (b)   Effective July 1, 1993, the cable operator shall provide written
information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of
service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
      (1)   Products and services offered;
      (2)   Prices and options for programming services and conditions of
subscription. to programming and other services;
      (3)   Installation and service maintenance policies;
      (4)   Instructions on how to use the cable service;
      (5)   Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and
      (6)   Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and
telephone number of the local franchise authority’s cable office.
   (c)   Subscribers shall be advised of the procedures for resolution of
complaints about the quality of the television signal delivered by the cable
system operator, including the address of the responsible officer of the local
franchising authority.
47 C.F.R. § 76.1603 Customer service--rate and service changes.
   (a)   A cable franchise authority may enforce the customer service standards
set forth in division (b) of this appendix against cable operators. The
franchise authority must provide affected cable operators 90 days’ written
notice of its intent to enforce standards.
   (b)   Customers will be notified of any changes in rates; programming
services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Notice must be
given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes if the
change is within the control of the cable operator. In addition, the cable
operator shall notify subscribers 30 days in advance of any significant changes
in the other information required by § 76.1602.
   [Information collection requirements for division (c) are not yet effective;
OMB approval pending.]
   (c)   In addition to the requirement of division (b) of this appendix
regarding advance notification to customers of any changes in rates,
programming services or channel positions, cable systems  shall give 30 days’
written notice to both subscribers and local franchising authorities before
implementing any rate or service change. Such notice shall state the precise
amount of any rate change and briefly explain in readily understandable fashion
the cause of the rate change (e.g., change in external costs or the addition/
deletion of channels). When the change involves addition or deletion of
channels, each channel added or deleted must be separately identified. For
purposes of the carriage of digital broadcast signals, the operator need only
identify for subscribers, the television signal added and not whether that
signal may be multiplexed during certain dayparts.
   [Last sentence added by FCC 01-22, 66 FR 16554, March 26, 2001]
   (d)   A cable operator shall provide written notice to a subscriber of any
increase in the price to be charged for the basic service tier or associated
equipment at least 30 days before any proposed increase is effective. The
notice should include the name and address of the local franchising authority.
   (e)   To the extent the operator is required to provide notice of service
and rate changes to subscribers, the operator may provide such notice using any
reasonable written means at its sole discretion.
   (f)   Notwithstanding any other provision of part 76 of this chapter, a
cable operator shall not be required to provide prior notice of any rate change
that is the result of a regulatory fee, franchise fee , or any other fee, tax,
assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by any Federal agency, state , or
franchising authority on the transaction between the operator and the
subscriber.
Note 1 to § 76.1603: § 624(h) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 544(h),
contains additional notification requirements which a franchising authority may
enforce. [The statutory section states “A franchising authority may require a
cable operator to do one or more of the following: (1) Provide thirty (30)
day’s advance written notice of any change in channel assignment or in the
video programming service provided over any such channel. (2) Inform
subscribers, via written notice, that comments on programming and channel
position changes are being recorded by a designated office of the franchising
authority.”]
Note 2 to § 76.1603: § 624(d)(3) of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 544(d)
(3), contains additional notification provisions pertaining to cable operators
who offer a premium channel without charge to cable subscribers who do not
subscribe to such premium channel.
Note 3 to § 76.1603: § 631 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 551, contains
additional notification requirements pertaining to the protection of subscriber
privacy.
47 C.F.R. § 76.1619 Information on subscriber bills.
   (a)   Effective July 1, 1993, bills must be clear, concise and
understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but
not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills
will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including
optional charges, rebates and credits.
   (b)   In case of a billing dispute, the cable operator must respond to a
written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days.
   (c)   A cable franchise authority may enforce the customer service standards
set forth in this section against cable operators. The franchise authority must
provide affected cable operators 90 days written notice of its intent to
enforce standards.
(Ord. passed 9-5-2001)
APPENDIX B: GUARANTEE IN LIEU OF BOND
 
GUARANTEE IN LIEU OF BOND
THIS AGREEMENT (“Agreement”) is made this _______ day of ________, 200__
between Guarantor, Municipality and Company (for the purpose of this Agreement,
the terms “Guarantor”, “Municipality”, and “Company” have the meanings ascribed
to them below).
WHEREAS, the Company has accepted a “Franchise ” (as defined below) with
Municipality , relating to Company’s cable system (“System”), which Franchise
is hereby specifically referred to and incorporated herein, and made a part
hereof; and
WHEREAS, __________________________________, a(n) ___________ corporation
(“Guarantor”) is the indirect parent company of the Company and has a
substantial interest in the System and the conduct of the Company in complying
with the Franchise , and any and all amendments thereof and any agreements
related thereto; and
WHEREAS, §
806.05(w) of the Franchise requires the Company , as principal, to furnish bond
or bonds issued to cover the faithful performance of certain of the Company’s
obligations under the Franchise.
NOW THEREFORE, Guarantor hereby unconditionally guarantees the due and punctual
performance of any and all obligations of Company contained in §
806.05(w) of the Franchise .
Municipality  shall give written notice to Guarantor of: (a) any defaults of
Company in the performance of any such covenants and agreements; and (b) any
presentment, demand, protest or notice of any kind which relates to Company’s
performance of the terms and conditions set forth in the Franchise .
This Agreement, unless terminated, substituted or canceled as provided herein,
shall remain in full force and effect for the duration of the term of the
Franchise , or as expressly provided otherwise in the Franchise.
Upon substitution of another Guarantor reasonably satisfactory to Municipality
, this Agreement may be terminated, substituted or canceled upon thirty (30)
days’ prior written notice from Guarantor to Municipality and the Company .
Such termination shall not affect liability incurred or accrued under this
Agreement prior to the effective date of such termination or cancellation.
Any notice given pursuant to this Agreement are to be given by certified mail
and shall be addressed to the Guarantor and Company at __________________ and
to Municipality at __________________.
No claim, suit or action under this Agreement by reason of any default of the
Company  shall be brought against Guarantor unless asserted or commenced within
six (6) months after the effective date of such termination or cancellation of
this Agreement.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Guarantor, Company and Municipality have set their
hands and seals on the _______ day of ___________ , 200__.
   DEFINITIONS
(The following terms have meanings ascribed to them below)
Municipality :      ___________________________
Company :      ___________________________
Franchise :      ___________________________
            GUARANTOR:
            ___________________________
            By:________________________      
Its:________________________
            COMPANY :
            ___________________________
            By:________________________
            Its:________________________
            Municipality :
            By:________________________
            Its: Mayor
APPENDIX C: FCC DEFINITION OF CONTROL
 
47 C.F.R. § 76.501 Cross-ownership.
   (a)   No cable television system (including all parties under common
control) shall carry the signal of any television broadcast station if such
system directly or indirectly owns, operates, controls, or has an interest in a
TV broadcast station whose predicted Grade B contour, computed in accordance
with § 73.684 of part 73 of this chapter, overlaps in whole or in part the
service area of such system (i.e., the area within which the system is serving
subscribers).
   (b)   [Reserved]
   (c)   Effective date . The provisions of paragraph (a) of this section are
not effective until November 8, 1987, as to ownership interests proscribed
herein if such interests were in existence on or before July 1, 1970 (e.g., if
franchise  were in existence on or before July 1970), and will be applied to
cause divestiture as to ownership interests proscribed herein only where the
cable system  is directly or indirectly, owned, operated, controlled by, or has
an interest in a non-satellite television broadcast station which places a
principal community contour encompassing the entire community and there is no
other commercial non-satellite television broadcast station placing a principal
community contour encompassing the entire community.
   (d)   No cable operator shall offer satellite master antenna television
service (“SMATV”), as that service is defined in § 76.5(a)(2), separate and
apart from any franchised cable service in any portion of the franchise area
served by that cable operator’s cable system , either directly or indirectly
through an affiliate owned, operated, controlled, or under common control with
the cable operator.
   (e)   (1)   A cable operator may directly or indirectly, through an
affiliate owned, operated, controlled by, or under common control with the
cable operator, offer SMATV service within its franchise area if the cable
operator’s SMATV system was owned, operated, controlled by or under common
control with the cable operator as of October 5, 1992.
      (2)   A cable operator may directly or indirectly, through an affiliate
owned, operated, controlled by, or under common control with the cable
operator, offer service within its franchise area through SMATV facilities,
provided such service is offered in accordance with the terms and conditions of
a cable franchise agreement .
   (f)   The restrictions in divisions (d) and (e) of this appendix shall not
apply to any cable operator in any franchise area in which a cable operator is
subject to effective competition as determined under § 623(1) of the
Communications Act.
   Note 1: The word “control” as used herein is not limited to majority stock
ownership, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised.
   Note 2: In applying the provisions of this section, ownership and other
interests in broadcast licensees and cable television systems will be
attributed to their holders and deemed cognizable pursuant to the following
criteria:
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided herein, partnership and direct ownership
interest and any voting stock interest amounting to 5% or more of the
outstanding voting stock of a corporate broadcast licensee or cable television
system will be cognizable;
   (b)   No minority voting stock interest will be cognizable if there is a
single holder of more than 50% of the outstanding voting stock of the corporate
broadcast licensee or cable television system in which the minority interest is
held;
   (c)   Investment companies, as defined in 15 U.S.C. § 80a-3, insurance
companies and banks holding stock through their trust departments in trust
accounts will be considered to have a cognizable interest only if they hold 10%
or more of the outstanding voting stock of a corporate broadcast licensee or
cable television system, or if any of the officers or directors of the
broadcast licensee or cable television system are representatives of the
investment company , insurance company or bank concerned. Holdings by a bank or
insurance company will be aggregated if the bank or insurance company has any
right to determine how the stock will be voted. Holdings by investment
companies will be aggregated if under common management.
   (d)   Attribution of ownership interests in a broadcast licensee or cable
television system that are held indirectly by any party through one or more
intervening corporations will be determined by successive multiplication of the
ownership percentages for each link in the vertical ownership chain and
application of the relevant attribution benchmark to the resulting product,
except that wherever the ownership percentage for any link in the chain exceeds
50%, it shall not be included for purposes of this multiplication. (For
example, if A owns 10% of company X, which owns 60% of company Y, which owns
25% of “Licensee”, then X’s interest in “Licensee” would be 25% (the same as
Y’s interest since X’s interest in Y exceeds 50%), and A’s interest in
“Licensee” would be 2.5% (0.1x0.25). Under the 5% attribution benchmark, X’s
interest in “Licensee” would be cognizable, while A’s interest would not be
cognizable.)
   (e)   Voting stock interests held in trust shall be attributed to any person
who holds or share the power to vote such stock, to any person who has the sole
power to sell such stock, and to any person who has the right to revoke the
trust at will or to replace the trustee at will. If the trustee has a familial,
personal or extra-trust business relationship to the grantor or the
beneficiary, the grantor or beneficiary, as appropriate, will be attributed
with the stock interests held in trust. An otherwise qualified trust will be
ineffective to insulate the grantor or beneficiary from attribution with the
trust’s assets unless all voting stock interests held by the grantor or
beneficiary in the relevant broadcast licensee or cable television system are
subject to said trust.
   (g)   (1)   A limited partnership interest shall be attributed to a limited
partner unless that partner is not materially involved, directly or indirectly,
in the management or operation of the media-related activities of the
partnership and the licensee or system so certifies.
      (2)   In order for a licensee or system to make the certification set
forth in division (g)(1) of this note, it must verify that the partnership
agreement or certificate of limited partnership, with respect to the particular
limited partner exempt from attribution, establishes that the exempt limited
partner has not material involvement, directly or indirectly, in the management
or operation of the media activities of the partnership. The criteria which
would assure adequate insulation for purposes of this certification are
described in the Memorandum Opinion and Order in MM Docket No. 83-46, FCC 85-
252 (released June 24, 1985) as modified on reconsideration in the Memorandum
Opinion and Order in MM Docket No. 83-46, FCC 86-410 (released November 28,
1986). Irrespective of the terms of the certificate of limited partnership or
partnership agreement, however, no such certification shall be made if the
individual or entity making the certification has actual knowledge of any
material involvement of the limited partners in the management or operation of
the media-related businesses of the partnership.
   (h)   Officers and directors of a broadcast licensee or cable television
system are considered to have a cognizable interest in the entity with which
they are so associated. If any such entity engages in businesses in addition to
its primary business of broadcasting or cable television service, it may
request the Commission to waive attribution for any officer or director whose
duties and responsibilities are wholly unrelated to its primary business. The
officers and directors of a parent company of a broadcast licensee or cable
television system, with an attributable interest in any such subsidiary entity,
shall be deemed to have a cognizable interest in the subsidiary unless the
duties and responsibilities of the officer or director involved are wholly
unrelated to the broadcast licensee or cable television system subsidiary, and
a statement properly documenting this fact is submitted to the Commission.
(This statement may be included on appropriate Ownership Report.) The officers
and directors of a sister corporation of a broadcast licensee or cable
television system shall not be attributed with ownership of these entities by
virtue of such status.
   (i)   Discrete ownership interests will be aggregated in determining whether
or not an interest is cognizable under this section. An individual or entity
will be deemed to have a cognizable investment if:
      (1)   The sum of the interests held by or through “passive investors” is
equal to or exceeds 10%; or
      (2)   The sum of the interests other than those held by or through
“passive investors” is equal to or exceeds 5%; or
      (3)   The sum of the interests computed under paragraph (i)(1) of this
note plus the sum of the interests computed under paragraph (i)(2) of this note
is equal to or exceeds 10%.
   Note 3: In cases where record and beneficial ownership of voting stock is
not identical (e.g., bank nominees holding stock as record owners for the
benefit of mutual funds, brokerage houses holding stock in street names for
benefit of customers, investment advisors holding stock in their own names for
the benefit of clients, and insurance companies holding stock), the party
having the right to determine how the stock will be voted will be considered to
own it for purposes of this subpart.
   Note 4: Division (a) of this section will not be applied so as to require
the divestiture of ownership interests proscribed herein solely because of the
transfer of such interests to heirs or legatees by will or intestacy, provided
that the degree or extent of the proscribed cross-ownership is not increased by
such transfer.
   Note 5: In applying the provisions of divisions (d) and (e) of this
appendix, control and an attributable ownership interest shall be defined by
reference to the definitions contained in Notes 1 through 4, provided however,
that:
   (a)   The single majority shareholder provisions of Note 2(b) and the
limited partner insulation provisions of Note 2(g) shall not apply; and
   (b)   The provisions of Note 2(a) regarding five (5) percent interests shall
include all voting or nonvoting stock or limited partnership equity interests
of five (5) percent or more.
(Ord. passed 9-5-2001)
APPENDIX D: SHARED EG CHANNEL INFORMATION
 
SHARED EG CHANNEL INFORMATION
GENESEE-NORTH OAKLAND AREA COMMUNITIES
   The following provides information on the two shared education/government
(“EG”) channels being provided for the ten participating Genesee-North Oakland
communities under the renewal franchise with Comcast.
   Two such channels are provided for each community, largely because the
achieves the communities’ goal of making sure that most/all subscribers receive
both the school and government programming appropriate to the school district/
community they live in, while doing so at the least expense to Comcast (by
having the EG channels the same for the large areas served by an Optical
Transfer Point, rather than having variations neighborhood by neighborhood
(node by node)).
I.   North Area:
   A.   Communities included:
      1.   City of Clio;
      2.   Vienna Charter Township;
      3.   City of Mount Morris; and
      4.   Genesee Charter Township.
   B.   Shared EG channels for these communities are:
      1.   The North channel which is shared by the following schools and
municipalities:
         a.   Mount Morris Public Schools;
         b.   Clio Public Schools;
         c.   City of Clio;
         d.   Vienna Charter Township;
         e.   City of Mount Morris;
         f.   Genesee Charter Township; and
         g.   Other school districts serving the preceding communities who
elect to participate via the studio location set forth in I.C.
      2.   City of Flint channel.
   C.   Shared EG channel studios located at (§ 5.4.1):
      1.   Mount Morris High School or Clio High School.
   D.   Additional remote signal input points located at (§ 5.4.2):
      1.   Clio City Hall;
      2.   Mount Morris City Hall;
      3.   Vienna Township Hall;
      4.   Genesee Township Hall; and
      5.   Mount Morris High School or Clio High School (whichever one does not
have the studio).
II.   West Area:
   A.   Communities included:
      1.   City of Flushing; and
      2.    Flint Charter Township.
   B.   Shared EG channels for these communities are:
      1.   The West-1 (Flushing) channel which is shared by the following
schools and municipalities:
         a.    Flushing Public Schools;
         b.   City of Flushing; and
         c.    Other school districts serving the preceding community who elect
to participate via the studio location set forth in II.C.
      2.    The West-2 (Flint Township) channel which is shared by the
following schools and municipalities:
         a.    Carmen Ainsworth Public Schools;
         b.   Flint Charter Township; and
         c.    Other school districts serving the preceding community who elect
to participate via the studio location set forth in II.C.
   C.    Shared EG channel studios located at (§ 5.4.1):
      1.   Flushing High School (West-1/Flushing Channel); and
      2.   Carmen Ainsworth High School (West-2/Flint Twp Channel).
   D.    Additional remote signal input points located at (§ 5.4.2):
      1.   Flushing City Hall (West-1/Flushing Channel); and
      2.   Flint Charter Twp Hall (West-2/Flint Twp Channel)
III.   South Area:
   A.   Communities included:
      1.   City of Grand Blanc;
      2.   Grand Blanc Charter Township;
      3.   Village of Holly;
      4.   Holly Township.
   B.   Shared EG channels for these communities are:
      1.   The South-1(Grand Blanc) channel which is shared by the following
schools and municipalities:
         a.   Grand Blanc Public Schools;
         b.   City of Grand Blanc;
         c.   Grand Blanc Charter Township; and
         d.   Other school districts serving the preceding communities who
elect to participate via the studio location set forth in III.C.
      2.   The South-2 (Holly) channel which is shared by the following schools
and municipalities:
         a.   Holly Public Schools;
         b.   Village of Holly;
         c.   Holly Township; and
         d.   Other school districts serving the preceding communities who
elect to participate via the studio location set forth in III.C.
   C.   Shared EG channel studios located at (§ 5.4.1):
      1.   Grand Blanc High School (South-1/Grand Blanc Channel); and
      2.   The NEW Holly High School (South-2/Holly Channel).
   D.   Additional remote signal input points located at (§ 5.4.2):
      1.   Grand Blanc City Hall (South-1/Grand Blanc Channel);
      2.   Grand Blanc Charter Township Hall (South-1/Grand Blanc Channel);
      3.   Holly Village Hall (South-2/Holly Channel); and
      4.   Holly Township Hall (South-2/Holly Channel).
APPENDIX E: SAMPLE CONTRACT FOR PEG CHANNEL
 
SAMPLE CONTRACT FOR PEG CHANNEL
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL AGREEMENT
   THIS AGREEMENT is made this ________ day of __________, 200___, between THE
CITY/TOWNSHIP of _________ (“Municipality ”), and the Public School System
(“Schools”).
   WITNESSETH:
   WHEREAS, pursuant to its ______ [year] cable television franchise
(“Franchise”) with ________Cable Company (“Company”), Municipality has obtained
for the benefit of the residents of Municipality, an educational access cable
channel (the “Cable Channel”) for educational use and related facilities; and
   WHEREAS, the Schools have or will acquire television facilities and are
desirous of providing programming on the cable system in Municipality ; and
   WHEREAS, the parties desire to give the Schools the responsibility to
operate the Cable Channel for the purposes described herein-for the benefit of
the residents of the Municipality ; and
   WHEREAS, the parties intend that the Cable Channel shall be used by the
Schools for the purpose of providing non-commercial educational programming as
defined herein; and
   WHEREAS, in consideration of the covenants herein, the Schools agree to
operate such channel upon the terms and conditions stated herein;
   NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the respective covenants contained
herein, the parties agree as follows:
   1.   Term of Agreement. This Agreement shall  be effective for one (1) year
from the date first written above (“Initial Term”) and shall automatically
renew for successive one-year terms (“Renewal Term”) unless either party gives
sixty (60) days notice of termination prior to the annual anniversary of this
Agreement, except that in no event shall any Renewal Term extend past the
expiration of Municipality’s current Franchise  with Company .
   2.   Definitions. For purposes of this Agreement, the parties hereby agree
that “Educational Access” shall  mean non-commercial cable access where
educational institutions are the primary or designated programmers or users.
   3.   Cable Channel. The Schools shall  be solely responsible for the
administration and operation of the Cable Channel and Municipality  shall have
no responsibility  therefore of any kind.
   4.   Operation of the Cable Channel. The Schools shall  operate the Cable
Channel for Educational Access programming purposes. The Schools shall operate
the Cable Channel in compliance with applicable laws, rules, regulations, and
judicial and agency decisions, and in compliance with the Franchise  between
Municipality  and Company . In particular, Schools acknowledge that its use of
the channel may  have to be shared with other school systems, entities or
municipalities on an equitable basis and that Municipality may adopt and revise
rules about Company’s use of the cable channel when it is not being used for
its intended purpose.
   5.   Channel Sharing. Schools acknowledge that Municipality  may require the
Cable Channel to be shared with public access channels, other educational
channels or with a government channel. If so, Schools will do same as from time
to time directed by Municipality.
   6.   Government Channel. If and as requested by Municipality , Schools agree
to provide live or videotaped coverage (as appropriate) on the Cable Channel of
those meetings of Municipality’s legislative body or subordinate bodies as
Municipality may  from time to time request, all at no cost to Municipality.
   7.   Program Schedule. The Schools shall  maintain appropriate program
schedules and prepare daily log sheets, accurately reflecting all programs
cablecast on the Cable Channel, including the time of each program, the length
of each program, and the format of the program. These records shall be retained
for a period of at least two (2) years and made available to Municipality  for
review and examination upon request.
   8.   Promotion of Programming. The Schools shall  promote the programming
being conducted on the Cable Channel in an appropriate manner which, at a
minimum, shall  include preparation and distribution in and around Municipality
of a weekly program schedule. Such schedule shall be provided to Municipality
and the Schools shall  use its best efforts to publicize such schedule in local
newspapers on a weekly basis.
   9.   Amount of Programming. The Schools shall  provide programming on the
Cable Channel at least _____ hours per day and shall provide at least ____
hours of full-motion video (i.e., excluding character generated, bulletin board
and similar programming) programming per week on the Cable Channel.
   10.   Records. The Schools shall  maintain appropriate records and files
regarding the Cable Channel’s operations, correspondence, communications,
programming plans, and history of operations, retaining such records for a
period of at least three (3) years or such longer period as may be required by
law , permitting Municipality  to review and examine such records upon request,
and permitting the general public to review and examine such records during
normal business hours  pursuant to such reasonable rules as the Schools may
establish for such purpose, or as may be required by law .
   11.   Cost of Operation. The Schools shall  provide and pay for all expenses
of operation of the Cable Channel, including employees, equipment, materials,
and services.
   12.   Programming. The Schools shall  be responsible for insuring that
programming which it produces or distributes on the Cable Channel does not
violate any applicable constitutional, statutory or ordinance  provision, FCC
rule, FCC decision, judicial decision, any governmental regulation applicable
to such programming, the Franchise , or any provision of Municipality’s
Franchise with Company . Also, the Schools shall  require that each user of or
person providing programming for the Cable Channel sign a form approved in
advance by Company and Municipality . Such form shall provide, inter alia, that
the user or person will be responsible for all programming he, she or it
produces, and agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless both the Schools,
Company and Municipality, their officers, employees, and agents, from and
against all claims, suits, and causes of action, of any kind whatsoever,
arising out of his or her use of the Cable Channel, and the programming he or
she produces.
   13.   Copyright Assignment. Upon request by Municipality , the Schools agree
to grant to Municipality a non-exclusive right to use, in any form whatsoever,
any copyrightable programming or related material created in whole or in part
at the Schools or with Schools’ equipment or cablecast on the Cable Channel,
such that Municipality shall  have the right to duplicate, air, distribute, and
otherwise use such copyrightable material and related material as Municipality
deems appropriate. To comply with Federal copyright law  and fulfill its
obligation in the preceding sentence, Schools agree to include in its forms,
rules and guidelines and enforce a requirement that all persons or entities
using the Schools’ equipment assign to the Schools and Municipality a non-
exclusive copyright in all works created at the Schools or with its equipment.
   14.   Copies. Upon request, the Schools shall  provide Municipality  with a
videotape copy of any program or programs aired on the Cable Channel.
   15.   Organizations. The Schools shall  join and have at least one qualified
representative attend the annual meetings of (a) the National Association of
Telecommunications Officers and Administrators, 1650 Tysons Blvd., Suite 200,
McLean, VA 22102-3915, (703) 506-3275, and (b) the Alliance for Community
Media, 666 11th Street, N.W., Suite 806, Washington, D.C. 20001, (202) 393-
2650. The Schools shall join both the national and state  chapters of each
organization.
   16.   Indemnification. The Schools shall  indemnify, defend, and save and
hold harmless Municipality , its officers and employees, from and against all
claims, suits, and causes of action of any kind whatsoever, including but not
limited to libel, slander or copyright infringement actions, arising out of the
Schools’ operations or activities of the Cable Channel or the programming
distributed on such channel.
   17.   Insurance. During the Initial Term of this Agreement, and any Renewal
Term, the Schools shall  secure, continuously maintain, and provide
Municipality  with acceptable proof of insurance of the following types and
amounts:
      (a)   Public liability insurance covering persons and property with
limits of not less than Three Hundred Thousand Dollars ($300,000) per person,
not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence for bodily
injury, and not less than Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000) aggregate in any one
policy year against property damage.
      (b)   Broadcaster’s liability insurance in an amount of not less than
Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000).
      (c)   Workers’ compensation in compliance with the laws of the State of
________________.
      (d)   All insurance shall be written on an occurrence basis with no
deductible to exceed $____________.
   Municipality  shall be named as a co-insured or an additional insured on all
of the foregoing insurance coverages, except for workers’ compensation
insurance. The proof of insurance provided to Municipality shall provide that
Municipality will be given thirty (30) days prior written notice of any
cancellation, non-renewal, or material reduction or change in any of the
coverages provided.
   18.   Transfer of Assets and Records. Upon termination of this Agreement,
including any extension or renewals thereof, and after request of Municipality
or upon dissolution of the Schools’ corporate existence, the Schools shall
transfer title and possession of all of assets acquired, in whole or in part,
with funds provided by Municipality and records required to be kept by this
Agreement, to Municipality for use by any successor Cable Channel operator
selected by Municipality, or in the absence of any such successor, for
disposition by Municipality in a manner deemed appropriate by Municipality.
   19.   Breach/Remedy. Upon any breach of this agreement, including in
particular the failure to maintain insurance coverage for libel claims, in
addition to other remedies Municipality  may immediately cancel this Agreement,
require Schools to stop distributing programming on the Cable Channel, and/or
direct Company  to cease transmitting programming on such channel.
   20.   Nonassignability. This Agreement may not be assigned by the Schools
without Municipality's  prior written consent.
   21.   Conflict. In the event of a conflict between this agreement and the
Franchise  the Franchise shall  control.
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have hereto set their hands as of the day
and year first above written.
WITNESSES:   CITY/TOWNSHIP OF __________________
_______________________            By   __________________________
_______________________            Its   __________________________
WITNESSES:   ______________ PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM
_______________________            By   _________________________
_______________________            Its   __________________________
(Ord. passed 9-5-2001)
CHAPTER 810: DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS
Section
810.01   Disorderly or immoral conduct; loitering
810.02   Garbage and rubbish
810.03   Alcoholic beverages
810.04   Access to premises
810.05   Parking areas
810.99   Penalty
§ 810.01 DISORDERLY OR IMMORAL CONDUCT; LOITERING.
   (a)   The owner  or operator of a drive-in restaurant shall  maintain quiet
and good order upon the premises  and shall not permit disorderly or immoral
conduct or loitering. No owner  or operator shall cause or create any noise or
other nuisance on the parking area of a drive-in restaurant whereby the quiet
and good order of the premises  or of the neighborhood is disturbed.
   (b)   No person on the premises of a drive-in restaurant shall race the
motor of any motor vehicle, needlessly bring a motor vehicle to a sudden start
or stop, blow any horn or make or cause to be made any other loud or unseemly
noise, nuisance or disturbance whereby the quiet and good order of the premises
or of the neighborhood is disturbed. No person on the premises of a drive-in
restaurant shall make profane, obscene, rude or insulting remarks in the
hearing of any other person, nor shall any person lounge, loiter or hang about
such premises after consuming the food or beverage provided by the drive-in
restaurant.
(Ord. 30, passed 4-8-1964)
§ 810.02 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH.
   (a)   No person shall  place, throw or deposit any waste material upon the
outside premises  or parking area of a drive-in restaurant, on any street ,
alley or adjoining property  or in the vicinity of a drive-in restaurant,
except in adequate receptacles provided for that purpose, nor shall the  owner
or operator of such restaurant permit such conduct.
   (b)   The owner or operator of a drive-in restaurant shall , at least once
every 24 hours, dispose of waste materials which tend to create a public
nuisance on the premises . The owner or operator shall keep the premises
whereon the drive-in restaurant is located, together with the parking area and
that portion of any street or alley adjoining the drive-in restaurant, free
from waste material. The owner or operator shall provide the drive-in
restaurant with a sufficient number of adequate refuse containers.
(Ord. 30, passed 4-8-1964)
§ 810.03 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   No person on the premises  of a drive-in restaurant, whether in or out of a
motor vehicle, shall  drink, have in his or her possession or under his or her
control, or offer to give to another to drink, any beer, wine or intoxicating
liquor.
(Ord. 30, passed 4-8-1964)
§ 810.04 ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   The owner or operator of a drive-in restaurant shall  provide access
available to public streets or other public ways from at least two points at
all times. Such means of access shall be kept clear by the owner or operator at
all times to facilitate departure of persons in motor vehicles and to permit
entrance of fire apparatus or ambulances in cases of emergency.
(Ord. 30, passed 4-8-1964)
§ 810.05 PARKING AREAS.
   (a)   Illumination. The parking area of any drive-in restaurant shall  be
adequately illuminated by electric lights, but such illumination shall be so
arranged by the owner or operator as to reflect away from any adjoining
residential property .
   (b)   Paving or treatment. The parking area shall  be satisfactorily paved
or treated by the owner or operator so as to avoid creating dust and so as to
provide for adequate drainage of surface water.
(Ord. 30, passed 4-8-1964)
§ 810.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 812: MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE VENDORS
Section
812.01   Intent
812.02   Definitions
812.03   Scope
812.04   Permit required
812.05   Fees
812.06   Regulations
812.07   Other permits
812.08   Revocation
812.09   Complaints; appeals
812.99   Penalty
§ 812.01 INTENT.
   In the interest of encouraging mobile food vendors  who add to the vibrancy
and desirability of the city, while providing a framework under which such
businesses operate , this chapter is established.
(Ord. 1701-08, passed 12-13-2017)
§ 812.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall  apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE. A motorized vehicle which may  upon issuance of a
license by the City Clerk and conformance with the regulations established by
the chapter may  temporarily park upon a public street  and engage in the
service, sale or distribution of ready to eat food for individual portion
service to the general public directly from the vehicle.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDING. Vending, serving or offering for sale food and/or
beverages from a mobile food vending unit which meets the definition of a Food
Service Establishment under Public Act 92 of 2000, being M.C.L.A. §§ 289.1101
through 289.8111, which may  include the ancillary sales of branded items
consistent with the food, such as a t-shirt that bears the name of the
organization engaged in mobile food vending.
   OPERATE. All activities associated with the conduct of business, including
set up and take down and/or actual hours where the mobile food vending  unit is
open for business.
   VENDOR. Any individual engaged in the business of mobile food vending ; if
more than one individual is operating a single stand, cart or other means of
conveyance, then VENDOR shall  mean all individuals operating such single
stand, care or other means of conveyance.
(Ord. 1701-08, passed 12-13-2017)
§ 812.03 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this chapter apply to mobile food vehicles  engaged in the
business of cooking, preparing and distributing food or beverage with or
without charge upon or in public and private restricted spaces. This chapter
does not apply to vehicles which dispense food and that move from place to
place and are stationary in the same location for no more than 15 minutes at a
time, such as ice cream trucks, or food vending pushcarts and stands located on
sidewalks.
(Ord. 1701-08, passed 12-13-2017)
§ 812.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   No vendor  shall  engage in mobile food vending  without a permit from
the City Clerk authorizing such vending. The City Clerk shall prescribe the
form of such permits and application for such permit. All permits shall be
prominently displayed on the mobile food vending unit. No vending through a
mobile food vending unit of food and/or other human consumables shall be
permitted unless it meets the definition of mobile food vending as defined by
this chapter. A permit issued under this chapter shall not be transferable from
person to person. A permit is valid for one vehicle only and shall not be
transferred between vehicles. The City Clerk shall issue no more than five
active mobile food vehicle  permits for any permitting period.
   (b)   The permit application shall include the following:
      (1)   Name, signature, phone number, email contact and business address
of the applicant;
      (2)   A description of the preparation methods and food product offered
for sale including the intended menu;
      (3)   Information on the mobile food vehicle to include year, make and
model of the vehicle and dimensions, which shall not exceed 30 feet in length
and ten feet in width;
      (4)   Information setting forth the proposed hours of operation, area of
operations, plans for power access, water supply and wastewater disposal;
      (5)   Copies of all necessary license or permits issued by the County
Health Department, including a copy of the letter of intent provided to the
county ; and
      (6)   Insurance coverage:
         A.   Proof of general comprehensive liability policy with limits of no
less than $2,000,000 combined single limit coverage issued by an insurer
licensed to do business in the state and which names the city as an additional
injured; and
         B.   Proof of public liability and property damage motor vehicle
policy with limits of no less than $1,000,000 issued by an insurer licensed to
do business in the state .
(Ord. 1701-08, passed 12-13-2017)
§ 812.05 FEES.
   All vendors  receiving a permit under this chapter shall  pay the monthly
fee as set from time to time by the City Council. There shall be no proration
of fees. Fees are not refundable once a permit has been issued by the City
Clerk.
(Ord. 1701-08, passed 12-13-2017)
§ 812.06 REGULATIONS.
   Any vendor  engaging in mobile food vending  shall  comply with the
following regulations.
   (a)   No operator of a mobile food vehicle  shall park, stand or move a
vehicle and conduct business within the areas of the city where the permit
holder has not been authorized to operate . The City Council shall by
resolution identify those streets and public areas where parking by mobile food
vehicles is permitted.
   (b)   The customer service area for mobile food vehicles  shall be on the
side of the truck that faces a curb lawn or sidewalk when parked. No food shall
be prepared, sold or displayed outside of mobile food vehicles.
   (c)   All mobile food vehicle  vendors  shall offer a waste container for
public use which the vendor shall empty at its own expense. All trash and
garbage originating from the preparation of mobile food vehicles shall be
collected and disposed of off-site by the operators each day. Spills of food or
food by-products shall be cleaned up, and no dumping of gray water on the
street is allowed.
   (d)   Mobile food vendors  shall comply with the city’s noise regulations,
sign regulations and all other city ordinances.
   (e)   Mobile food vehicles when parked on public streets shall be parked in
conformance with all applicable parking restrictions, and shall not hinder the
lawful parking or operation of other vehicles.
   (f)   A mobile food vehicle  shall not be parked on the street overnight or
left unattended and unsecured at any time food is in the vehicle. Any mobile
food vehicle found to be unattended shall be considered a public safety hazard
and may be ticketed and impounded or towed.
   (g)   A vendor shall not operate a mobile food vehicle within 500 feet of
any fair, festival, special event or civic event that is licensed or sanctioned
by the city unless the vendor has obtained permission from the event sponsor.
   (h)   A vendor shall not operate on private property without first obtaining
written consent to operate from the affected private property owner. A private
property owner shall not permit parking by a mobile food vehicle until a permit
has been obtained to allow for such use.
   (i)   Any power required for the mobile food vehicle located on public way
shall be self-contained and a mobile food vehicle shall not use utilities drawn
from the public right-of-way. All power sources must be self-contained. No
power or cable equipment shall be extended at or across any city street , alley
or sidewalk .
   (j)   A mobile food vendor  may only operate the follow hours:
      (1)   9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. in residential areas;
      (2)   7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. in commercial areas; and
      (3)   6:00 a.m. to 3:00 a.m. on private property within a commercial
area.
(Ord. 1701-08, passed 12-13-2017)
§ 812.07 OTHER PERMITS.
   A permit obtained under this chapter shall not relieve any vendor  of the
responsibility  for obtaining any other permit, or authorization required by
any other ordinance , statute or administrative rule.
(Ord. 1701-08, passed 12-13-2017)
§ 812.08 REVOCATION.
   (a)   The City Clerk shall  revoke the permit of any vendor  engaged in
mobile food vending  who ceases to meet any requirement of this chapter or
violates any other federal, state  or local regulation, makes a false statement
on their application, or conducts activity in a manner that is adverse to the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
   (b)   Immediately upon such revocation, the permit shall become null and
void.
(Ord. 1701-08, passed 12-13-2017)
§ 812.09 COMPLAINTS; APPEALS.
   If a permit is denied or revoked by the City Clerk, the  applicant  or
holder of a permit may  appeal to and have a hearing before the City Manager .
The City Manager  shall  make a written determination. If the City Manager
denial or revocation is supported the  applicant  may appeal the City Manager
’s decision to City Council.
(Ord. 1701-08, passed 12-13-2017)
§ 812.99 PENALTY.
   Any permit holder operating a mobile food vehicle  in violation of any
provision of this chapter or any rules and regulations promulgated by the city
shall  be subject to a civil fine of $500 per day. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 1701-08, passed 12-13-2017)
CHAPTER 818: GARAGE SALES
Section
818.01   Definitions
818.02   License required; fee
818.03   License issuance; term; display
818.04   License information
818.05   Exceptions
818.99   Penalty
§ 818.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   GARAGE SALE. Includes all sales entitled “garage sale”, “lawn sale”, “attic
sale”, “rummage sale” or “flea market sale”, or any similar casual sale of
tangible personal property  which is advertised by any means whereby the public
at large is or can be made aware of such sale.
   GOODS. Includes any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property  capable
of being the object of a sale regulated by this chapter.
(Ord. 93, passed 2-12-1975)
§ 818.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.
   No person shall conduct a garage sale in the city without first filing with
the City Clerk the information specified in §
818.04 and obtaining from the City Clerk a license to do so, to be known as a
garage sale license. The fee for such license shall be $2.
(Ord. 93, passed 2-12-1975)
§ 818.03 LICENSE ISSUANCE; TERM; DISPLAY.
   (a)   A garage sale  license shall  be issued to any person only twice
within a 12-month period, and no such license shall be issued for more than
three consecutive calendar  days.
   (b)   Each license issued under this chapter shall be prominently displayed
on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout the entire
period of the licensed sale.
(Ord. 93, passed 2-12-1975)
§ 818.04 LICENSE INFORMATION.
   The license information to be filed with the City Clerk pursuant to this
chapter shall  be as follows:
   (a)   The name of the person conducting the sale;
   (b)   The name of the owner of the property on which the sale is to be
conducted, and the consent of the owner if the applicant is other than the
owner ;
   (c)   The location at which the sale is to be conducted;
   (d)   The number of days of the sale;
   (e)   The date and nature of any past sale; and
   (f)   A statement or affirmation by the applicant that the information given
is in full and true.
(Ord. 93, passed 2-12-1975)
§ 818.05 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to or affect the following persons or sales:
   (a)   Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction;
   (b)   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials; or
   (c)   Any person selling or advertising for sale any items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the advertisement and
which separate items do not exceed five in number .
(Ord. 93, passed 2-12-1975)
§ 818.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 850: PEDDLERS
Section
850.01   Peddler and solicitor defined
850.02   License required
850.03   Application of chapter
850.04   License applications; investigation fee
850.05   Investigations; license issuance; records
850.06   Health standards
850.07   License fees
850.08   Transferability of licenses
850.09   Peace disturbances; prohibited actions
850.10   Use of streets
850.11   Hours of sale
850.12   Exhibition of licenses
850.13   Enforcement by police
850.14   Records of violations
850.15   Revocation of licenses
850.16   Appeals
850.17   Expiration of licenses
850.18   Waiver of provisions
850.19   Establishment of do-not-knock registry
850.20   Removal from do-not-knock registry
850.21   Copies of do-not-knock registry
850.22   Enforcement
850.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Hawkers and peddlers generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 445.371 et seq.
§ 850.01 PEDDLER AND SOLICITOR DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall  apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. Includes any person, whether a resident of the city or not, who
travels by foot, automobile or any other type of conveyance, from place to
place, from house to house or from street  to street , carrying, conveying or
transporting goods, wares, magazines, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables,
fruits, garden truck or farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the
same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who,
without traveling from place to place, sells or offers the same for sale from a
wagon, automobile, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance. PEDDLER also
includes the words HAWKER and HUCKSTER.
   SOLICITOR. Includes any person, whether a resident of the city or not,
traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile or any other type of conveyance,
from place to place, from house to house, or from street  to street , taking or
attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares, magazines, merchandise,
or personal property  of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for
services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such person
has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or
whether they are collecting advance payments on such sales or not. SOLICITOR
also includes the word CANVASSER.
(Ord. 114, passed 10-9-1977; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-13-2008)
§ 850.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall  engage in the business of peddler  or solicitor  in the
city without first obtaining a license therefore as provided in this chapter.
Any person or organization that is actively soliciting funds or donations of
any kind, by whatever means, as opposed to soliciting solely for the purpose of
distributing religious, political or other noncommercial information, is
required to apply for and obtain a license as provided in this chapter, unless
otherwise exempt under this chapter.
(Ord. 114, passed 10-9-1977; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-13-2008)
§ 850.03 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
The following shall be exempt from obtaining a license under this chapter but
shall be required to abide by the remaining sections of this chapter:
   (a)   Newspaper peddlers ;
   (b)   Any persons traveling on an established route at the request, express
or implied, of their customers;
   (c)   Any salesperson calling on business establishments;
   (d)   Any person under 18 years of age peddling or soliciting under the
sponsorship of any established public or private school or recognized
charitable or religious organization; and
   (e)   Any person soliciting as the duly authorized representative of any
nonprofit enterprise provided they are soliciting solely for the limited
purpose of distributing religious, political or other noncommercial information
and not actively soliciting any funds or donations of any kind.
   (f)   Any person claiming exemption under this section shall provide proof
satisfactory to the City Clerk of exempt status.
(Ord. 114, passed 10-9-1977; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-13-2008; Ord. 2504-01, passed
5-14-2025)
§ 850.04 LICENSE APPLICATIONS; INVESTIGATION FEE.
   (a)   Applicants for a license under this chapter shall  file with the City
Clerk a sworn application, in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished
by the City Clerk, which application shall give the following information:
      (1)   The name and a description of the applicant;
      (2)   The address (legal and local) of the applicant;
      (3)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold, and, in the case of products of a farm or orchard, a statement as to
whether or not such products are produced or grown by the applicant;
      (4)   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship;
      (5)   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
      (6)   If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together
with the license number or other means of identification;
      (7)   A photograph of the applicant taken within 60 days immediately
prior to the date of filing the application, which photograph shall be two
inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a
clear and distinguishing manner;
      (8)   The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two
reliable property owners of the county who will certify as to the applicant’s
good character and business responsibility , or, in lieu of the names of
references, at the discretion of the Chief of Police, any other available
evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant
as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business
responsibility ; and
      (9)   A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance , the nature of the
offense, name of any applicable jurisdiction, case number and the punishment or
penalty assessed therefore.
   (b)   At the time of filing the application, a fee, which shall be set and
may be amended by resolution of City Council from time to time, shall be paid
to the City Clerk to cover the cost of the investigation described in §
850.05.
(Ord. 114, passed 10-9-1977; Ord. 232, passed 12-13-1995; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-
13-2008)
§ 850.05 INVESTIGATIONS; LICENSE ISSUANCE; RECORDS.
   (a)   Upon receipt of the license application described in §
850.04, the original shall be referred to the Chief of Police, who shall,
within ten days from the date of the application, cause such an investigation
of the applicant’s business and moral character to be made as he or she deems
necessary for the protection of the public good.
   (b)   If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant’s character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police
shall endorse on such application his or her disapproval and reasons for the
same and shall return the application to the City Clerk, who shall notify the
applicant within three days after the completion of the investigation that his
or her application is disapproved and that no license will be issued.
   (c)   If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of
Police shall endorse on the application his or her approval, execute a
certificate addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business
applied for and return such certificate, along with the application, to the
City Clerk, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fee, issue the
license and deliver to the applicant his or her license certificate. Such
certificate shall contain the seal of the city, the signature of the licensee,
the class of license issued, the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the
amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall
be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description
of any vehicle to be used by the applicant. The Clerk shall keep a permanent
record of all licenses issued.
(Ord. 232, passed 12-13-1995; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-13-2008)
§ 850.06 HEALTH STANDARDS.
   No license under this chapter shall  be issued to a person who sells or
expects to sell food for human consumption without the approval of the County
Health Department. All vehicles used in the transportation or sale of
foodstuffs shall  be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.
(Ord. 114, passed 10-9-1977; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-13-2008)
§ 850.07 LICENSE FEES.
   (a)   The fees for a peddler's  or solicitor’s  license shall  be set and
may  be amended by resolution of City Council from time to time.
   (b)   No fee shall be required of any person who is a war veteran and who
has first obtained a peddler's license pursuant to Public Act 359 of 1921,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 35.441 through 35.443, as amended, provided that the goods,
wares and merchandise proposed to be sold by such person are his or her own.
   (c)   No fee shall be required of any person or organization that is
conducting or operating a nonprofit enterprise and is required to apply for and
obtain a permit because such person or organization is actively soliciting
funds or donations of any kind, by whatever means, as opposed to soliciting
solely for the limited purpose of distributing religious, political or other
noncommercial information. Any person claiming an exemption under this
subsection shall provide proof satisfactory to the City Clerk of their exempt
status.
   (d)   For the purpose of this chapter, any period of one or more than one
calendar day and not more than 30 calendar days shall be considered one month.
(Ord. 114, passed 10-9-1977; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-13-2008)
§ 850.08 TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSES.
   No license certificate issued under this chapter shall  be transferred or
assigned without the consent of Council.
(Ord. 114, passed 10-9-1977; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-13-2008)
§ 850.09 PEACE DISTURBANCES; PROHIBITED ACTIONS.
   (a)   No peddler , nor any person on his or her behalf, shall  shout, make
any cryout, blow a horn or use any loud-speaking radio or sound amplifying
system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the
city, or upon any private premises  in the city from where sound is emitted or
produced of sufficient volume to be plainly heard upon the streets, avenues,
alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention
to any goods, wares or merchandise which a licensee proposes to sell, without
the consent City Council.
   (b)   Peddling and/or soliciting is prohibited on any privately owned
premises that is posted with a sign or other notice stating “no trespassing”,
“no peddlers ”, “no peddling”, “no soliciting”, “no solicitors ”, “do not
disturb” or similar notification making apparent the desires of the owner or
occupant of the premises .
   (c)   No peddler or solicitor  shall remain on any premises or return to any
premises after being asked or directed to leave by the owner , occupant or
person in charge of such premises .
(Ord. 114, passed 10-9-1977; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-13-2008)
§ 850.10 USE OF STREETS.
   (a)   Generally. A person may  solicit contributions on behalf of a
charitable or civic origination by standing or remaining in the public roadway
only with a license and in accordance with this article and the Motor Vehicle
Code, being M.C.L.A. § 257.676b(2). Any other solicitation within the public
roadway is prohibited.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall  apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CHARITABLE OR CIVIC ORGANIZATION. A non-profit organization that is
qualified under §§ 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code, 26
U.S.C. § 501, or a veterans’ organization that has tax exempt status under the
Internal Revenue Code, and establishes proof of such qualification or status
with documentation as determined acceptable by the City Manager .
      ROADWAY. The area of a paved or unpaved private, or public street ,
highway or road designed for vehicular travel generally including the area from
curb to curb, or if no curb is present, from outer edge of shoulder to outer
edge of shoulder.
      SOLICIT or SOLICITATION. By words or other conduct, to request or invite
the receipt of money or other personal property .
      STANDING. Include standing, sitting, leaning or otherwise remaining
within the roadway other than is reasonably necessary to traverse across the
roadway, or to complete activity within an area of the roadway necessitated by
an emergency such as a traffic accident, mechanical breakdown, or other similar
event.
   (c)   Frequency of solicitation. Any charitable or civic organization may
only solicit on two occasions in each calendar  year (365 days January 1
through December 31), for not more than two consecutive days each occasion.
   (d)   Approval to solicit. Only one charitable or civic organization will be
granted approval to solicit by City Council for a particular day.
   (e)   Insurance. The charitable or civic organization shall  maintain
general liability insurance with a minimum of $500,000 per person per
occurrence during all times of solicitation pursuant to this section.
   (f)   Penalty. Any entity, organization, employee or person who violates
this section shall  be guilty of a civil infraction punishable by up to a $500
fine plus costs. Each instance of solicitation or standing, is considered a
separate offense subject to penalties under the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 232, passed 12-13-1995; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-13-2008; Ord. 1701-10,
passed 1-10-2018; Ord. 2104-01, passed 4-14-2021)
§ 850.11 HOURS OF SALE.
   No person covered by this chapter shall  sell his or her goods at any time
other than between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., or sunset, whichever
comes first.
(Ord. 114, passed 10-9-1977; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-13-2008)
§ 850.12 EXHIBITION OF LICENSES.
   Peddlers  and solicitors  are required to exhibit their license certificates
at the request of any resident of the city.
(Ord. 114, passed 10-9-1977; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-13-2008)
§ 850.13 ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE.
   (a)   Any police officer of the city shall  require any person seen peddling
or soliciting, and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to
produce his or her peddler's  or solicitor’s  license certificate, and such
police officer shall  enforce this chapter against any person found to be
violating the same.
   (b)   When the conduct of any peddler or solicitor is so inimical to the
public health, safety and general welfare as to constitute a nuisance or give
rise to an emergency, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to summarily
order the cessation of peddling or soliciting activities and suspend the
license pending a hearing on the revocation of the license by City Council.
(Ord. 114, passed 10-9-1977; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-13-2008)
§ 850.14 RECORDS OF VIOLATIONS.
   The Chief of Police shall  report all violations of this chapter to the City
Clerk, and the City Clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and
record the reports of violations thereof.
(Ord. 114, passed 10-9-1977; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-13-2008)
§ 850.15 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   (a)   Licenses issued under this chapter may  be revoked by City Council,
after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the
license application;
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the course of
carrying on business as a peddler or solicitor ;
      (3)   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter;
      (4)   Conviction of a licensee for a crime or misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude; or
      (5)   Conducting the business of peddling or soliciting in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, nuisance or
a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare.
   (b)   Notice of a hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and
place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
licensee at his or her last known address at least five days prior to the date
set for the hearing.
(Ord. 114, passed 10-9-1977; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-13-2008)
§ 850.16 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the City Clerk
in the denial of an application for a license, as provided in §§
850.04 and
850.05, shall have the right of appeal to City Council. Such appeal shall be
taken by filing with City Council, within 14 days after notice of the action
complained of has been mailed to such person’s last known address, a written
statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. City Council shall
set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing
shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in §
850.15 for notice of a hearing on revocation. The decision and order of City
Council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 114, passed 10-9-1977; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-13-2008)
§ 850.17 EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
   All licenses issued under this chapter shall  expire on December 31 of the
year of issuance, unless a shorter time period is stated on the license
certificate, except licenses issued for a period of one month, which shall
expire on the date specified on the license certificate.
(Ord. 114, passed 10-9-1977; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-13-2008)
§ 850.18 WAIVER OF PROVISIONS.
   If, in the opinion of the City Clerk, any  applicant  who, by this chapter,
is required to obtain a license, should, for any reason, not be required to
obtain a license, or should not be required to comply with any of the
provisions contained herein, including, but not limited to, the payment of any
fees, such facts shall  be presented to Council, in writing, by the City Clerk,
and Council  may  waive the application of this chapter or any of the
provisions hereof to any  applicant .
(Ord. 114, passed 10-9-1977; Ord. 08-09, passed 8-13-2008)
§ 850.19 ESTABLISHMENT OF DO-NOT-KNOCK REGISTRY.
   (a)   The City Clerk shall establish and maintain the do-not-knock registry.
Any person in lawful possession and occupancy of any residence, house,
apartment, or other dwelling within the city may request that the city place
and maintain his or her residence, house, apartment, or dwelling on the do-not-
knock registry by submitting a written request on a form supplied by the City
Clerk. The written request shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name of the person completing the form.
      (2)   The complete address of the residence, house, apartment, or
dwelling to be placed on the registry.
      (3)   The date the form was completed.
      (4)   A statement that solicitors shall not knock, ring the doorbell, or
otherwise physically call at his or her residence, house, apartment, or
dwelling.
      (5)   Any other information reasonably required by the city to verify the
identity of the person completing the form as a lawful occupant and possessor
of the residence, house, apartment, or dwelling.
   (b)   Re-registering on the do-not-knock registry. Every person who requests
that the city place and maintain his or her residence, house, apartment or
dwelling on the do-not-knock registry shall  be required to re-register his or
her residence, house, apartment, or dwelling every five years. Any residence,
house, apartment, or dwelling that is not re-registered shall  be removed from
the registry pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 2512-06, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 850.20 REMOVAL FROM DO-NOT-KNOCK REGISTRY.
   (a)   Any person in lawful possession and occupancy of any residence, house,
apartment, or other dwelling within the city may request that the city remove
his or her residence, house, apartment, or other dwelling from the do-not-knock
registry by submitting a written request on a form supplied by the City Clerk.
The written request shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name of the person completing the form.
      (2)   The complete address of the residence, house, apartment, or
dwelling to be removed from the registry.
      (3)   The date the form was completed.
      (4)   A statement that his or her residence, house, apartment, or
dwelling shall be removed from the do-not-knock registry.
      (5)   Any other information reasonably required by the city to verify the
identity of the person completing the form as a lawful occupant and possessor
of the residence, house, apartment, or dwelling.
   (b)   After being placed on the do-not-knock registry, a residence, house,
apartment, or other dwelling shall remain on the registry until one of the
following occurs:
      (1)   The City Clerk receives a written request to remove the residence,
house, apartment, or dwelling from the registry pursuant to this section.
      (2)   The city receives written notice that the person who submitted the
request to have the residence, house, apartment, notice, or dwelling added to
the registry pursuant to §
850.19 is no longer a lawful possessor or occupant of the premises.
      (3)   The expiration of five calendar years, expiring on December 31 of
the fifth full calendar year, from the date of the form submitted pursuant to §
850.19.
(Ord. 2512-06, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 850.21 COPIES OF DO-NOT-KNOCK REGISTRY.
   (a)   The City Clerk shall provide a copy of the then-current do-not-knock
registry to each person issued a peddler's license registered pursuant to this
chapter. A copy of the do-not-knock registry shall also be available for public
inspection in the City Clerk's office during regular business hours.
   (b)   The failure to add a residence, house, apartment, or other dwelling to
the do-not-knock registry, or to remove a residence, house, apartment, or other
dwelling from the registry, shall not be grounds for any claim against the
city.
(Ord. 2512-06, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 850.22 ENFORCEMENT.
   The provisions of §§
850.19 through
850.22 shall be enforced by the City Police Department and its duly authorized
representatives. They shall be authorized to enter, during normal business
hours, for the purposes of enforcement of §§
850.19 through
850.22, including inspection purposes, any vehicle for which a current
registration is in effect or for which a registration has been applied. A
registration can be denied, revoked or suspended if entry to the vehicle where
the registration would be in effect is refused during normal business hours.
(Ord. 2512-06, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 850.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 852: PUBLIC GATHERINGS
Section
852.01   Definitions
852.02   License required
852.03   License application
852.04   Drawings; plans
852.05   Investigations
852.06   License issuance or denial
852.07   Conditions for denial
852.08   License form; posting; transferability
852.09   Site facilities
852.10   License revocation
852.11   Violations
852.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Breaking or entering tents, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.110, 750.111, 750.115
   Municipal police regulations re theaters and shows, see M.C.L.A. §§ 431.201,
431.202
   Recreation generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 41.421 et seq.
   Tents to be made of fire resistant material, see M.C.L.A. § 29.7b
§ 852.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   ATTENDANT. Any person who obtains admission to an outdoor assembly  by the
payment of money or by the rendering of services in lieu of the payment of
money for admission.
   LICENSEE. Any person to whom a license is issued pursuant to this chapter.
   OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY, (HEREINAFTER REFERRED TO AS ASSEMBLY). Any event, attended
by more than 5,000 attendants , all or any part of which event includes a
theatrical exhibition, public show, display, entertainment, amusement or other
exhibition, including, but not limited to, musical festivals, rock festivals,
peace festivals or similar gatherings, but does not mean:
      (1)   An event which is conducted or sponsored by a governmental unit or
agency on publicly owned land or property ;
      (2)   An event which is conducted or sponsored by any entity qualifying
for tax exempt status under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954,
being 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3), as incorporated by reference in M.C.L.A. § 206.201
as amended; or
      (3)   An event held entirely within the confines of a permanently
enclosed and covered structure.
   SPONSOR. Any person who organizes, promotes, conducts or causes to be
conducted an outdoor assembly .
(Ord. 61, passed 10-22-1970)
§ 852.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall  sponsor , operate, maintain, conduct or promote an outdoor
assembly  in the city without first making application for and obtaining as
hereinafter prescribed, a license therefor.
(Ord. 61, passed 10-22-1970)
§ 852.03 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   An application for a license to conduct an outdoor assembly  shall  be made
in writing on such forms and in such manner as prescribed by the City Clerk,
and shall be made at least 60 days prior to the date of the proposed assembly.
Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $100 and shall
include at least the following:
   (a)   The name, age, residence and mailing address of the person making the
application. Where the person making the application is a partnership,
corporation or other association, this information shall be provided for all
partners, officers and directors or members. Where the person is a corporation,
a copy of the articles of incorporation shall be filed, and the names and
addresses shall be provided of all shareholders having a financial interest
greater than $500;
   (b)   A statement of the kind, character and type of the proposed assembly;
   (c)   The address, legal description and proof of ownership of the site at
which the proposed assembly is to be conducted. Where ownership is not vested
in the prospective licensee , he or she shall submit an affidavit from the
owner indicating his or her consent to the use of the site for the proposed
assembly;
   (d)   The dates and hours during which the proposed assembly is to be
conducted; and
   (e)   An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at the
assembly for each day it is conducted and a detailed explanation of the
evidence of admission which will be used and of the sequential numbering or
other method which will be used for accounting purposes.
(Ord. 61, passed 10-22-1970)
§ 852.04 DRAWINGS; PLANS.
   (a)   Each application for a license required by this chapter shall  be
accompanied by a detailed explanation, including drawings and diagrams where
applicable, of the prospective licensee's  plans to provide for the following:
      (1)   Police and fire protection;
      (2)   Food and water supply and facilities;
      (3)   Health and sanitation facilities;
      (4)   Medical facilities and services, including emergency vehicles and
equipment;
      (5)   Vehicle access and parking facilities;
      (6)   Camping and trailer facilities;
      (7)   Illumination facilities;
      (8)   Communications facilities;
      (9)   Noise control and abatement;
      (10)   Facilities for clean-up and waste disposal; and
      (11)   Insurance and bonding arrangements.
   (b)   In addition, the application shall be accompanied by a map of the
overall site of the proposed assembly.
(Ord. 61, passed 10-22-1970)
§ 852.05 INVESTIGATIONS.
   On receipt of an application for a license required by this chapter by the
City Clerk, copies of the application shall  be forwarded to the Chief of
Police and the Health Officer, to the State Fire Marshal and to such other
appropriate public officials as the City Clerk deems necessary. Such officers
and officials shall review and investigate matters relevant to the application,
and within 20 days of receipt thereof shall report their findings and
recommendations to Council.
(Ord. 61, passed 10-22-1970)
§ 852.06 LICENSE ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   Within 30 days of the filing of an application for a license required by
this chapter, Council shall  issue, set conditions prerequisite to the issuance
of, or deny, a license. Council may  require that adequate security or
insurance be provided before a license is issued. Where conditions are imposed
as prerequisite to the issuance of a license, or where a license is denied,
notice thereof shall be mailed, within five days of such action, to the
applicant  by certified mail and, in the case of denial, the reasons therefor
shall be stated in the notice.
(Ord. 61, passed 10-22-1970)
§ 852.07 CONDITIONS FOR DENIAL.
   A license to conduct an outdoor assembly  may  be denied if:
   (a)   The applicant fails to comply with any of the requirements of this
chapter, with any conditions imposed pursuant hereto or with any other
applicable provision of state or local law ; and
   (b)   The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent
statement in the application or in any supporting document.
(Ord. 61, passed 10-22-1970)
§ 852.08 LICENSE FORM; POSTING; TRANSFERABILITY.
   A license shall  specify the name and address of the licensee , the kind and
location of the assembly, the maximum number  of attendants  permissible, the
duration of the license and any other conditions imposed pursuant to this
chapter. It shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises  of the
assembly and shall not be transferred to any other person or location.
(Ord. 61, passed 10-22-1970)
§ 852.09 SITE FACILITIES.
   In processing an application for a license required by this chapter, Council
shall , at a minimum, require the following:
   (a)   Security personnel. The licensee  shall  employ, at his or her own
expense, such security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for
the adequate security and protection of the maximum number  of attendants  at
the assembly and for the preservation of order and protection of property  in
and around the site of the assembly. No license shall be issued unless the
Chief of Police of the city, in cooperation with the Director of State Police,
is satisfied that such necessary and sufficient security personnel will be
provided by the licensee for the duration of the assembly.
   (b)   Water facilities. The licensee  shall  provide potable water,
sufficient in quantity and pressure to ensure the proper operation of all water
using facilities under conditions of peak demand. Such water shall  be supplied
from a public water system, if available, and if not available, then from a
source constructed, located and approved in accordance with M.C.L.A. §§
333.12701 to 333.12715, as amended, and the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state  or local
law , or from a source and delivered and stored in a manner approved by the
City Health Officer.
   (c)   Restroom facilities.
      (1)   The licensee  shall provide separate enclosed flush-type water
closets in accordance with any other applicable state or local law . If such
flush-type facilities are not available, the Health Officer may permit the use
of other facilities which are in compliance with M.C.L.A. § 333.12771, as
amended, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in
accordance with any other applicable state or local law .
      (2)   The licensee  shall provide lavatory and drinking water facilities
constructed, installed and maintained in accordance with M.C.L.A. §§ 339.6101
et seq., as amended, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto,
and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law . All lavatories
shall be provided with hot and cold water, soap and paper towels. The number
and type of facilities required shall be determined, on the basis of the number
of attendants , in the following manner:
 
Facilities         Male        Female
Toilets            1:300       1:200
Urinals            1:100
Lavatories         1:200       1:200
Drinking fountains       1:500
Taps or faucets          1:500
 
      (3)   Where the assembly is to continue for more than twelve hours, the
licensee  shall  provide shower facilities, on the basis of the number  of
attendants , in the following manner:
 
Facilities   Male  Female
Shower heads 1:100 1:100
 
      (4)   All facilities shall  be installed, connected and maintained free
from obstructions, leaks and defects and shall, at all times, be in operable
condition as determined by the Health Officer.
   (d)   Food service.
      (1)   If food service is made available on the premises, it shall be
delivered only through concessions licensed and operated in accordance with
M.C.L.A. §§ 333.12905 to 333.12922, M.C.L.A. § 289.1101 et seq., as amended,
and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with
any other applicable state or local law .
      (2)   If the assembly is distant from food service establishments open to
the public, the licensee  shall make such food services available on the
premises as will adequately feed the attendants .
   (e)   Medical facilities. If the assembly is not readily and quickly
accessible to adequate existing medical facilities, the licensee  shall  be
required to provide such facilities on the premises  of the assembly. The kind,
location, staff strength, medical and other supplies and equipment of such
facilities shall be as prescribed by the Health Officer.
   (f)   Liquid waste disposal. The licensee  shall  provide for liquid waste
disposal in accordance with all rules and regulations pertaining thereto
established by the Health Officer. If such rules and regulations are not
available or if they are inadequate, then liquid waste disposal shall be in
accordance with the United States Public Health Service Publication No. 526,
entitled Manual of Septic Tank Practice. If liquid waste retention and disposal
is dependent upon pumpers and haulers, they shall be licensed in accordance
with M.C.L.A. §§ 324.11701 et seq., as amended, and the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state  or
local law . Prior to the issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide
the Health Officer with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and
effect with a licensed pumper or hauler, which agreement will ensure proper,
effective and frequent removal of liquid waste from the premises  so as to
neither create nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health.
   (g)   Solid waste disposal.
      (1)   The licensee  shall provide for solid waste storage on, and removal
from, the premises . Storage shall be in approved, covered, flytight and
rodentproof containers, provided in sufficient quantity to accommodate the
number of attendants . Prior to the issuance of any license, the licensee shall
provide the Health Officer with a true copy of an executed agreement in force
and effect with a licensed refuse collector, which agreement will ensure
proper, effective and frequent removal of solid waste from the premises so as
to neither create nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health.
      (2)   The licensee  shall implement effective control measures to
minimize the presence of rodents, flies, roaches and other vermin on the
premises . Poisonous materials, such as insecticides or rodenticides, shall not
be used in any way so as to contaminate food or equipment or to otherwise
constitute a hazard to the public health. Solid waste containing food waste
shall be stored so as to be inaccessible to vermin. The premises shall be kept
in such condition as to prevent the harborage or feeding of vermin.
   (h)   Public bathing beaches. The licensee  shall  provide or make available
or accessible public bathing beaches only in accordance with M.C.L.A.§§
333.12541 to 333.12546, as amended, and the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable State  or local
law .
   (i)   Public swimming pools. The licensee  shall  provide or make available
public swimming pools only in accordance with M.C.L.A. §§ 333.12521 to
333.12534, as amended, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto,
and in accordance with any other applicable state  or local law .
   (j)   Access and traffic control. The licensee  shall  provide for ingress
to and egress from the premises  so as to ensure the orderly flow of traffic
onto and off of the premises . Access to the premises  shall be from a highway
or road which is a part of the county  system of highways or which is a highway
maintained by the state. Traffic lanes and other space shall be provided,
designated and kept open for access by ambulance, fire equipment, helicopter
and other emergency vehicles. Prior to the issuance of a license, the Director
of the Department of State Police and the Director of the Department of State
Highways shall approve the licensee's plan for access and traffic control.
   (k)   Parking. The licensee  shall  provide a parking area sufficient to
accommodate all motor vehicles, but in no case shall he or she provide less
than one automobile space for every four attendants .
   (l)   Camping and trailer parking. A licensee  who permits attendants  to
remain on the premises  between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall  provide for
camping and trailer parking and facilities in accordance with M.C.L.A. §§
333.12501 to 333.12516, as amended, and the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state  or local
law .
   (m)   Illumination. The licensee  shall  provide electrical illumination of
all occupied areas sufficient to ensure the safety and comfort of all
attendants . The licensee’s lighting plan shall be approved by the Building
Inspector.
   (n)   Insurance. Before the issuance of a license, the licensee  shall
obtain public liability insurance with limits of not less than $100,000/
$300,000 and property  damage insurance with a limit of not less than $25,000
from a company approved by the Commissioner of Insurance of the State. Such
insurance shall insure liability for death or injury to persons or damage to
property  which may  result from the conduct of the assembly or conduct
incident thereto, and such insurance shall remain in full force and effect in
the specified amounts for the duration of the license. The evidence of
insurance shall include an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company
shall notify the City Clerk, in writing, at least ten days before the
expiration or cancellation of such insurance.
   (o)   Bonding. Before the issuance of a license, the licensee  shall
obtain, from a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in the state
, a corporate surety bond in the amount of $100,000, in a form to be approved
by the City Attorney, conditioned upon the licensee’s faithful compliance with
this chapter and with all applicable State  or local laws. Such bond shall
indemnify the city, its agents, officers and employees and Council against any
loss, injury or damage arising out of or in any way connected with the
assembly, and shall indemnify the owners of property  adjoining the assembly
site for any costs attributable to cleaning up and/or removing debris, trash or
other waste resulting from the assembly.
   (p)   Fire protection. The licensee  shall , at his or her own expense, take
adequate steps, as determined by the State Fire Marshal, to ensure fire
protection.
   (q)   Sound producing equipment. Sound producing equipment, including, but
not limited to, public address systems, radios, phonographs, musical
instruments and other recording devices, shall  not be operated on the premises
of the assembly so as to be unreasonably loud or raucous or so as to be a
nuisance or disturbance to the peace and tranquility of the residents of the
city.
   (r)   Fencing. The licensee  shall  erect a fence completely enclosing the
site, of sufficient height and strength as will preclude persons in excess of
the maximum permissible attendants  from gaining access. Such fence shall have
sufficient gates properly located so as to provide ready and safe ingress and
egress.
   (s)   Communications. The licensee  shall  provide public telephone
equipment for general use on the basis of at least one unit for each 1,000
attendants .
   (t)   Miscellaneous. Prior to the issuance of a license, Council may  impose
any other condition reasonably calculated to protect the health, safety,
welfare and property  of the attendants  or residents of the city.
(Ord. 61, passed 10-22-1970)
§ 852.10 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   Council may  revoke a license to conduct an outdoor assembly  whenever the
licensee  or his or her employee or agent fails, neglects or refuses to fully
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or with any provisions,
regulations, ordinances, statutes or other laws incorporated herein by
reference.
(Ord. 61, passed 10-22-1970)
§ 852.11 VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   No licensee  or his or her employee or agent shall  knowingly:
      (1)   Advertise, promote, sell tickets to, conduct or operate an assembly
without first obtaining a license as provided in this chapter;
      (2)   Conduct or operate an assembly in such a manner as to create a
public or private nuisance;
      (3)   Conduct or permit, within the assembly, any obscene display,
exhibition, show, play, entertainment or amusement;
      (4)   Permit any person on the premises to cause or create a disturbance
in, around or near the assembly by obscene or disorderly conduct;
      (5)   Permit any person to unlawfully consume, sell or possess
intoxicating liquor while on the premises ; or
      (6)   Permit any person to unlawfully use, sell or possess any narcotics,
narcotic drugs, drugs or other substances as defined in Public Act 368 of 1978,
M.C.L.A. §§ 333.6101 et seq,, as amended.
   (b)   Each of such violations is a separate offense and is a nuisance per se
immediately enjoinable in the Circuit Court. In addition, each of such
violations is a sufficient basis for revocation of the license and for the
immediate enjoining in the Circuit Court of the assembly. In addition, each of
such violations is punishable as provided in §
852.99.
(Ord. 61, passed 10-22-1970)
§ 852.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 860: PRECIOUS METAL AND GEM DEALERS
Section
860.01   Purpose
860.02   Enabling authority
860.03   Definitions
860.04   Registration and transaction fee
860.05   Records of transactions
860.06   Retention of transaction and transmittal to city police
860.07   Certificate of registration
860.08   Application; prerequisites
860.09   City office review
860.10   Review by City Clerk
860.11   Certificate of registration; duration; renewal; changes
860.12   Display of certificate of registration
860.13   Precious item retention; alteration or defacing unlawful
860.14   Precious items; acceptance prohibited and unlawful
860.99   Penalty
§ 860.01 PURPOSE.
   To promote and protect public health, safety and welfare, to reduce or
eliminate the resale of stolen or unauthorized property  and thereby reduce or
eliminate crime, and to advance the pursuit and operation of legitimate
business operations and practices within the city.
(Ord. 1705-01, passed 6-14-2017)
§ 860.02 ENABLING AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to and in accordance with Public Act 246 of
1945, being M.C.L.A. §§ 41.181 through 41.187, as amended, and M.C.L.A. §§
445.481 et seq., as amended, known as the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act.
(Ord. 1705-01, passed 6-14-2017)
§ 860.03 DEFINITIONS.
   Definitions utilized in this chapter shall  be consistent with the
definitions set forth in the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act, being M.C.L.A.
§ 445.482, as amended.
(Ord. 1705-01, passed 6-14-2017)
§ 860.04 REGISTRATION AND TRANSACTION FEE.
   A mandatory registration fee and renewal fee shall  be assessed from each
licensee in a manner and amount established, from time to time, by the City
Council. A per transaction fee shall also be required and payable in an amount
established, from time to time, by the City Council.
(Ord. 1705-01, passed 6-14-2017)
§ 860.05 RECORDS OF TRANSACTIONS.
   (a)   A dealer shall  maintain a permanent record of each transaction, on
record of transaction forms provided for in Public Act 95 of 1981, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 445.481 through 445.492, and shall provide the records online.
   (b)   At the time a dealer receives or purchases a precious item, the dealer
or the agent or the employee of the dealer shall ensure that the following
information is recorded accurately on a record of transaction form:
      (1)   The dealer certificate of registration number;
      (2)   A general description of the precious item or precious items
received or purchased, including the type of metal or precious gem. In the case
of watches, the description shall contain the name of the maker and the number
of both the works and the case. In the case of jewelry, all letters and marks
inscribed on the jewelry shall be included in the description;
      (3)   The date of the transaction;
      (4)   The name of the person conducting the transaction;
      (5)   The name, date of birth, driver’s license number or state personal
identification card number, and street and house number of the customer,
together with a legible imprint of the right thumb and photograph of the
customer, or if that is not possible, of the left thumb or a finger of the
customer. However, the thumbprint or fingerprint shall only be required on the
record of transaction form retained by the dealer. The thumbprint or
fingerprint shall be made available to police agencies during the course of a
police investigation involving a precious item or items described on the record
of transaction. After a period of one year from the date of the record of
transaction, if a police investigation concerning a precious item or items
described on the record of transaction has not occurred, the dealer and any
police agency or sheriff’s department holding a copy of the record of
transaction shall destroy, and not keep a permanent record of, the record of
transaction. A dealer who goes out of business or changes his, her or its
business address to another jurisdiction either within or out of this state
shall transmit the records of all transactions made by the dealer within one
year before his, her or its closing or moving to the local police agency;
      (6)   The price paid by the dealer for the precious or semi-precious
items;
      (7)   The form of payment to the customer: check, money order, bank
draft, or cash. If the payment is by check, money order, or bank draft, the
dealer shall indicate the number of the check, money order, or bank draft; and
      (8)   The customer’s signature.
   (c)   The record of each transaction shall be numbered consecutively,
commencing with the number one and the calendar year (example: 01-2012).
   (d)   The record of transaction forms of a dealer and each precious item
received shall be open to an inspection by the prosecuting attorney, the local
police agency, the sheriffs department of the local governmental unit in which
the customer resides, and/or the state police, at all times during the ordinary
business hours of the dealer. As a condition of doing business, a dealer is
considered to have given consent to the inspection prescribed by this division
(d). The record of transaction forms of a dealer shall not be open to
inspection by the general public.
   (e)   The items shall be photographed and any serial number or other
markings provided, as well as any other information as required pursuant to the
electronic transaction reporting processes utilized by the city. Additionally,
the driver license, state identification, passport, or other photographic
identification of a customer shall be photographed.
(Ord. 1705-01, passed 6-14-2017)
§ 860.06 RETENTION OF TRANSACTION AND TRANSMITTAL TO CITY POLICE.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided by state  law , each record of a
transaction shall  be retained by the dealer for not less than one year after
the transaction to which the record pertains.
   (b)   Within 48 hours after receiving or purchasing a precious item, the
dealer shall send a copy of the record of transaction form to the city’s Police
Chief or his or her designee and, if the record of transaction form indicates
that the customer resides outside the jurisdiction of the city, the dealer
shall send a copy of the record of transaction form to the police agency of the
city, village or township in which the customer resides as set forth on the
record of transaction, or, if that city, village or township does not have a
police agency, to the sheriffs department of the county in which the customer
resides as set forth on the record of transaction.
      (1)   Every licensee, owner and employee shall keep a record of all
persons and/or entities with whom business has transacted and all property
coming into their possession. Reports must be electronically transmitted to the
city’s Police Chief or his or her designee. Within 48 hours of receipt by
purchase or otherwise of a precious item, a report must be transmitted by means
of electronic transmission through a modem or similar device in a format that
the data is capable of direct electronic entry into the city’s computerized
system, as approved by the city’s Police Chief, or his or her designee, for
identifying property coming into the possession of a licensor. A transaction
report by electronic transmission under this subsection shall not be reported
on paper forms, unless the city’s Police Chief or his or her designee so
requires.
      (2)   A fee as adopted and subject to change periodically by the City
Council shall be assessed per transaction. The vendor will assess the property
registration fee for each transaction the licensee reports either through batch
file upload or directly using the vendor’s business interface or on the
vendor’s automated reporting service that involves transactions subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   TRANSACTION is defined as a single buy, or which may  involve one
or more items and does not include contract extension, or claims. The per
transaction registration fee is not a per item fee, included in the
transaction. It is within the sole discretion of the secondhand dealer whether
to recover the fee from their customers for registering a transaction.
      (4)   The licensee will be invoiced on a monthly basis. The city’s vendor
automated reporting service isolates and generates a list of the billable
transactions and will be used for deriving invoiced amounts. The above fees are
assessed for the use of the standard vendor’s automated recording service. Any
custom programming completed for the secondhand dealer will be negotiated on a
contract basis and may result in additional licensing arrangements between the
vendor and the licensor. Sales tax will be added to the above amounts where
applicable. Failure to timely pay as invoiced is a violation of this chapter.
   (c)   The record of transaction forms received by a police agency or
sheriffs department shall not be open to inspection by the general public. Each
police agency or sheriff’s department holding record of transaction forms shall
be responsible for ensuring the confidentiality of the record of transaction
forms and ensuring that the record of transaction forms are used only for the
purpose for which they were received.
(Ord. 1705-01, passed 6-14-2017)
§ 860.07 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   No person shall  carry on the business of a precious metal or gem dealer in
the city without first having a business license issued from the City Clerk or
his or her designee authorizing such person or entity to carry on such business
subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1705-01, passed 6-14-2017)
§ 860.08 APPLICATION; PREREQUISITES.
   A dealer shall  apply to the City Clerk or his or her designee for a
certificate of registration, and pay a fee prescribed by the City Council to
cover the cost of processing and issuing the certificate of registration, by
disclosing the following information:
   (a)   The name, address, photograph and thumbprint of the applicant(s);
   (b)   The name and address under which the applicant does business;
   (c)   Name, address, and thumbprint of the new employee; and
   (d)   Such other information as the City Clerk may require.
(Ord. 1705-01, passed 6-14-2017)
§ 860.09 CITY OFFICE REVIEW.
   The city’s Police Chief or his or her designee shall  review the application
and determine whether the application complies with the provisions of this
chapter and the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act, Public Act 95 of 1981, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 445.481 through 445.492. The dealer shall complete his or her
examination and issue a determination within 30 days upon receipt of the
application described herein.
(Ord. 2306, passed 8-12-2013; Ord. 1705-01, passed 6-14-2017)
§ 860.10 REVIEW BY CITY CLERK.
   The City Clerk or his or her designee shall  within 15 days of the submittal
of an application review the premises  in order to determine whether the
precious metal and gem dealer activities are compliant with the zoning chapter.
Such determination shall be issued to the city’s Police Chief.
(Ord. 1705-01, passed 6-14-2017)
§ 860.11 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION; DURATION; RENEWAL; CHANGES.
   Not less than ten days before a dealer changes the name or address under
which the dealer does business, the dealer shall  notify the city’s Police
Chief or his or her designee in writing of the change.
(Ord. 1705-01, passed 6-14-2017)
§ 860.12 DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   Upon receipt of the certificate of registration from the local police
agency, the dealer shall  post it in a conspicuous place in the dealer’s place
of business.
(Ord. 2306, passed 8-12-2013; Ord. 1705-01, passed 6-14-2017)
§ 860.13 PRECIOUS ITEM RETENTION; ALTERATION OR DEFACING UNLAWFUL.
   A precious item received by a dealer shall  be retained by the dealer for
nine calendar  days after it was received, without any form of alteration other
than that required for an accurate appraisal of its value.
(Ord. 1705-01, passed 6-14-2017)
§ 860.14 PRECIOUS ITEMS; ACCEPTANCE PROHIBITED AND UNLAWFUL.
   A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer shall not:
   (a)   Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from any person who is
less than 18 years of age or any person known by the dealer or agent or
employee of the dealer to have been convicted of theft or receipt of stolen
property within the preceding five years, whether the person is acting in his
or her own behalf or as the agent of another; and/or
   (b)   Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from a person unless
that person presents a valid driver’s license or a valid state personal
identification card.
(Ord. 1705-01, passed 6-14-2017)
§ 860.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall  be a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment of not more than 90 days and/or a fine of $500, or
both, in addition to any other penalty provisions provided for violation of a
misdemeanor as set forth in the general penalty provisions of this code of
ordinances.
(Ord. 1705-01, passed 6-14-2017)
CHAPTER 870: TAXICABS
Section
870.01   Taxicab defined
870.02   Business license required; application
870.03   Character of applicant
870.04   Business license fee; tags and stickers
870.05   Vehicle equipment; inspections; identification
870.06   Chauffeur’s license required; drivers’ behavior
870.07   Insurance
870.08   Compliance with traffic code
870.09   Illegal use of taxicabs
870.10   Passengers
870.11   Rates of fare; meters
870.12   Taxicab stands
870.13   Taxicab driver’s licenses
870.14   Certification of need by Council
870.15   Renewal of business licenses
870.16   Revocation or modification of authorization
870.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Application for registration of taxicabs, see M.C.L.A. § 257.217
   Carrying passengers; locking of doors, see M.C.L.A. §§ 256.531, 256.532
   Discrimination, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.146, 750.147
§ 870.01 TAXICAB DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, TAXICAB means and includes any vehicle used to
carry passengers for hire, but not operating on a fixed route.
(Ord. 62, passed 12-9-1970)
§ 870.02 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   No person shall engage in the business of operating a taxicab in the city
without first obtaining a license therefor. Applications for such licenses
shall be made in writing to the City Clerk and shall state thereon the name of
the applicant, the intended place of business and the number of cabs to be
operated. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the
president and secretary shall be given.
(Ord. 62, passed 12-9-1970)
§ 870.03 CHARACTER OF APPLICANT.
   No license required by this chapter shall be issued to or held by any person
who is not a person of good character or who has been convicted of a felony,
nor shall such license be issued to or held by any corporation if any officer
thereof would be ineligible for a license under this section.
(Ord. 62, passed 12-9-1970)
§ 870.04 BUSINESS LICENSE FEE; TAGS AND STICKERS.
   (a)   The annual fee, payable in advance, for a taxicab business license,
shall be $25 for each taxicab operated. Whenever the number of cabs so operated
is increased during the license year, the licensee shall notify the City Clerk
of such change and shall pay the additional fee.
   (b)   Such fee shall be in lieu of any other vehicle fee required by
ordinance , and the City Clerk shall issue suitable tags or stickers for the
number of taxicabs covered by each license. Such tag or sticker shall be
displayed in a prominent place on each taxicab while it is in use and may be
transferred to any taxicab put into service to replace one withdrawn from
service.
   (c)   The licensee shall notify the City Clerk of the motor number and state
license number of each taxicab operated and of the corresponding city tag or
sticker number .
(Ord. 62, passed 12-9-1970)
§ 870.05 VEHICLE EQUIPMENT; INSPECTIONS; IDENTIFICATION.
   (a)   No taxicab  shall be operated unless it bears a state license duly
issued. No such taxicab shall be operated unless it is equipped with proper
brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear vision mirror and windshield wipers
in good condition. The Chief of Police shall inspect every taxicab as often as
may be necessary to enforce this section.
   (b)   Each taxicab , while operated, shall have on each side, in letters
readable from a distance of 20 feet, the name of the licensee operating it. If
more than one taxicab is operated by a licensee, each taxicab shall be
designated by a different number and such number shall also so appear on each
side of such taxicab.
(Ord. 62, passed 12-9-1970)
§ 870.06 CHAUFFEUR’S LICENSE REQUIRED; DRIVERS’ BEHAVIOR.
   (a)   No person shall drive a taxicab , or be hired or permitted to do so,
unless he or she is duly licensed as a chauffeur.
   (b)   No driver of a taxicab , while on duty, shall drink any intoxicating
liquor, use any profane or obscene language, shout or call to prospective
passengers or disturb the peace in any way.
(Ord. 62, passed 12-9-1970)
§ 870.07 INSURANCE.
   No taxicab  shall be operated unless it is covered by a bond or public
liability policy as required by statute.
(Ord. 62, passed 12-9-1970)
§ 870.08 COMPLIANCE WITH TRAFFIC CODE.
   Every driver of a taxicab  shall obey all traffic rules established by
statute or ordinance .
(Ord. 62, passed 12-9-1970)
§ 870.09 ILLEGAL USE OF TAXICABS.
   No person shall knowingly permit any taxicab to be used in the perpetration
of a crime or misdemeanor.
(Ord. 62, passed 12-9-1970)
§ 870.10 PASSENGERS.
   (a)   The driver of any taxicab  shall accept as a passenger any person who
seeks to use the taxicab, provided that such person is not intoxicated and
conducts himself or herself in an orderly manner. No person shall be admitted
to a taxicab occupied by a passenger without the consent of the passenger.
   (b)   The driver shall take his or her passenger to his or her destination
by the most direct available route from the place where the passenger enters
the cab.
(Ord. 62, passed 12-9-1970)
§ 870.11 RATES OF FARE; METERS.
   (a)   No taxicab  shall be operated unless it is equipped with a meter in
good condition to record the amount to be charged on each trip or with posted
zone rates approved by Council. Posted rates or meter charges shall be shown in
figures visible to the passenger. Upon paying his or her fare, each passenger
shall be given a receipt, upon request, showing the amount so paid and the name
of the company or person operating the taxicab, together with the number of the
taxicab if such company or person operates more than one taxicab in the city.
   (b)   No passenger shall fail or refuse to pay the lawful fare at the
termination of a trip.
   (c)   The charges for taxicab service shall be subject to the approval of
Council and may be reviewed from time to time as Council deems necessary.
   (d)   No extra charge shall be made for baggage or parcels, the size of
which baggage or parcels permits them to be carried in the taxicab .
(Ord. 62, passed 12-9-1970)
§ 870.12 TAXICAB STANDS.
   Taxicab stands shall be located on public streets and areas as directed and
approved by the Chief of Police. Each such stand shall be appropriately marked
by signs erected under the supervision of the Chief of Police. No person shall
park any vehicle other than a licensed taxicab in any taxicab stand. A licensed
taxicab may be parked in any taxicab stand while such taxicab is in the charge
of its driver on duty or awaiting a fare.
(Ord. 62, passed 12-9-1970)
§ 870.13 TAXICAB DRIVER’S LICENSES.
   (a)   Required. No person shall  drive a taxicab  unless he or she has
obtained a license therefor as provided in this chapter.
   (b)   Fee. The annual fee for a taxicab  driver’s license shall  be $1.
   (c)   Qualifications. No taxicab  driver’s license shall  be issued to any
person who is not competent to operate a motor vehicle or who is not familiar
with traffic laws and ordinances. The Chief of Police shall examine each
applicant for a taxicab driver’s license to determine the competency of the
applicant, and no such license shall be issued except on the applicant’s
ability to operate a motor vehicle as required herein.
   (d)   Revocation. The Mayor may  revoke any taxicab  driver’s license for
repeated violations of traffic laws or ordinances, or of any ordinance
regulating the conduct of such drivers.
(Ord. 62, passed 12-9-1970)
§ 870.14 CERTIFICATION OF NEED BY COUNCIL.
   No license to operate a taxicab in the city shall be issued unless and until
Council certifies that the public need for taxicab service requires the
additional service to be rendered by the applicant. In deciding this question,
the Council shall consider the need of the public for taxicab service, the
number of cabs in operation and the anticipated future demands.
§ 870.15 RENEWAL OF BUSINESS LICENSES.
   No certification as required by §
870.14 shall be required for the renewal of any operator’s business license.
(Ord. 62, passed 12-9-1970)
§ 870.16 REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF AUTHORIZATION.
   If any business licensee on whose behalf a certificate has been issued fails
to operate any or all of the taxicabs covered by such certificate for six
consecutive days, the certificate may be revoked or modified by Council so as
to cover and authorize only the number of taxicabs actually operated.
§ 870.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 872: OPEN-AIR MARKETS
Section
872.01   Purpose
872.02   Definitions
872.03   Permitted locations
872.04   Property maintenance
872.05   Hours and dates of setup and operation
872.06   Market permit required
872.07   Vendor permit application
872.08   Noise control
872.09   Refuse containers, litter and waste disposal
872.10   Produce and product containers
872.11   Fire code compliance
872.12   Market guidelines
872.13   Market manager; powers and duties
872.14   Hearings; revocation of vendor permit and appeals
872.15   Vendor service of notice to quit
872.16   Products prohibited from being sold
872.17   Enforcement
872.99   Penalty
§ 872.01 PURPOSE.
   The City Council hereby establishes open-air markets for the purpose of
creating a vibrant and exciting downtown public marketplace to serve the
greater Grand Blanc community and provide a use that supports local farmers,
artists and crafters.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 872.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LOCALLY GROWN PRODUCE. Defined in the market guidelines .
   LOCALLY PRODUCED PRODUCTS. Defined in the market guidelines .
   MARKET MANAGER. An individual who will assume responsibility  for the
coordination of all market events and assure compliance with all regulations.
The terms MANAGER and MARKET MANAGER shall  be used interchangeably throughout
the remaining sections of this chapter.
   MERCHANDISE FOR SALE. Wholesome, merchantable products of the farm, orchard,
greenhouse, nursery, or forest that are produced and sold by local state  based
growers. Locally produced arts and crafts may  also be sold. Other products not
listed in this definition may be approved for sale at market if approved by
resolution of City Council.
   OPEN-AIR MARKET. An open-air market, without permanent structures and
limited to the selling of locally grown fresh fruits, fresh vegetables,
flowers, arts and crafts. The terms MARKET and OPEN- AIR MARKET shall  be used
interchangeably throughout the remaining sections of this chapter.
   MARKET GUIDELINES. Guidelines that clearly communicate the expectations and
requirements of all persons, including vendors , patrons and the manager of the
market.
   VENDOR. A person, firm or corporation who rents, lets or sublets space in an
open-air market , or who sells products in an open-air market. The vendor may
also be the producer of the produce or products being sold to the public.
   VENDOR BOOTHS, SPACES OR STALLS. Temporary structures or tents that are to
be used by vendors  of the open-air market . These structures may  be covered
or uncovered as determined by market guidelines . Other structures or vehicles
may be used to hold products or produce for sale if determined to be
appropriate by the manager.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 872.03 PERMITTED LOCATIONS.
   Open-air markets are permitted to be located on and around Grand Boulevard.
All locations outside of the Grand Boulevard area must be approved by
resolution of City Council.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 872.04 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   The driving of stakes or other devices into city right-of-way,
including, but not limited to, streets or sidewalks, for the purpose of
securing tents or any other type of vendor booth is expressly prohibited.
   (b)   Any person causing any damage to any street right-of-way, sidewalk or
any other public or private property including, but not limited to, street
trees, electrical outlets or streetlights shall be required to pay for any and
all restoration or repair activities needed to restore the property to its
original state .
(Ord. 06-05, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 872.05 HOURS AND DATES OF SETUP AND OPERATION.
   Hours and dates of setup and operation of a market other than those listed
in this section may be approved by resolution of City Council. Markets are
required to comply with the following:
   (a)   Setup and tear down times. Vendors  may  set up booths two hours prior
to the market opening;
   (b)   Dates of operation. Open-air markets  may  be operated between April 1
through October 31 of each year;
   (c)   Days of operation. Days of operation must be approved by resolution of
City Council;
   (d)   Hours of operation. Markets shall  be allowed to operate between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.; and
   (e)   Adjustment of hours of operation. The City Council, by resolution, may
adjust hours and days of operation from time to time.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 872.06 MARKET PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to operate a market without first securing a permit
from the city administration.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 872.07 VENDOR PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Every vendor must submit an application for vending at the market to the
manager for review and approval or denial.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 872.08 NOISE CONTROL.
   (a)   No loud speakers or other audio amplifying devices are permitted
unless approved by resolution of City Council.
   (b)   No vendor  shall attract attention to their articles, goods, wares or
merchandise, or to any other service or activity by hawking or outcry in a loud
and annoying manner.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 872.09 REFUSE CONTAINERS, LITTER AND WASTE DISPOSAL.
   (a)   It shall be the responsibility of each vendor to furnish a sufficient
number of refuse containers which shall be watertight, non-corrosive and
tightly covered and adequately sized to hold all accumulations of garbage,
offal and liquid waste from such operations. All containers shall be regularly
emptied and not allowed to overflow with waste material at any time.
   (b)   The entire market area, including but not limited to the market and
parking areas and vendor booths , shall be kept free of litter and all other
waste material at all times.
   (c)   All waste must be disposed of during the market hours of operation and
absolutely no waste material shall be left at the market site after the market
closes.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 872.10 PRODUCE AND PRODUCT CONTAINERS.
   Boxes, crates, barrels, cartons and other produce or product containers must
be kept clean and stored in neat piles at all times.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 872.11 FIRE CODE COMPLIANCE.
   All vendor booths or sales areas must be in compliance with all fire codes
that have been adopted by the city. Fire code compliance inspections may be
required when vendors use heating elements, grills or propane canisters at the
assigned location, electrical generators and any other types of equipment that
has the potential of causing fire, explosions or corrosion. All electrical
cords from electrical services must be covered by and contained in a rubberized
threshold or equivalent for safety and in no case shall electrical cords be
situated in a manner where they could provide a tripping hazard.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 872.12 MARKET GUIDELINES.
   Market guidelines  shall be drafted by the Manager and approved by
resolution of City Council. At a minimum the market guidelines shall contain
the following:
   (a)   Location of the market;
   (b)   Days of the week and time of day for the market;
   (c)   Length of season for operation of the market;
   (d)   Assign and define size of individual selling space or booths;
   (e)   List stall fees and/or payment structure;
   (f)   Define permissible products or “locally grown produce ” and “locally
produced products , arts and crafts”;
   (g)   Product source restrictions; and
   (h)   List any required regulatory compliance grievance procedure.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 872.13 MARKET MANAGER; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   All market activities shall be under the supervision and control of the
manager. The manager shall be appointed by City Council and report directly to
the City Manager . The manager shall have the following duties:
   (a)   Be responsible for assuring that the market is kept free of all litter
and waste material, clean, safe, all waste containers emptied regularly and are
not allowed to overflow with litter or other waste;
   (b)   Enforcement of all provision of this chapter;
   (c)   Drafting of vendor application and approval or denial of said
applications;
   (d)   Drafting and enforcement of all market guidelines ;
   (e)   Inspecting booths and other vendor sales areas for safety;
   (f)   Be responsible for obtaining all required federal, state and local
licenses and/or permits;
   (g)   Verifying all federal, state and local governmental licenses have been
obtained by vendors ;
   (h)   Verifying that all vendor licenses requiring public display are
clearly visible to all individuals;
   (i)   Assuring that the market opens and closes at the approved times;
   (j)   shall see that no nuisance activity is caused or practiced by buyers
and sellers;
   (k)   shall direct the arrangement of stalls, tents or other temporary
structures or sales areas;
   (l)   shall verify that all vendor sales areas are properly secured so that
public safety is maintained;
   (m)   shall monitor vendors and assure that only approved goods are sold;
   (n)   shall not allow illegal sales of goods;
   (o)   Verify that all products for sale that require refrigeration or are
perishable are kept at the proper temperature as established by State or County
Health Department guidelines;
   (p)   Verify that absolutely no price fixing occurs such as price
undercutting or artificial price inflation occurs;
   (q)   Assure that only members who pay membership fees are permitted to sell
products at the market;
   (r)   Submit all market guidelines for City Council approval; and
   (s)   shall have the power to revoke vendor permits for violations of market
guidelines or other City requirements.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 872.14 HEARINGS; REVOCATION OF VENDOR PERMIT AND APPEALS.
   (a)   Whenever a city official or manager finds any vendor in violation of
any of the requirements of this chapter or other city ordinance , the manager
shall immediately notify, in writing, the vendor thereof to correct or abate
the violation(s). If the violation is not abated within a reasonable period of
time, established by the manager, then the manager shall immediately revoke the
vendors permit and file a report of such violation with the city
administration.
   (b)   The vendor  shall have 30 days to file a grievance or appeal, from the
time he or she is notified of any revocation of vendor permit, with the City
Council. The City Council shall have the final authority to reinstate a
vendor’s permit or permanently revoke the permit and thereby disallowing the
vendor from doing business at the market.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 872.15 VENDOR SERVICE OF NOTICE TO QUIT.
   All vendor service of notice to quit, issued by City Council, shall be
served upon the vendor listed on the vendor application and permit in at least
one of the following manners:
   (a)   Delivered to him or her in person;
   (b)   Delivered to him or her via first class mail to the address listed on
the vendors application;
   (c)   By posting a copy in a conspicuous place in or about the market;
   (d)   By sending a copy of the notice to quit by registered mail with return
receipt; or
   (e)   If registered mail is returned with receipt showing that said notice
to quit has not been delivered to the vendor , then said notice to quit shall
be posted in a conspicuous location in or about the market.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 872.16 PRODUCTS PROHIBITED FROM BEING SOLD.
   Unless approved by a resolution of City Council, the following products are
prohibited from being sold at open-air markets : commercially produced products
and other prohibited products as defined in the market guidelines .
(Ord. 06-05, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 872.17 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall hereby be declared that all provisions of this chapter shall be
policed and enforced by the manager. The market manager  may ask the Police
Department to intervene in cases that cannot be reasonably resolved by the
manager.
(Ord. 06-05, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 872.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 874: MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
874.01   Prohibition of marijuana businesses and establishments
§ 874.01 PROHIBITION OF MARIJUANA BUSINESSES AND ESTABLISHMENTS.
   Pursuant to the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, § 6.1,
being Initiated Law 1 of 2018, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27956, the city prohibits the
establishment or operation of marihuana establishments, as defined by the Act,
within its boundaries.
(Ord. 1902-01, passed 2-13-2019)
CHAPTER 882: REAL ESTATE TAX
Section
882.01   Property tax administration fee
882.02   Late penalty charge
Statutory reference:
   Municipal tax rates, see M.C.L.A. §§ 211.107a, 211.203
   Real estate transfer; documentary stamp tax, see M.C.L.A. §§ 207.501 et seq.
§ 882.01 PROPERTY TAX ADMINISTRATION FEE.
   (a)   There is hereby authorized the imposition of a property tax
administration fee of 1% on all sums voluntarily paid for winter property taxes
before February 28 of the succeeding year in which the same become due and
payable, and for summer property taxes before August 31 of the succeeding year
in which the same become due and payable.
   (b)   As used in this section, PROPERTY TAX ADMINISTRATION FEE means a fee
to offset costs incurred by the city in assessing property  values, collecting
the property  tax levies and in the review and appeal processes.
   (c)   If apprehensive of the loss of personal property tax assessed upon the
roll, the City Treasurer may enforce collection of the tax at any time, and if
compelled to seize property or bring an action, shall add 1% for a property tax
administration fee.
   (d)   The City Treasurer is hereby directed and authorized to take such
steps as may be necessary to implement this section.
   (e)   This section shall apply to all property tax levies that become a lien
in 1983, or in any year thereafter, and this section shall continue in full
force and effect unless and until revoked or rescinded by resolution of
Council.
   (f)   Council hereby reserves the right and authority to waive all or part
of the property tax administration fee imposed by this section for a specific
tax levy and collection period by the adoption of a resolution or ordinance to
that effect.
   (g)   Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, there shall
not be imposed the 1% property tax administration fee on that portion of taxes
designated as city general operating taxes.
(Ord. 150, passed 5-11-1983)
§ 882.02 LATE PENALTY CHARGE.
   (a)   There is hereby authorized the imposition of a late penalty charge,
equal to 3%, on all winter taxes paid after February 28 and before March 1 of
the succeeding year in which such taxes become due and payable, and on all
summer taxes paid after August 31 and before September 1 of the succeeding year
in which such taxes become due and payable.
   (b)   The late penalty charge shall be waived for the homestead property of
a senior citizen, paraplegic, quadriplegic, eligible serviceperson, eligible
veteran, eligible widow or widower, totally and permanently disabled person or
blind person, as those persons are defined in M.C.L.A. §§ 206.501 to 206.532,
as amended, if a person makes a claim before February 15 for a credit for that
property provided by M.C.L.A. §§ 206.501 to 206.532, as amended, presents a
copy of the form filed for that credit to the City Treasurer and has not
received the credit before February 15.
   (c)   If apprehensive of the loss of personal property tax assessed upon the
tax roll, the City Treasurer may enforce collection of the tax at any time, and
if compelled to seize property or bring an action in December, shall add 3% for
a late penalty charge.
   (d)   The City Treasurer is hereby directed and authorized to take such
steps as may be necessary to implement this section.
   (e)   This section shall apply to all property tax levies that become a lien
in 1983, or in any year thereafter, and this section shall continue in full
force and effect unless and until revoked or rescinded by action of Council.
   (f)   Council hereby reserves the right and authority to waive all or part
of the late penalty charge imposed by this section for a specific tax levy and
collection period by the adoption of a resolution or ordinance to that effect.
(Ord. 149, passed 5-11-1983), Utilities and Public Services Code
PART TEN: STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE
   TITLE TWO - Street and Sidewalk Areas
      
Chap. 1020. Improvements and Special Assessments.
      
Chap. 1022. Sidewalk Construction and Repair.
      
Chap. 1024. Obstructions of Public Rights-of-Way.
      
Chap. 1026. Trees. (Repealed)
   TITLE FOUR - Utilities
      
Chap. 1040. Sewers. (Repealed)
      
Chap. 1042. Water.
      
Chap. 1044. Wells.
      
Chap. 1046. Storm Water Management.
   TITLE SIX - Other Public Services
      
Chap. 1060. Garbage and Rubbish Collection and Disposal.
      
Chap. 1062. Parks.
      
Chap. 1066. Cost Recovery of Emergency Services.
TITLE TWO: STREET AND SIDEWALK AREAS
      
Chap. 1020. Improvements and Special Assessments.
      
Chap. 1022. Sidewalk Construction and Repair.
      
Chap. 1024. Obstructions of Public Rights-of-Way.
      
Chap. 1026. Trees.
CHAPTER 1020: IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
Section
1020.01   Definitions
1020.02   Advisory petitions
1020.03   Improvement procedures
1020.04   Hazard removal or nuisance abatement
1020.05   Construction or repair of sidewalks
1020.06   Single lot procedure
1020.07   Liens on property
1020.08   Installment payments
1020.09   Rebates, reassessments and additional assessments
1020.10   Restrictions
1020.99   Penalty
Constitutional reference:
   Special assessments, see Mich. Const. Art. 9, § 6
Statutory reference:
   Curbs and gutters, see M.C.L.A. §§ 91.1, 102.8
   Excavations generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 554.251 et seq.
   Special assessments, see M.C.L.A. §§ 211.741 et seq.
§ 1020.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
    COST. Includes the expense of survey, spreading of roll, notice,
advertising, printing, financing, legal services, engineering, construction,
condemnation and all other costs incidental to the making of an improvement .
   ENGINEER. The City Engineer unless an outside engineer is specifically
employed for the work on the improvement , in which case, ENGINEER means the
person so employed.
   IMPROVEMENT. Any public betterment.
   LOT or PARCEL OF LAND. Any subdivision lot or portion thereof as officially
platted, or any unplatted parcel of land  as may  be described upon any
official records.
   OWNER. The last recorded title holder of any lot or parcel  of land , or the
person whose name is last listed upon the city tax roll as owner  of a certain
piece or parcel of land .
(Ord. 24, passed 12-8-1954)
§ 1020.02 ADVISORY PETITIONS.
   (a)   Initiation. Council, in order to ascertain whether or not a reasonable
number  of property  owners to be assessed desires any particular improvement
to be made, may  request and receive a petition therefor, or may  receive such
a petition voluntarily presented, but in either event, such petition shall  be
advisory only and shall not be jurisdictional.
   (b)   Contents. An advisory petition shall  be addressed to Council and
contain a brief description of the improvement  sought to be made or the
nuisance or hazard sought to be abated, and shall  be signed by property
owners only, whose signatures shall be followed by a brief description of the
property  owned by them. The signatures on such petition shall be verified by
the oath  of one or more of the circulators of such petition before filing.
   (c)   Filing. Advisory petitions shall  be filed with the City Clerk who
shall  check them for signatures and correctness. If they are found to be in
order he or she shall refer them to the Mayor who shall present them to Council
at its next regular or special meeting called for that purpose, together with
his or her recommendations.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-8-1954)
§ 1020.03 IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Initiatory resolution. When, by the provisions of the City Charter and
the laws of the state , Council has the power to make a public improvement  by
special assessment, it shall , by resolution, set forth the improvement
intended to be made and direct the Mayor to prepare a report, with the
assistance of the Engineer , containing any information it may  request
concerning such improvement .
   (b)   Plans and specifications. The Mayor shall  request the Engineer  to
prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and specifications of the improvement
to be made, an estimate of the life of the improvement  and of the cost
thereof, plats of the lands affected thereby and such other information as
Council may  have requested.
   (c)   Report of Mayor. The Mayor shall  prepare his or her report which
shall include a schedule of all property  affected by the proposed improvement
, listing the assessed valuation, tax delinquencies, whether land  is vacant or
improved, pertinent information on such parcels as are owned by public
authorities and such other information as Council may  have requested, and
shall present it to Council along with the plans and specifications of the
Engineer , together with his or her recommendation as to what proportion of the
cost  should be paid by special assessment and who part, if any, should be a
general obligation of the city, the number  of installments in which the
assessment should be spread and the lands which should be included in the
special assessment district.
   (d)   Notice of hearing. After filing of the report and plans and
specifications referred to in division (c) above, Council shall , by
resolution, order the same filed with the City Clerk and provide for a public
hearing before Council on the improvement  to be made, which hearing shall be
not less than one week after notice thereof has been given by publication at
least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, to be designated
by Council, or by posting notices thereof for the same length of time in three
public places in the city.
   (e)   Public hearing, objections and changes. At the time and place
specified in such notice for the public hearing, Council shall  meet and hear
any person to be affected by the proposed public improvement . The hearing may
be adjourned from time to time by Council, and Council may make any changes in
the proposed work or assessment which seems reasonable or proper in view of any
objections, or for any other reason which may appear to be for the best
interests of the city, provided that if the improvements intended to be made
are enlarged upon or if additions are made to the district to be assessed, the
same shall not be done until after another hearing is held pursuant to notice
as required for an original hearing.
   (f)   Resolution of determination. After public hearing, Council may , by
resolution, determine to make the improvement  and defray the whole or any part
of the cost  of the improvement  by special assessment upon the property
especially benefitted in proportion to the benefits derived, or to be derived,
and designate whether it is to be assessed according to frontage or other
basis. By such resolution, Council shall  approve the plans and specifications
for the improvement , determine the number  of installments, not to exceed 6%
per year, designate the district or land  and premises  upon which special
assessments shall be levied, direct the City Assessor to prepare a special
assessment roll in accordance with Council’s determination and designate the
name by which such assessment roll shall be known and referred to.
   (g)   Special assessment roll. The City Assessor shall  thereupon prepare a
special assessment roll, including all lots and parcels of land  within the
special assessment district designated by Council, and shall assess to each lot
or parcel of land  such relative portion of the whole sum to be levied against
all the lands in the special assessment district as the benefit to such lot or
parcel of land  bears to the total benefits to all lands in such district.
There shall  also be entered upon such roll the amount which has been assessed
to the city at large.
   (h)   Certificate of Assessor. When the City Assessor has completed such
assessment roll, he or she shall  attach thereto, or endorse thereon, his or
her certificate to the effect that such roll has been made by him or her
pursuant to a resolution of Council (giving the date of adoption of the same)
and that in making the assessments therein he or she has, as near as may  be,
according to his or her best judgment, conformed in all respects to the
directions contained in such resolution, the City Charter and this chapter.
Thereupon, he or she shall file such special assessment roll with the City
Clerk who shall present the same to Council.
   (i)   Notice of hearing on roll. Upon receipt of such special assessment
roll, Council shall  order it filed in the office of the City Clerk for public
examination and shall, by resolution, fix the time and place when Council will
meet and review such roll, which meeting shall be held not less than one week
after notice thereof, specifying the purpose, time and place, has been
published by the City Clerk at least once in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city, to be designated by Council, or by posting notice thereof for the
same length of time in three public places in the city.
   (j)   Written objections. Any person deeming himself or herself aggrieved by
the special assessment roll may  file his or her objections thereto, in
writing, with the City Clerk prior to the close of such hearing, which written
objections shall  specify in what respect he or she deems himself or herself
aggrieved.
   (k)   Hearing on objections. Council shall  meet and review the special
assessment roll at the time and place appointed or at an adjourned date
therefor and shall consider any written objections thereto.
   (l)   Objection to improvement . If, at or prior to final confirmation of
any special assessment, more than 50% of the number  of owners of privately
owned real property  to be assessed for any improvement , or in case of paving
or similar improvements, more than 50% of the number  of owners of frontage to
be assessed for any such improvement , object, in writing, to the proposed
improvement , the improvement  shall  not be made by proceedings authorized by
this chapter without a four-fifths vote of the members of Council, provided
that this section shall not apply to sidewalk  construction.
   (m)   Corrections and changes. Council may  correct such roll as to any
assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land  or other errors
appearing therein. Any changes made in such roll shall  be noted in the Council
minutes.
   (n)   Confirmation or rejection of roll. After such hearing and review,
Council may  confirm such special assessment roll with such corrections as may
have been made, if any, may refer it back to the City Assessor for revision or
may annul it and any proceedings in connection therewith.
   (o)   Certificate of confirmation. The City Clerk shall  endorse the date of
confirmation upon each special assessment roll, and upon confirmation such roll
shall be final and conclusive.
   (p)   Contractual provision. If all persons or property  owners to be
affected by any proposed improvement  agree that such proposed improvement  be
made and that a special assessment be levied in connection therewith, the city
may , in lieu of the procedure set forth in this section, enter into a written
contract with all of the persons or property  owners affected thereby, which
contract, when properly approved and executed, shall  operate as a complete
special assessment procedure, and the assessment shall  be made in accordance
with such contract.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-8-1954)
§ 1020.04 HAZARD REMOVAL OR NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   (a)   Resolution and notice. When any lot , building or structure in the
city, because of an accumulation of refuse or debris, the uncontrolled growing
of noxious weeds, age, dilapidation or any other condition or happening,
becomes, in the opinion of Council, a public hazard or nuisance which is
dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the city or to
those residing or habitually going near such lot , building or structure,
Council may , by resolution, after investigation, determine that a hazard or
nuisance exists, prescribe a form of notice and direct the City Clerk to give
such notice by publication or by registered mail, addressed to the last known
address of the owner  of the land  upon which such nuisance exists or to the
owner  of the building or structure itself, to abate such nuisance or remove
such hazard.
   (b)   Contents of notice. The notice to abate or remove the hazard or
nuisance shall  specify the nature of the hazard or nuisance, shall describe
the property  on which the same is located, shall require the owner  to abate
or remove the hazard or nuisance promptly and shall designate a time within
which the same shall be abated or removed, which time shall be commensurate
with the nature of the hazard or nuisance.
   (c)   Removal by city. If, at the expiration of the time limit specified in
the notice to remove or abate a hazard or nuisance, the owner  has not complied
with the requirements thereof, or in any case where the owner  of the land  or
of the building or structure itself is not known, Council may , by resolution,
order such hazard removed or nuisance abated under the direction of the Mayor
by the proper department or agency of the city, or may do the work by contract
or by hire.
   (d)   Mayor’s duties. The Mayor shall  take all steps necessary to carry out
the directions of Council in removing a hazard or abating a nuisance, shall
keep or cause to be kept an accurate record of all expenses in connection
therewith and, upon completion of the work to be performed, shall submit to
Council a report of the work done and of all expenses in connection therewith.
   (e)   Assessment of costs. Council shall , by resolution, after examination
of the Mayor’s report, determine what amount or part of each such expense shall
be charged and the person, if known, against whom, and the premises  upon
which, the same shall be levied as a special assessment. By such resolution,
Council shall determine the number  of installments in which the assessment may
be paid, determine the rate of interest to be charged on installments, not to
exceed 6% per year, designate the district or land  and premises  upon which
special assessments shall be levied, direct the City Assessor to prepare a
special assessment roll in accordance with Council’s determination, designate
the name by which the assessment roll shall be known and referred to, and, as
often as Council deems it expedient, require notice of all of the several
amounts so reported and determined to be given by the City Clerk, either by
registered mail sent to the last known address of the owner  as shown on the
assessment roll of the city or by publication.
   (f)   Special assessment roll. The City Assessor shall  prepare a special
assessment roll, including all lots and parcels of land  within the special
assessment district designated by Council, and shall assess to each such lot or
parcel of land  such sums as may  have been directed by Council.
   (g)   Certificate of assessor. When the City Assessor has completed such
assessment roll, he or she shall  attach thereto and endorse thereon his or her
certificate to the effect that the roll has been made by him or her pursuant to
a resolution of Council (giving the date of adoption of the same) and that in
making the assessments therein he or she has, as near as may  be, according to
his or her best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions contained
in such resolution, the City Charter and this chapter. Thereupon, he or she
shall file such special assessment roll with the City Clerk who shall forthwith
give notice as required by Council.
   (h)   Notice of hearing on roll. Upon receipt of such special assessment
roll, the City Clerk shall  give notice as directed by Council, which notice
shall state the basis of the assessment and the amount thereof, describe the
property  affected thereby and give a reasonable time , which shall not be less
than 30 days, in which a hearing may  be had thereon or payment made.
   (i)   Hearing on objections. If payment is not made within the time
specified in the resolution and notice, Council shall  meet at the time and
place provided and hear any objections to the roll as prepared.
   (j)   Corrections and changes. Council may  correct the roll as to any
assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land  or other errors
appearing therein. Any changes made in the roll shall  be noted in the Council
minutes.
   (k)   Confirmation of roll. After the hearing, Council shall  confirm such
special assessment roll with such corrections as may  have been made, and the
City Clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation thereon, and upon
confirmation such roll shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-8-1954)
§ 1020.05 CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   Initiatory resolution. When, in the opinion of Council, any sidewalk
needs to be constructed, rebuilt or repaired, it shall , by resolution, direct
the Mayor to prepare a report, with the assistance of the Engineer , containing
any information it may  request concerning such work.
   (b)   Plans and specifications. The Mayor shall  request the Engineer  to
prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and specifications of the work to be
done, a schedule of the lands affected and such other information as Council
may  have requested.
   (c)   Report of Mayor. The Mayor shall  prepare his or her report and shall
include in it a schedule of all property  affected by the work proposed to be
done, pertinent information on such parcels as are owned by public authorities
and such other information as Council may  have requested. He or she shall
present it to Council along with the plans and specifications of the Engineer ,
together with his or her recommendation as to what part, if any, should be a
general obligation of the city, the number  of installments in which the
assessment should be spread and the lands which should be included in the
special assessment district.
   (d)   Alternative procedure. When, in the opinion of the Mayor, any sidewalk
needs to be constructed, rebuilt or repaired, he or she may  request the
Engineer  to prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and specifications of the
work needed to be done and a schedule of the lands affected. The Mayor shall
submit such information, along with his or her report and recommendations, to
Council, in the same manner as though Council had requested it.
   (e)   Resolution of determination. After reviewing the plans and
specifications and the report of the Mayor, Council shall , if it so desires,
determine, by resolution, that the work be done, setting forth the details
concerning it, prescribing a form of notice and directing the City Clerk to
give such notice by publication or by registered mail addressed to the last
known address of the owner  of the land  to be assessed.
   (f)   Contents of notice. The notice shall  specify the extent of the work
to be done, describe the property  affected by the work, require the owner  to
perform the work promptly, in accordance with the plans and specifications of
the Engineer , and designate a time within which the same shall be done.
   (g)   Work done by city. If, at the expiration of the time limit specified
in the notice, within which the work must be done, the owner  has not complied
with the requirements thereof, Council shall , by resolution, order such
sidewalk  to be constructed, rebuilt or repaired under the direction of the
Mayor by the proper department or agency of the city, or may  do the work by
contract or by hire.
   (h)   Mayor’s duties. The Mayor shall  take all steps necessary to carry out
the direction of Council in performing the work ordered, shall keep or cause to
be kept an accurate record of all expenses in connection therewith, and, upon
completion of the work to be performed, shall submit to Council a report of the
work done and of all expenses in connection therewith.
   (i)   Assessment of costs. Council shall , by resolution, after examination
of the Mayor’s report, determine what amount or part of each such expense shall
be charged and the person, if known, against whom, and the premises  upon
which, the same shall be levied as a special assessment. By such resolution,
Council shall determine the number  of installments in which the assessment may
be paid, determine the rate of interest to be charged on installments, not to
exceed 6% per year, designate the district or land  and premises  upon which
the special assessments shall be levied, direct the City Assessor to prepare a
special assessment roll in accordance with Council’s determination, designate
the name by which such assessment roll shall be known and referred to, and, as
often as Council deems it expedient, require notice of the several amounts so
reported and determined to be given by the City Clerk, either by registered
mail sent to the last known address of the owner  as shown on the assessment
roll of the city or by publication.
   (j)   Special assessment roll. The City Assessor shall  thereupon prepare a
special assessment roll, including all lots and parcels of land  within the
special assessment district designated by Council, and shall assess to each
such lot or parcel of land  such sums as may  have been directed by Council.
   (k)   Certificate of Assessor. When the City Assessor has completed such
assessment roll, he or she shall  attach thereto and endorse thereon his or her
certificate to the effect that such roll has been made by him or her pursuant
to a resolution of Council (giving the date of adoption of the same) and that
in making the assessments therein, he or she has, as near as may  be, according
to his or her best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions
contained in such resolution, the City Charter and this chapter. Thereupon, he
or she shall  file such special assessment roll with the City Clerk who shall
forthwith give notice as required by Council.
   (l)   Notice of hearing on roll. Upon receipt of such special assessment
roll, the City Clerk shall  give notice as directed by Council, which notice
shall state the basis of the assessment and the amount thereof, describe the
property  affected thereby and give a reasonable time , which shall not be less
than 30 days, in which a hearing may  be had thereon or payment made.
   (m)   Hearing on objections. If payment is not made within the time
specified in the resolution and notice, the Council shall  meet at the time and
place provided and hear any objections to the roll as prepared.
   (n)   Corrections and changes. Council may  correct the roll as to any
assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land  or other errors
appearing therein. Any changes made in the roll shall  be noted in the Council
minutes.
   (o)   Confirmation of roll. After such hearing, Council shall  confirm such
special assessment roll, with such corrections as may  have been made, and the
City Clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation thereon, and upon
confirmation such roll shall be final and conclusive.
   (p)   Alternate proceedings. Council may , if it so desires, disregard the
proceedings under this section and proceed entirely under the improvement
procedure provided in this chapter, either as an individual improvement
program or in conjunction with any other improvement  program.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-8-1954)
§ 1020.06 SINGLE LOT PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Report of Mayor. When any expense has been incurred by the city upon
or with respect to any single lot or parcel of land , which expense is
chargeable against such lot or parcel of land  and the owner  thereof under
authority  of the City Charter, any city ordinance  or state  law , and which
expense is not of that class required to be prorated among several lots or
parcels of land  in a special assessment district, the amount of labor and
material or any other expense or service for which such expense was incurred,
with a description of the lot or parcel of land  upon or with respect to which
the expense was incurred, and the name of the owner , if known, shall  be
reported by the Mayor to Council.
   (b)   Resolution of determination. After reviewing the report of the Mayor,
Council may , if it so desires, determine, by resolution, what amount or part
of each such expense shall  be charged, and the person, if known, against whom,
and the premises  upon which, the same shall be levied as a special assessment.
By such resolution, Council shall determine the number  of installments in
which the assessment may  be paid, determine the rate of interest to be charged
on installments, not to exceed 6% per year, designate the land  and premises
upon which the special assessment shall be levied, direct the City Assessor to
prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with Council’s determination,
designate the name by which the assessment roll shall be known and referred to,
and, as often as Council deems it expedient, require notice of the several
amounts so reported and determined to be given by the City Clerk, either by
registered mail sent to the last known address of the owner  as shown on the
assessment roll of the city or by publication.
   (c)   Special assessment roll. The City Assessor shall  thereupon prepare a
special assessment roll, including all lots and parcels of land  within the
special assessment district designated by Council, and shall assess to each
such lot or parcel of land  such sums as may  have been directed by Council.
   (d)   Certificate of Assessor. When the City Assessor has completed such
assessment roll, he or she shall  attach thereto and endorse thereon his or her
certificate to the effect that such roll has been made by him or her pursuant
to a resolution of Council (giving the date of adoption of the same) and that
in making the assessments therein, he or she has, as near as may  be, according
to his or her best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions
contained in such resolution, the City Charter and this chapter. Thereupon, he
or she shall file the special assessment roll with the City Clerk who shall
forthwith give notice as required by Council.
   (e)   Notice of hearing on roll. Upon receipt of such special assessment
roll, the City Clerk shall  give notice as directed by Council, which notice
shall state the basis of the assessment and the amount thereof, describe the
property  affected thereby and give a reasonable time , which shall not be less
than 30 days, in which a hearing may  be had thereon or payment made.
   (f)   Hearing on objections. If payment is not made within the time
specified in the resolution and notice, Council shall  meet at the time and
place provided and hear any objections to the roll as prepared.
   (g)   Corrections and changes. Council may  correct the roll as to any
assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land  or other errors
appearing therein. Any changes made in the roll shall  be noted in the Council
minutes.
   (h)   Confirmation of roll. After such hearing, Council shall  confirm such
special assessment roll, with such corrections as may  have been made, and the
City Clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation thereon, and upon
confirmation such roll shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-8-1954)
§ 1020.07 LIENS ON PROPERTY.
   (a)   Establishment. Special assessments and all interest and charges
thereon, from the date of confirmation of a special assessment roll, shall  be
and remain a lien upon the property  assessed of the same character and effect
as the lien created by general law  for state  and county  taxes or by the City
Charter for city taxes, until paid.
   (b)   Character and effect. All such liens shall  be of the same character
and effect as liens created by the City Charter for taxes and shall include
accrued interest and penalties.
   (c)   Destruction or impairment. No judgment or decree, nor any action of
Council vacating a special assessment, shall  destroy or impair the lien of the
city upon the premises  assessed for such amount of the assessment as may  be
equitably charged against the same, or as by regular mode of proceeding might
have been lawfully assessed thereon.
   (d)   Failure to receive notice. Failure of any owner  to receive any notice
required to be sent under the provisions of the City Charter and this chapter
shall not invalidate any special assessment or special assessment roll.
   (e)   Personal liability of owner . In addition to the property  tax lien
created herein, any special assessment levied by the city shall  constitute a
debt owed to the city from the owner  of the lot or parcel of land  assessed
and may  be collected in the same manner as any contracted debt or in the same
manner as provided by law  for the collection of personal property  taxes.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-8-1954)
§ 1020.08 INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS.
   (a)   Number; minimum amount. Annual installments shall not exceed ten in
number, as Council may  determine at the time of confirmation of a special
assessment roll, and if a division of the assessment operates to make any
installment less than $10, the City Assessor shall  reduce the number  of
installments so that each installment shall be above and as near to $10 as
possible.
   (b)   Due date. All special assessments levied under this chapter shall
become due upon confirmation of the special assessment roll, and if they are to
be paid in annual installments, Council shall determine the first installment
to be due upon confirmation of the roll. Deferred installments shall be due
annually thereafter, or, at the discretion of Council, they may  be spread upon
and made a part of each annual city tax roll thereafter until all are paid.
   (c)   First installment spread. The first installment of any special
assessment shall  be spread upon a special city tax roll in a column headed
“Special Assessment,” or upon the next annual city tax roll, at the direction
of Council. If such first installment is spread on a special tax roll, it may
be paid at any time within three months from the date of confirmation without
penalties, and if unpaid on or before such three-month period, it shall  be
added to and made a part of the following July tax roll, together with interest
as provided thereon.
   (d)   Annual installment spread. Annual installments shall  be spread
thereafter either on a special assessment roll or on the annual city tax roll,
as directed by Council, in the same manner and subject to the same provisions
as provided for first installments.
   (e)   Publication of notice to pay. The assessment roll shall  be
transmitted by the Clerk to the City Treasurer for collection immediately after
confirmation. If it is not a part of the annual tax roll, the City Treasurer
shall give notice by publication at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation that such special assessment roll (describing it) has been filed in
the City Treasurer’s office and specifying when and where payments may  be made
thereon.
   (f)   Notice by mail. The City Treasurer may  mail statements of the several
assessments to the respective owners, as indicated by the records of the City
Assessor, of the several lots or parcels of land  assessed, stating the amount
of the assessment and the manner in which it may be paid. However, failure to
mail any such statement shall not invalidate the assessment or entitle the
owner  to an extension of time within which to pay the assessment.
   (g)   Collection fees and penalties. After the confirmation of any special
assessment roll, the same collection fees shall  be collected on delinquent
special assessments and upon delinquent installments of such special
assessments beginning on the first day of the fourth month following the due
date, as provided by the City Charter for the collection of delinquent city
taxes.
   (h)   Contested assessments. Except and unless written notice is given to
Council of an intention to contest or enjoin the collection of any special
assessment for the construction of any pavement, sewer, other public
improvement  or sidewalk , or for the removal or abatement of any public hazard
or nuisance, within 30 days after the date of the meeting of Council at which
it is finally determined to proceed with the making of the improvement  in
question, which notice shall state the grounds on which the proceedings are to
be contested, no suit or action of any kind shall  be instituted or maintained
for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of such special
assessment. Regardless of whether or not any public improvement  is completed
in any special assessment district, no owner  of real property  located in such
district shall be entitled to commence any suit or action for the purpose of
contesting or enjoining the collection of any such special assessment after he
or she has received the benefits from the substantial completion of that
portion of such public improvement  for which he or she is assessed.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-8-1954)
§ 1020.09 REBATES, REASSESSMENTS AND ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENTS.
   (a)   Certification. The Mayor shall , within 60 days after the completion
of each local or special public improvement , compile the actual cost  thereof
and certify the same to the City Assessor who shall adjust the special
assessment roll to correspond therewith.
   (b)   Additional assessments. When any special assessment roll proves
insufficient to pay the cost  of the improvement  for which it was made,
Council may  make an additional pro rata assessment, but the total amount
assessed against any one lot or parcel of land  shall  not exceed the value of
the benefits received by such lot or parcel of land .
   (c)   Assessment refunds. If the assessment proves larger than necessary by
5% or less, such information shall  be reported to Council which may  place the
excess in the city treasury or make a refund thereof pro rata according to the
assessment. If the assessment exceeds the amount necessary by more than 5%, the
entire excess shall be refunded to the owners of the property  upon which
payments have been made in full, pro rata according to the assessment.
   (d)   Refund procedure on installments. Any excess refund, where payment in
full has not been received, shall  be made a credit against future unpaid
installments in the inverse order in which they are payable to the extent that
such installments exist, and the balance of such refund shall be made in cash.
   (e)   Restriction against refund. No refunds of special assessments may  be
made which impair or contravene the provisions of any outstanding obligation or
bond secured in whole or in part by such special assessment.
   (f)   Illegal or invalid assessments. Whenever Council determines that a
special assessment is invalid or defective for any reason whatsoever, or if any
court of competent jurisdiction has adjudged such an assessment to be illegal
for any reason whatsoever, in whole or in part, Council may  cause a new
assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was
made, whether the improvement  or any part thereof has been completed or not,
and whether any part of the assessment has been collected or not.
   (g)   Proceedings on reassessment. All proceedings on reassessments and for
the collection thereof shall  be made in the same manner as provided for an
original assessment. If any portion of the original assessment has been
collected and not refunded, if shall be applied upon the reassessment, and the
reassessment shall, to that extent, be deemed satisfied. If more than the
amount reassessed has been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the
person making such payments.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-8-1954)
§ 1020.10 RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   Assessment limited to value of benefits. The total amount assessed
against any lot or parcel of land  shall  not exceed the value of the benefits
received from the improvement .
   (b)   Special fund. Except as otherwise provided in the City Charter and
this chapter, moneys raised by special assessment to pay the cost  of any local
improvement  shall  be held in a special fund to pay such cost  or to repay any
moneys borrowed therefor.
   (c)   Restricted use of funds. Each special assessment account shall  be
used only for the improvement  project for which the assessment was levied,
except as otherwise provided in the City Charter.
(Ord. 24, passed 12-8-1954)
§ 1020.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1022: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
Section
1022.01   Duties of owners and occupants
1022.02   Construction standards
1022.03   Dangerous sidewalks and crosswalks
1022.04   Authority of Council to order repairs; notice
1022.05   Noncompliance; remedy to city
1022.06   Conformity to standards required
1022.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Failure of property owner to keep sidewalks free of obstructions, see
M.C.L.A. § 103.4
   Sidewalks generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 691.1401 et seq.
§ 1022.01 DUTIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
   It shall be the duty of every owner , agent or occupant of any lot or parcel
of land situated within the city to keep and maintain good and sufficient
sidewalks along all the streets and avenues in front of or adjacent to such
lots or parcels of land .
(Ord. 20, passed 5-25-1949)
§ 1022.02 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   All sidewalks, crosswalks and approaches hereafter constructed or repaired
in streets within the city shall be constructed or repaired according to the
following specifications.
   (a)   Location, grades, widths. Sidewalks to be constructed shall  be
located one foot from the property  line, unless special permission is granted
by Council to locate sidewalks at any other location. All sidewalks shall be
upon such grade as Council may  direct and shall not be less than four feet in
width.
   (b)   Filling, depth and grade. All necessary filling shall  be made with
earth free from vegetable material or refuse of any kind. It shall be deposited
in layers not exceeding six inches thick and each layer shall be tamped by a
hand tamper or packed by other means which will produce the same results to the
established grade, allowing for the thickness of the walk to be built upon it.
The fill on the top shall extend one foot in width on each side beyond the walk
to be built upon it. Its sides shall be constructed with a slope of not less
than one and one-half feet horizontal to one foot vertical. No walk shall be
constructed upon the fill until the earth is sufficiently compact to prevent
settlement.
   (c)   Unsuitable filling. Any soft material subject to shrinkage or decay,
trees under six inches in diameter, or other unsuitable material designated by
the Director of Public Works, shall  be removed and the space backfilled with
well-tamped earth.
   (d)   Tree removal. All trees which are on the line of the sidewalk  work,
or which interfere with the proper placing of the sidewalk , and which require
moving, will be removed by the city at the expense of the person adjacent to
whose property  the sidewalk  is to be constructed.
   (e)   Cuts. When cuts are necessary, the earth or other material shall  be
excavated to such width that the bottom of the excavation shall be at least one
foot wider on each side than the width of the walk to be built upon it, and the
sides shall, where possible, slope two feet horizontal to one foot vertical.
Excavated material shall be removed from the site of the work, and any excess
of excavation over fill shall be disposed of by the builder. The bottom of the
cut shall be tamped, provided it is not sufficiently firm.
   (f)   Material required. Walks shall  be constructed of cement concrete.
   (g)   Forms.
      (1)   The forms for the concrete shall be smooth, free from warp, of
sufficient strength to resist springing out of shape and of a depth to conform
to the thickness of the proposed walk. The divider plates shall be removed from
forms that have been previously used.
      (2)   The forms shall preferably be of steel and must be well staked and
set to the established lines, their upper edges conforming to the grade of the
finished walk, which walk shall have a fall towards the gutter of one-quarter
of an inch to one foot.
      (3)   The base shall be blocked out in sections which will not measure
more than four feet in any dimension, and in any given walk such sections are
to be uniformly spaced.
      (4)   The divider plates shall be made of steel not less than one-eighth
of an inch in thickness of a depth to correspond to the thickness of the
proposed walk, shall extend the full width of the walk and shall be set at
right angles to the side forms. They shall be left in place until the surface
coat is floated.
   (h)   Expansion joints. On concrete walks, three-quarter inch expansion
joints composed of some asphaltic composition satisfactory to Council shall  be
placed between curbs and walks at all points where they meet and in
intermediate joints at distances not to exceed 80 feet. These joints are to be
flush with the wearing surface and are to extend for the full depth of the
walk.
   (i)   Mixing and placing concrete.
      (1)   All concrete shall be mixed with a batch mixer of an approved type
except where the Director of Public Works may deem it necessary or expedient to
mix by hand methods. In the event hand mixing is resorted to, it shall be done
only as directed by the Director, in writing.
      (2)   Water shall be used in sufficient quantities to obtain concrete
which will hold its shape when struck off with a template. In no case shall
such concrete be wet enough to cause a separation of materials.
      (3)   Concrete shall be placed in such manner as to produce a dense
homogeneous mass. It shall be puddled, sliced or tamped with proper tools for
such purpose while being deposited.
      (4)   Special care must be exercised in reinforced concrete work not to
distort or displace any reinforcing steel during concreting.
      (5)   No used concrete or retempering of concrete which has partially set
will be allowed either by the addition of water or by mixing it with other
materials.
      (6)   Concrete shall not be mixed or deposited when the temperature is
below 40°F, unless special precautions, subject to the approval of the
Director, are taken to avoid the use of materials containing frost and to keep
the work protected until thoroughly hardened.
      (7)   In warm weather, walks shall be protected from the sun by a
covering and shall be kept moist by sprinkling for at least four days. At least
once on small areas, and at least every 50 feet on long stretches, suitable
nameplates or dies shall be used to mark the name of the builder employed on
the work and the date the work was done.
   (j)   Quantities of cement required.
      (1)   For a one course walk, the minimum amount of cement required for
the concrete is one barrel of cement for each 60 square feet of four-inch
sidewalk .
      (2)   For two course walks, the minimum amount of cement required for the
concrete is one barrel for each 100 square feet of base course, and one barrel
for each 100 square feet of top. In no case shall the builders use less than
these amounts of cement in sidewalk construction. In the event that less cement
than the above requirement is used in any walk constructed, the builder may be
required to tear out the walk and replace it with a walk containing the proper
amount of cement as required herein. Due allowance will be made for any waste
in mixing and placing concrete in forms.
   (k)   Gravel. Clean, hard, washed gravel, free from soft, porous particles,
clay, silt or vegetable matter, may  be used which may be finished to leave a
reasonably smooth and nonporous surface.
   (l)   Base course.
      (1)   A two course concrete sidewalk  shall consist of a bottom course
three inches thick under a wearing or top course of cement mortar one inch
thick.
      (2)   The base shall be mixed in a batch mixer in the proportion of one
part by volume of cement to six parts by volume of well graded bank-run gravel,
free from clay, loam or vegetable matter as herein specified. In preparing
concrete for the base, cement and gravel shall be measured separately and then
mixed thoroughly while dry.
      (3)   After being mixed dry, sufficient water shall be added to obtain
the desired consistency and the mixing shall be continued until the materials
are uniformly distributed and each particle of the same is thoroughly coated
with cement. All concrete shall be mixed for not less than 50 seconds after the
addition of water.
      (4)   The consistency of the mixture shall be such that the mortar,
composed of cement and the fine material, adheres to the pebbles, and such that
under heavy tamping, a small amount of water will flush to the surface.
      (5)   The concrete shall be deposited in such quantities that after being
thoroughly rammed into place, it will be three inches in thickness and the
upper surface shall be true, uniform, parallel to and one inch below the
surface of the finished work.
      (6)   Concrete must be conveyed from the place of mixing and placed in
such manner and so handled after depositing it that the concrete will be of
uniform composition throughout, showing no lack or excess of mortar in any
place.
   (m)   Wearing surface.
      (1)   The wearing surface shall be composed of one part by volume of
cement to two parts by volume of clean sand screened through a one-quarter inch
screen, not more than 5% of which shall pass a number 100 sieve. The sand and
cement shall be mixed thoroughly while dry and then sufficient water added
while the mixing is continued to produce a mortar of a consistency which can be
easily spread into position with a straight edge. The mortar shall be spread on
the base immediately after mixing and before the base has obtained its initial
set.
      (2)   After the wearing surface has been worked to an approximately true
plane, the slab marking shall be made directly over the joints in the base.
Such marking shall be made with a tool which will cut entirely through and
completely separate the surface of adjacent slabs.
      (3)   The slabs shall be rounded on all surface edges to a radius of
about one-half of an inch.
      (4)   The surface shall be troweled smooth and shall then be lightly
brushed with a stiff brush or broom. The application of neat cement in the
surface in order to hasten hardening is prohibited.
   (n)   Faulty materials.
      (1)   No materials of any sort not approved by Council are to be used in
any part of the work.
      (2)   All cement used shall be some recognized brand of cement that has
proven satisfactory and shall comply with the latest specifications of the
American Society for Testing Materials.
      (3)   The right is hereby reserved to inspect and test cement at any time
that Council deems it advisable to make such tests. If, in the short period
tests, it appears that a certain shipment of cement is not up to the desired
standard, no cement from this lot shall be used until the time necessary to
complete the tests requiring more time has elapsed. If, after these tests have
been made, it still appears that the cement is not satisfactory, then any part
of this cement on the job shall be hauled away and disposed of in some manner
which will insure its not being used in any part of the work. Lumps of cement
are to be thrown out in all cases. They shall not be used either as lumps or by
attempting to pulverize them.
   (o)   Walks across driveways. All sidewalks constructed, reconstructed or
repaired which cross existing or proposed driveways shall be built six inches
in thickness and the concrete used shall  be of the same mixture as specified
for other walks.
   (p)   Grades; permits required.
      (1)   All sidewalks, crosswalks and approaches hereafter constructed or
repaired in streets within the city shall be upon such grade and line as shall
be established by Council.
      (2)   All joints and edges shall be finished with tools for that purpose.
In the case of walks on slopes greater than one-half inch per foot, grooving or
brooming or checking the top surface shall be done as directed by the Director
of Public Works.
      (3)   No such construction, reconstruction or repair work shall be
commenced until after a permit has been obtained from Council.
   (q)   Approaches. For the purpose of this chapter, APPROACHES shall  be
taken to mean either driveways or sidewalks built on the street  property
between the gutter line and the sidewalk  line, or other miscellaneous
construction of a similar nature within the limits of the public streets and
highways.
   (r)   Crosswalks. All crosswalks shall  be built and kept in repair by the
city under the direction of Council and shall be not less than four feet wide
and of such material as heretofore specified. The expense of building and
repairing crosswalks shall be paid out of the General Highway or Street Fund.
   (s)   Permitted contractors.
      (1)   All sidewalks shall be built:
         A.   By the city by the direct employment of labor and the purchase of
materials;
         B.   By private contract under the supervision of, and with an
inspection by, the city; or
         C.   By bonded sidewalk contractors as hereinafter noted, under the
direction of Council.
      (2)   The construction of walks through the city may be undertaken by the
employment of labor and purchase of materials by the owner , provided that a
full-time city inspector is employed on the job to check, supervise and inspect
the work and provided that all expense of employing such inspector is paid by
the owner .
(Ord. 20, passed 5-25-1949)
§ 1022.03 DANGEROUS SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS.
   Whenever any sidewalk , crosswalk or approach, or any portion of the same,
by reason of defects or for want of repair, becomes dangerous to persons
passing along and upon the same, it shall be the duty of the city to tear up
and remove the dangerous portions, or cause such removal to be done, and
replace the sidewalk , crosswalk or approach with earth or gravel, if required,
so as to make it safe for persons passing along and upon the space from which
the sidewalk , crosswalk or approach has been removed.
(Ord. 20, passed 5-25-1949)
§ 1022.04 AUTHORITY OF COUNCIL TO ORDER REPAIRS; NOTICE.
   (a)   Council shall have the power, by resolution, to order any sidewalk ,
crosswalk or approach constructed, reconstructed or repaired, and it shall be
the duty of the city to give to the owner , agent or occupant of any parcel or
lot of land in front of or adjacent to which a sidewalk , crosswalk or approach
is ordered to be constructed, reconstructed or repaired, notice to construct,
reconstruct or repair the same within 30 days from personal service upon such
owner , agent or occupant of such parcel or lot of land . Such notice shall be
served by any member of the police force of the city by delivering to the owner
, agent or occupant of such lot or parcel of land , a true copy of such notice,
inscribed “copy”, and at the same time informing him or her of its contents, if
such owner , agent or occupant is found within the city.
   (b)   If the officer is unable to serve such notice personally, as herein
required, within three days from the date of receiving the notice, he or she
shall serve the same by posting one copy thereof on the lot or parcel of land
in front of which, or adjacent to which, the sidewalk , crosswalk or approach
is to be constructed, reconstructed or repaired, and also by posting one copy
of such notice at each of three public places in the ward in which the lot or
parcel of land is situated.
   (c)   The officer serving the notice shall retain the original notice, shall
endorse thereon his or her certificate and return, showing the time, place and
manner of the service, and shall file the same with the City Clerk. Service by
posting copies of such notice as herein required shall be equivalent to
personal service. The notice shall be in the following form, as nearly as
possible:
   STATE OF MICHIGAN
   County of Genesee, City of
   Grand Blanc
   To __________________________________________
   You are hereby notified to construct, reconstruct or repair a sidewalk,
crosswalk or approach along the __________________ side of ________________
Street in front of (or adjacent to) the following described lot or parcel of
land situated in the City of Grand Blanc, to-wit: ____________ pursuant to a
resolution duly adopted by the City Council of the City of Grand Blanc on the
____________ day of ____________ 20____ in accordance with plans and
specifications prescribed therefor and now on file in the office of the City
Clerk, within thirty days from the date of the service upon you of this notice.
WITNESS ______________________________
Mayor of the City of Grand Blanc, this ____________ day of ____________ 20____.
      __________________________________
      City Clerk
(Ord. 20, passed 5-25-1949)
§ 1022.05 NONCOMPLIANCE; REMEDY TO CITY.
   (a)   If the owner , agent or occupant of any parcel or lot of land neglects
to construct, reconstruct or repair a sidewalk , crosswalk or approach within
the time specified in the notice required to be given by §
1022.04, it shall be the duty of the city to construct, reconstruct or repair
the same, or cause it to be done, and in such case the cost and expense of
constructing, reconstructing or repairing such sidewalk , crosswalk or
approach, in which cost shall be included all of the items of cost of such
construction, shall, when ordered by Council, be assessed by the City Clerk on
each description of land , which cost shall be a lien thereon until collected
and paid as provided in this chapter.
   (b)   The cost of constructing, reconstructing or repairing any such
sidewalk , crosswalk or approach shall be divided as follows: the owner , agent
or occupant  shall be required to pay 75% of the total cost and expense and the
city shall pay 25%, unless payment in full is made within 30 days from the date
of billing, in which event the owner , agent or occupant shall receive a 33.34%
discount, thereby dividing the cost equally between the city and the owner ,
agent or occupant .
   (c)   Immediately after the construction, reconstruction or repair of such
sidewalk , crosswalk or approach, Council shall make a certificate setting
forth the names of the owner , agent or occupant , with a description of the
premises , the amount of walk constructed, reconstructed or repaired, and the
cost and expense of the same, and shall file such certificate with the City
Clerk.
(Ord. 20, passed 5-25-1949)
§ 1022.06 CONFORMITY TO STANDARDS REQUIRED.
   No person shall construct, reconstruct or repair, or cause or permit to be
constructed, reconstructed or repaired, in front of or adjacent to any lot or
parcel of land owned or occupied by him or her, any sidewalk , crosswalk or
approach of different material or of different width or to a different line or
grade than specified in this chapter.
(Ord. 20, passed 5-25-1949)
§ 1022.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1024: OBSTRUCTIONS OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
1024.01   Council permission required
1024.02   Barricades and warning lights; excavations
1024.03   Storage or display of merchandise on streets and sidewalks
1024.04   Awnings and advertising devices (Repealed)
1024.05   Moving of buildings
1024.99   Penalty
§ 1024.01 COUNCIL PERMISSION REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall place or cause to be placed any stone, brick, timber,
lumber, rubbish, material or other obstruction in or upon any street , lane or
alley in the city, or permit any such encumbrance or obstruction to remain in
any of the streets, lanes or alleys, without the permission of Council.
   (b)   No person shall , without having first obtained permission from
Council, obstruct or cause to be obstructed any street , lane, alley, sidewalk
or gutter, or more than one-quarter of a street or other highway opposite the
lot owned by such person or corporation building.
(Ord. 14, passed 7-30-1940)
§ 1024.02 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS; EXCAVATIONS.
   (a)   (1)   Every person who obstructs or encumbers any street , lane or
alley in the city with stone, brick, timber, lumber, rubbish or other material,
or who makes any excavation or embankment in any street , lane or alley in the
city, shall erect and maintain a good and sufficient fence, railing or barrier
around such obstruction, excavation or embankment to prevent an accident. In
addition, such person shall place and keep in a conspicuous place on such
fence, railing or barrier, suitable and sufficient red or amber lights during
the whole of any night that such obstruction, excavation or embankment
continues.
      (1)   No person shall willfully remove, displace or destroy any such
fence, railing, barrier or red or amber lights placed around any obstruction,
excavation or embankment within any street , lane, alley or public place in the
city.
   (b)   Every person, who excavates for the erection of any wall or building,
or for any other purpose, near to any street , lane or alley in the city, shall
put up a good and sufficient protecting rail or barrier along the line of such
street , lane or alley opposite such excavation and shall maintain the same as
long as may be necessary to prevent danger to any person traveling along such
street , lane or alley.
(Ord. 14, passed 7-30-1940)
§ 1024.03 STORAGE OR DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall use any sidewalk , street or alley in the city for the
storage, keeping or displaying thereon of any goods, wares, merchandise, used
cars, implements, produce, provisions, vegetables, boxes, barrels or showcases
without first obtaining the permission of Council to do so. The storing,
keeping or displaying of any of such articles on any public sidewalk , street
or alley is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and in addition to the
penalties provided for in this chapter, proceedings may be instituted in the
County Circuit Court for the abatement of such nuisance.
(Ord. 14, passed 7-30-1940)
§ 1024.04 AWNINGS AND ADVERTISING DEVICES. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 1024.04 was repealed by Ordinance 213, passed April 11, 1990.
§ 1024.05 MOVING OF BUILDINGS.
   No person shall move or assist in moving any building into, along or across
any street , lane or alley in the city without having first obtained permission
of Council to do so, and then only by the route and under the direction of the
Building Inspector, who shall make such orders and directions as the safety and
convenience of the public may require.
(Ord. 14, passed 7-30-1940)
§ 1024.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1026: TREES (REPEALED)
Editor's note:
   Chapter 1026 was repealed by Ordinance 2305-01, passed June 14, 2023.
TITLE FOUR: UTILITIES
      
Chap. 1040. Sewers. (Repealed)
      
Chap. 1042. Water.
      
Chap. 1044. Wells.
      
Chap. 1046. Storm Water Management.
CHAPTER 1040: SEWERS (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
Ordinance 08-06, passed March 12, 2008, repealed in its entirety Ordinance 40,
passed January 13, 1968, codified as Chapter 1040, Sewers, and adopts a new
Genesee County Sewer Use Ordinance for the City of Grand Blanc (hereinafter
referred to as the “ordinance”).
The Ordinance establishes uniform requirements for discharges by users located
within the city to Genesee County POTW, and to enable the city and the county
agency to comply with applicable state and federal laws as required by the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act (also knows as the “Clean Water Act”), as
amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.; the General Pretreatment Regulations (40
C.F.R. part 403); Part 31 of Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.3101
et seq., as amended (“Water Resources Protection”); and the rules, Michigan
Administrative Code, R 323.2301 et seq., as amended, promulgated pursuant to §§
3103, 3106, and 3109 of Part 31 of Act 451 of Public Acts of Michigan of 1994,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.3103, 324.106 and 324.3109 respectively, as amended.
The ordinance prohibits the discharge of pollutants from within the city into
the Genesee County POTW that do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements; that would interfere with the operation of the POTW; that would
pass through the POTW into receiving waters or the atmosphere, the environment,
or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; that would inhibit or disrupt the
POTW’s processing, use or disposal of sludge; that would cause health or safety
problems for POTW workers; or that would result in a violation of the POTW’s
NPDES permit or of other applicable laws and regulations.
The ordinance is intended to improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim
wastewaters and sludge from the Genesee County POTW, as required by law.
The ordinance regulates the discharge of wastewater and/or pollutants to the
POTW and provides the authority to enforce the requirements of the ordinance
through the issuance of permits and through other means as provided by the
ordinance.
The ordinance authorizes and requires all inspection, monitoring, reporting and
enforcement activities as necessary to ensure compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements and other applicable laws and
regulations.
The ordinance provides for the equitable distribution and recovery of costs
from users of the Genesee County POTW sufficient to administer regulatory
activities and to meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement and
replacement of the POTW.
The ordinance applies to any person that discharges to the Genesee County POTW
from within the city. The ordinance also applies to any person owning, using,
constructing or maintaining any private system or facility intended or used for
the disposal of sewage or wastewater within the city.
The ordinance designates, empowers and authorizes the Genesee County POTW to
act as the agent and representative of the city for the purposes of
administering and enforcing the ordinance within the city. This includes, but
is not limited to, the power and authority of the POTW, as deemed necessary by
the POTW, to immediately and independently investigate, enforce, and prosecute
(administratively or judicially, and civilly or criminally) any violation of
the ordinance or of any notice, order, permit, decision or determination
promulgated, issued or made by the POTW under the ordinance, and to otherwise
implement the requirements of the ordinance.
The ordinance makes it unlawful for any person to discharge any wastewater or
pollutant to the POTW or to any storm sewer or natural outlet within the city
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, except in accordance with
the provisions of the ordinance and other applicable laws and regulations. If
any user discharges or proposes to discharge wastewaters or pollutants that are
prohibited or limited by the ordinance, the POTW may take any action as
provided by the ordinance or other applicable laws or regulations to assure and
require compliance with the provisions of the ordinance.
CHAPTER 1042: WATER
Section
1042.01   Administration
1042.02   Water mains
1042.03   Service pipes; connections
1042.04   Meters
1042.05   Use of water; inspections; fire hydrants
1042.06   Rates and charges
1042.07   Free service prohibited; bimonthly billing; payment
1042.08   Collection of delinquent charges
1042.09   Criteria for establishment of rates
1042.10   Accidents or repairs; notice of shut-offs
1042.11   Cross connections
1042.12   Fluoridation
1042.13   Table of unit factors
1042.99   Penalty
Constitutional reference:
   Water quality, see Mich. Const. Art. 4, § 52
   Water supply generally, see Mich. Const. Art. 7, § 24
Statutory reference:
   Water quality, see M.C.L.A. §§ 67.38, 324.101 et seq.
   Water supply generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 46.171 et seq., 324.101 et seq.,
486.51 et seq., 486.101 et seq.
   Water supply in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4b, 117.4e, 117.4f,
117.35
§ 1042.01 ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   The operation, maintenance and management of the waterworks system
shall be under the immediate supervision and control of Council. Council may ,
however, delegate the authority to regulate day-to-day operations of the system
to the Director of Public Works or to any other person of its choosing,
provided that such authority shall always be subordinate to the authority of
Council.
   (b)   The Director of Public Works shall have charge of the maintenance and
operation of the water supply and treatment plant, pumping equipment,
distribution system, fire hydrants, meters and all other appurtenances of the
waterworks system. The Director shall supervise all extensions and alterations
of the waterworks system as Council may direct. He or she shall also be
responsible for reading all water meters.
   (c)   The City Clerk shall be responsible for the collection of water bills.
All revenues shall be accounted for in a manner satisfactory to Council. The
City Clerk shall prepare and present a bimonthly statement of the receipts and
expenditures of the Water Department to Council.
   (d)   The City Treasurer shall deposit water revenues in a manner approved
for other municipal deposits, but shall keep water revenues in a separate and
distinct account.
   (e)   The Director shall report monthly to Council in such detail as Council
may direct.
   (f)   The system shall be operated upon the basis of a fiscal year beginning
on June 1 of each year and ending on May 31 of the following year.
(Ord. 11, passed 4-13-1938; Ord. 34, passed 3-1-1967)
§ 1042.02 WATER MAINS.
   (a)   The water mains of the city shall be under the exclusive control of
the Director of Public Works. No person, other than an agent or employee of the
Water Department, shall tap, change, obstruct, interfere with or in any way
disturb the system of water mains.
   (b)   All extensions and alterations to the system of water mains shall be
made under the supervision of the Director who shall act only upon
authorization of Council. Petitions for the extension of water mains shall be
addressed to Council, which will thereupon consider the same and advise the
petitioners of its decision.
   (c)   Any person installing water mains at his or her own expense shall
first submit plans and specifications for such work to Council for its
approval. After such plans and specifications have been approved by Council,
the work shall be done under the supervision of the Director who shall require
that such tests be made as he or she may consider necessary, and no water shall
be admitted into such mains until he or she accepts the installation on behalf
of Council. This division (c) shall also apply to any installation of water
mains outside the city where permission has first been granted by Council to
connect such mains to the existing distribution system.
   (d)   All future privately-funded water distribution mains, which are at
least six inches in diameter, shall become the property of the city upon their
proper completion and connection to the municipal water supply system. In
addition, and concurrent with or prior to connection of such mains, all
necessary easements shall be dedicated to the city and all such easements shall
have a minimum width of 15 feet.
   (e)   The city shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of all
water mains dedicated to it under this section, and maintenance and repairs
shall be accomplished only by the city or by a private or public entity
selected by the city under contract with it to perform such duties. All
expenses of maintaining and repairing such mains, whether incurred by the city
directly or by contract, shall be charged to the owner of the property upon
which the water main is located. For purposes of this section, the city’s
responsibility for maintenance and repair shall be limited to the water mains
and necessary excavating and backfilling. All other expenses, such as, but not
limited to, landscaping and repaving of parking lots, are the responsibility of
the landowner.
   (f)   All expenses incurred by the city in maintaining and repairing water
mains shall be reimbursed within 30 days from the date of issuance of the
city’s statement. If such reimbursement is not made within 30 days, the
expenses shall become a lien against the land , and payment shall be required
in the same manner and with the same penalties and interest charges as for city
taxes.
(Ord. 11, passed 4-13-1938; Ord. 164, passed 11-13-1985)
§ 1042.03 SERVICE PIPES; CONNECTIONS.
   (a)   All service pipe on either public or private property shall be laid on
solid ground not less than four feet below the established grade of the street
. Service pipe laid in the same trench with a sewer shall be at least 18 inches
distant from the sewer horizontally, and if the sewer is laid at a greater
depth, service pipe shall be shelved into the bank to a solid bottom. In no
case shall a service pipe be laid on a fill.
   (b)   From the main to the water meter, all service pipe shall be of copper,
not less than three-fourths inch in diameter, approved by the Director of
Public Works. Service cocks shall be at least three-fourths inch, extra heavy
round way stop and waste type, placed 12 inches inside the sidewalk line. The
stop box shall be set so that the cover is one inch above the grade and shall
be set on a brick or concrete foundation to prevent settlement.
   (c)   A separate stop and waste cock shall be placed on the service pipe
just inside the building wall on the influent side of the water meter. Such
stops shall be equal in quality to the service cock.
   (d)   The corporation cock, service pipe from main to meter, service cock
and stop box, stop and waste cock and meter will be provided in place by the
Water Department after payment of the water permit fee as provided in this
section. The service pipe from the service cock to the building on private
property  shall be properly maintained by the owner . The owner shall keep the
stop box free from dirt, stones or other substances that will prevent access to
the service cock.
   (e)   Plumbers shall not interfere in any way with the service pipes
installed by the Water Department and shall not be permitted to turn water on
or off at the service cock except for the purpose of testing their work, in
which case the service cock shall be left in the same condition and position as
they found it. Any plumber called upon to shut off water and drain pipes in any
premises shall do so inside the building only.
   (f)   (1)   Before any connection is made to any water main, an application
for a permit shall be made, in writing, by the owner of the premises to be
served, or by his or her authorized representative, at the office of the City
Clerk. Such application shall be made on forms provided by the Water
Department, and shall contain such information as Council may require.
      (2)   When such application is made, the applicant shall pay to the
Department, in addition to the fee provided in division (g) below, a tap-in
service fee, per unit, as determined from time to time by Council.
      (3)   A UNIT, for the purpose of computing water tap-in fees, shall  be
determined in accordance with the Table of Unit Factors set forth in §
1042.13, with the exception that there shall be a minimum of one full unit for
each connection.
   (g)   After the permit for a service connection has been granted, and before
the connection is made, the owner  shall pay a fee for tapping the main and
installing the service pipe to the building on private property , which will
include the corporation cock, service cock and stop box, stop and waste cock
and meter. This fee will be a charge per foot from the center of the road to
the meter for ditch and copper pipe, plus the cost of the corporation cock and
stop and waste cocks, which charges will be based on current material and labor
costs.
   (h)   When a permit is requested for service to a building under
construction, the owner  shall pay to the Water Department, in addition to the
fee provided in division (g) above, a fee for water used during construction as
set forth in §
1042.06(h).
(Ord. 11, passed 4-13-1938; Ord. 170, passed 3-12-1986; Ord. 172, passed 3-12-
1986)
§ 1042.04 METERS.
   (a)   All premises using water shall be metered and payment shall be made
for water at rates as herein set forth. In no case will water be supplied at
fixture or flat rates, except for temporary supplies as provided in this
chapter, or in special cases reviewed and approved by formal resolution of
Council.
   (b)   Meters will be furnished by the Water Department. Meters shall remain
the property of the Department and will, at all times, be under its control.
   (c)   For ordinary domestic consumption of water, a five-eighths inch or
five-eighths inch by three-fourths inch meter will be furnished. Where
application is made for a meter larger than five-eighths inch or five-eighths
inch by three-fourths inch, the Director of Public Works shall determine
whether a meter of such size is required. The Water Department will furnish
meters in sizes up to and including two inches. Where a meter larger than two
inches is required, special arrangements shall be made between the Department
and the customer. All such special arrangements shall be approved by Council
before becoming effective.
   (d)   Meters shall be set in an accessible location and in a manner
satisfactory to the Director. Where the premises contain no basement or cellar,
the meter shall be installed in a location which shall be approved by the
Director. Where it is necessary to set the meter in a pit, such pit shall be
built at the expense of the owner as directed by the Director and to his or her
entire satisfaction.
   (e)   Meters will be sealed by the Department. No person, except an
authorized employee of the Department, shall break or injure such seals. No
person, other than an authorized employee of the Department, shall change the
location of, alter or interfere in any way with the meter.
   (f)   The expense of installing, replacing and maintaining meters, after the
purchase of the initial meter at the owner ’s expense, will be borne by the
Department with the exception of irrigation meters, which costs shall be borne
by the owner . However, where replacements, repairs or adjustments of a meter
installed by the Department are made necessary by the act, negligence or
carelessness of the owner or occupant of the premises , the expense to the
Department caused thereby shall be charged and collected from the owner of the
premises .
   (g)   The owner or occupant of the premises where a meter is installed will
be held responsible for its care and protection from freezing and from injury
or interference by any person. In case of injury to the meter or in case of its
stoppage or imperfect operation, the owner or occupant of the premises  shall
give immediate notice to the Water Department. All water furnished by the city
and used on any premises must pass through the meter. No by-pass or connection
around the meter will be permitted. If any meter becomes defective or fails to
register, the consumer will be charged at the average bimonthly consumption
rate as shown by the meter over the period of the preceding four bimonthly
periods when the meter was accurately registering.
   (h)   The accuracy of the meter on any premises will be tested by the
Department upon written request of the owner , who shall pay, in advance, a fee
determined from time to time by Council, to cover the cost of the test. If, on
such test, the meter is found to register over 5% more water than actually
passes through it, another meter will be substituted therefor, such fee will be
refunded to the owner and the water bill may be adjusted in such a manner as
may be fair and just.
(Ord. 11, passed 4-13-1938; Ord. 10-04, passed 9-8-2010)
§ 1042.05 USE OF WATER; INSPECTIONS; FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (a)   When new service pipes are put into any premises , the service cock
shall be left closed and shall thereafter be opened only by an authorized
employee of the Water Department and only upon the request of the owner or his
or her agent. However, a plumber may open and close a service cock to test his
or her work, as provided in §
1042.03(e).
   (b)   If a permit is issued as provided in §
1042.03(h) and a water meter has been installed for the temporary use of water,
the owner  shall notify the Department upon the completion of his or her work
so that the water meter may be read and the connection shut off.
   (c)   No person shall take or use city water from premises other than his or
her own, and no person shall sell or give away water from his or her own
premises for any purpose. No connection through which water may pass from one
property to another shall be constructed, although the ownership of both
properties may be the same.
   (d)   Where the water has been turned off by the Department for any reason,
no person, except an authorized employee or agent of the Department, shall turn
it on again. Whenever this rule is violated, the Department may shut the water
off at the corporation cock at the main and the owner shall pay, in advance,
double the established rate for water used in violation of this division (d),
in addition to the entire expense incurred by the Department for doing this
work, before the water may be turned on again.
   (e)   No steam boiler shall be directly connected to the service pipe. The
owner of the premises involved shall make such provisions as may be required by
the Department before the water may be supplied to such an installation.
   (f)   The Director of Public Works or his or her authorized agents shall
have free access at all reasonable hours to inspect any premises supplied with
water. No person shall refuse to admit authorized agents of the Department to
any premises for such purpose. If an authorized agent is refused admittance, or
is in any way hindered in making the necessary inspection or examination, the
water may be turned off from such premises after giving 24 hours notice to the
owner or occupant thereof.
   (g)   Where pipes are provided for fire protection on any premises , or
where hose connections for fire apparatus are provided, each such connection or
opening of the service pipes shall have not less than 25 feet of fire hose
constantly attached thereto, and no water shall be taken through such opening
or hose for any purpose other than for extinguishing fires, expect for the
purpose of testing such fire equipment. No such test of fire equipment shall be
conducted unless a special permit is first obtained from the Department.
   (h)   Fire hydrants may be opened and used only by the Water Department and
Fire Department of the city or by such persons as may be specifically
authorized by the Water Department. No person shall in any manner, obstruct or
prevent free access to any fire hydrant by placing or storing, temporarily or
otherwise, any object or material of any kind within 20 feet of the same.
(Ord. 11, passed 4-13-1938; Ord. 2210-01, passed 10-12-2022; Ord. 2505-01,
passed 7-9-2025)
§ 1042.06 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (a)   Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, water
furnished by the waterworks system to each premises  shall  be measured by a
meter installed and controlled by the city. Charges for water service to each
premises  in the city connected to the waterworks system shall be as determined
from time to time by Council.
   (b)   Nonmetered premises. If water service to any premises  is not metered,
the charge thereto shall  be at a flat rate as determined from time to time by
Council, per month, subject to an increase if it appears that consumption
exceeds the quantity of water which such amount would purchase at the
consumption rates.
   (c)   Premises outside city. Charges for water service to premises  outside
the city, including water rates, meter charges, tap-in fees, interconnection
charges and all other charges for units specified herein, shall  be 150% of the
rates and charges applicable to premises  in the city.
   (d)   Charges to city. The city shall  pay for all water used by it at the
rates determined according to this section, except that for fire hydrant
service, the charge shall be as determined from time to time by Council, per
hydrant, per year. Charges to the city shall be payable in quarterly
installments from the current funds of the city or from the proceeds of taxes
which the city, within constitutional limitations, is hereby authorized and
required to levy in an amount sufficient for such purpose.
   (e)   Payment. The cost of water service connections from city water mains
to private premises  shall  not be paid from proceeds of authorized bonds or
from the revenues of the system.
   (f)   Deposits. Deposits for water service may  be required by resolutions,
from time to time, by the City Council.
   (g)   Charges during construction. For structures under construction and
prior to any use of the water system, a meter shall  be installed and charges
for the use of water during the period of construction shall be chargeable to
the party responsible for the construction. Before an occupancy permit is
issued, such charges shall be paid in full. A new meter shall be installed
thereafter and the cost of the use of water shall be paid as set forth in this
section.
   (h)   Bulk water sales. The charge for bulk water sales shall  be determined
from time to time by Council. Bulk water sales include, but are not limited to,
tanker trucks, hydroseeding, equipment and pool fills.
   (i)   Vacant structures. Residents who are not residing in a particular
structure, or who do not have a user of the structure during any particular
time period, will be required to continue to pay the ready to service fee for
that structure.
(Ord. 76, passed 5-10-1972; Ord. 170, passed 3-12-1986; Ord. passed 7-14-1999;
Ord. 10-04, passed 9-8-2010)
§ 1042.07 FREE SERVICE PROHIBITED; BIMONTHLY BILLING; PAYMENT.
   (a)   Free service shall not be furnished by the waterworks system to the
city, to any person, public or private, or to any public agency or
instrumentality, except the City Council may authorize subdivision entrances
receive 1,000 cubic feet of water without charge. Charges for service furnished
by the system shall be billed bimonthly on the twenty-first day of the month.
Such charges shall become due on the tenth day of the following month. If such
charges are not paid on or before such due date, then a penalty of 10% shall be
added thereto.
   (b)   The penalty described aforesaid for charges due and payable but not
paid on the tenth day of the following month shall not apply from April, 1,
2020 to December 31, 2020. Penalty charges are waived during this time period.
Beginning January 1, 2021, charges not paid when due shall be charged the
penalties as set forth in division (a) above.
(Ord. 177, passed 8-13-1986; Ord. 10-04, passed 9-8-2010; Ord. 2004-01, passed
4-22-2020)
§ 1042.08 COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT CHARGES.
   (a)   Utility service to customers shall be discontinued by reason of
nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard
on disputed bills has occurred. The initial utility bill shall contain, in
addition to the title, address, and telephone number of the official in charge
of billing, and a due date upon which all bills are payable on or before.
   (b)   If any bill is not paid by or before the due date, a second bill will
be mailed containing a cutoff notice. Said notice shall state that if the bill
is not paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill or if a hearing
date to dispute the correctness of the bill is not requested, service shall be
discontinued for nonpayment.
   (c)   If a hearing is requested by the customer, said hearing shall be to
dispute the correctness of the bill. Requests for delays or waiver of payment
will not be entertained at the time of the hearing. At said hearing, the
customer may be represented by counsel or any other person of the customer's
choosing and may present orally or in writing their complaint and contentions
to the city official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be
authorized to order the customer's service not be discontinued and shall have
the authority to make a final determination of the customer's complaint.
   (d)   In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the
hearing procedure provided in division (c) herein, service will be discontinued
at the time specified on the second bill, but in no event until the charges
have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days from the date of the initial
bill.
   (e)   Any services discontinued pursuant to this section will be reinstated
only after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge in the sum of $50.
(Ord. 34, passed 3-1-1967; Ord. 2305-03, passed 6-14-2023)
§ 1042.09 CRITERIA FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES.
   The rates established by Council pursuant to this chapter shall be
sufficient to provide for payment of the expenses of administration and
operation of the waterworks system and of such maintenance thereof as may be
necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order; to provide for
payment of the interest upon and the principal of all bonds payable therefrom,
as and when the same become due and payable, and for the creation of a reserve
for the payment of principal and interest as required; and to provide for such
other expenditures and funds for the system as are required. Rates shall be
fixed and revised from time to time by Council so as to produce the foregoing
amounts, and the city covenants and agrees to maintain at all times such rates
and services furnished by the system as are sufficient to provide for the
foregoing.
(Ord. 34, passed 3-1-1967)
§ 1042.10 ACCIDENTS OR REPAIRS; NOTICE OF SHUT-OFFS.
   If it becomes necessary to shut off the water from any section of the city
because of any accident or for the purpose of making repairs or extensions, the
Water Department will endeavor to give timely notice to the consumers affected
thereby and will, so far as practical, use its best efforts to prevent
inconvenience and damage arising from any such causes. However, failure to give
such notice shall not render the Department responsible or liable in damages
for any inconvenience, injury or loss which may result therefrom.
(Ord. 11, passed 4-13-1938)
§ 1042.11 CROSS CONNECTIONS.
   (a)   The city hereby adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross-Connection
Rules of the Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes and Energy
Drinking Water and Environmental Health Division, being Mich. Admin. Code, R
325.11401 to 325.11407.
   (b)   Council shall cause inspections to be made of all properties served by
the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply
are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on
potential health hazards involved shall be as established by Council and as
approved by the Michigan Department of Public Health.
   (c)   A representative of the city may enter at any reasonable time any
property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city
for the purpose of inspecting the piping system thereof for cross connections.
On request, the owner , lessee or occupant of any property so served shall
furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping
system on such property . The refusal of such information or refusal of access,
when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections.
   (d)   Council shall discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any
property wherein any connection in violation of this section exists, and shall
take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger
of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such
property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated
in compliance with this section.
   (e)   The potable water supply made available on the properties served by
the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as
specified by this section and by the State Plumbing Code. Any water outlet
which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied
by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: WATER UNSAFE
FOR DRINKING.
   (f)   This section does not supersede the State Plumbing Code but is
supplementary thereto.
(Ord. 78, passed 5-9-1973)
§ 1042.12 FLUORIDATION.
   The addition of fluoride to the public water supply system of the city is
hereby prohibited.
(Ord. 79, passed 6-13-1973)
§ 1042.13 TABLE OF UNIT FACTORS.
   The following Table of Unit Factors, used to determine tap-in fees, rates
and charges, as set forth in this chapter, is hereby established:
Table of Unit Factors
Usage Unit Factor
Table of Unit Factors
Usage                                   Unit Factor
Auto dealers                            .40 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Barber shops                            .08 per chair
Bars                                    .06 per seat
Beauty shops                            .30 per booth
Boarding houses                         .20 per person
Boarding schools                        .35 per person
Bowling alleys (no bars, lunch          .20 per alley
facilities)
Car washes                              10.00 single production line
Churches                                .01 per seat
Cleaners (pick-up only)                 .06 per employee
Cleaners (pressing facilities)          1.25 per press
Clinics (minimum assignment 1.00 unit   .65 per doctor
per profession)
Convalescent homes                      .30 per bed
Convents                                .25 per person
Country clubs                           .10 per member
Drug stores (with fountain service)     .10 per seat
Factories (exclusive of excessive       .50 per 1,000 sq. ft.
industrial use)
Fraternal organizations (members only)  1.25 per hall
Fraternal organizations (members and    2.50 per hall
rentals)
Grocery stores and supermarkets         1.10 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Hospitals                               1.40 per bed
Hotels (private baths, two persons per  .25 per bed
room)
Laundries (self-service)                .50 per washer
Multi-family residences                 1.00 per unit
Motels                                  .25 per bed
Office buildings                        .60 per 1,00 sq. ft.
Public institutes other than hospitals  .40 per employee
Restaurants (dinner and/or drinks)      .16 per seat
Rooming houses (no meals)               .167 per person
Schools (cafeteria without showers and/ 1.50 per classroom
or pool)
Schools (showers and/or pool)           2.00 per classroom
Schools (showers, gym, cafeteria)       2.50 per classroom
Service stations                        .30 per pump
Snack bars, drive-ins                   .10 per seat and/or stall
Stores (other than specifically listed) .20 per employee
Swimming pools                          3.50 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Theaters (drive-in)                     .10 per car space
Theaters                                .0001 x weekly hours of (inside with
                                        air conditioning) operation x seats
Tourists courts (individual bath units) .27 per cubical
Trailer parks (central bath houses)     .35 per trailer
Trailer parks (individual baths)        1.00 per unit
Trailer parks (individual baths -       .50 per unit
seasonal only)
Warehouses                              .10 per 1,000 sq. ft.
 
(Ord. 206, passed 4-12-1989)
§ 1042.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1044: WELLS
Section
1044.01   Private well defined
1044.02   Intent; violations as nuisances
1044.03   Digging, drilling, extending or enlarging; permit required
1044.04   Permit application; fee
1044.05   Conditions of permit issuance
1044.06   Compliance required; inspections by Water Department
1044.07   Meters
1044.08   Discharges to sewerage system
1044.09   Sewage treatment charges
1044.10   Sale or use of water
1044.11   Permit revocation
1044.12   Appeals
1044.99   Penalty
Constitutional reference:
   Water quality, see Mich. Const. Art. 4, § 52
   Water supply generally, see Mich. Const. Art. 7, § 24
Statutory reference:
   Water quality, see M.C.L.A. §§ 67.38, 324.101 et seq.
   Water supply generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 46.171 et seq., 324.101 et seq.,
486.51 et seq., 486.101 et seq.
   Water supply in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4b, 117.4e, 117.4f,
117.35
§ 1044.01 PRIVATE WELL DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, PRIVATE WELL means any well or excavation, drilled
or dug to a depth of more than 12 feet on privately owned lands for purposes of
taking artesian water.
(Ord. 182, passed 6-10-1987)
§ 1044.02 INTENT; VIOLATIONS AS NUISANCES.
   (a)   The regulation of private wells is intended to prevent waste of water
from artesian wells or any use which may in any way cause depletion or lowering
of the head or reservoir, to the detriment or damage of other wells in the
city, or harm to the public health and welfare.
   (b)   Any private well that is dug, drilled, operated or maintained in
violation of any provision of this chapter, or of the permit issued for the
well, shall be a public nuisance and shall be abated immediately.
(Ord. 182, passed 6-10-1987)
§ 1044.03 DIGGING, DRILLING, EXTENDING OR ENLARGING; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall dig, drill, extend or enlarge a private well upon any land
in the city without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city official
designated by Council.
(Ord. 182, passed 6-10-1987)
§ 1044.04 PERMIT APPLICATION; FEE.
   Any person desiring to dig, drill, extend or enlarge a private well shall
make application to the city for a permit therefor. The application shall be in
writing and shall contain all pertinent information concerning the size and
location of the proposed well or its extension, with a statement of the
purposes for which the water will be used. The application shall be accompanied
by a permit fee of $200, which fee shall be returned if the permit is not
granted.
(Ord. 182, passed 6-10-1987)
§ 1044.05 CONDITIONS OF PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   The city official designated by Council may grant or deny the issuance of a
permit required by this chapter. If such a permit is granted, it shall contain
such reasonable terms and conditions as are deemed necessary relative to the
depth or size of the well, the maximum horsepower of the pump motor and/or the
gallonage per hour, and the use and disposal of water taken from the well.
(Ord. 182, passed 6-10-1987)
§ 1044.06 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; INSPECTIONS BY WATER DEPARTMENT.
   Whenever a permit is granted for a private well, the well shall be dug,
drilled, extended or enlarged in strict conformity and compliance with
regulations contained in the permit. Such well, both at the time of digging,
drilling, extension or enlargement and subsequently, shall be subject to
inspection at all reasonable times by the Water Department.
(Ord. 182, passed 6-10-1987)
§ 1044.07 METERS.
   The city official designated by Council may , as a condition precedent to
the granting of a permit required by this chapter, require the installation of
a meter measuring the amount of water taken from the well. The meter, if
required, shall be installed by the Water Department, and all costs in
connection with its installation shall be borne by the owner of the premises
upon which the well is located and shall be additional charges over and above
the permit fee.
(Ord. 182, passed 6-10-1987)
§ 1044.08 DISCHARGES TO SEWERAGE SYSTEM.
   No water from a private well in the city shall be permitted to enter the
sewerage system of the city unless the water first passes through a meter as
provided for in §
1044.07.
(Ord. 182, passed 6-10-1987)
§ 1044.09 SEWAGE TREATMENT CHARGES.
   Water obtained from private wells and deposited in the sewerage system of
the city shall be subject to the same charges for sewage treatment as water
from the city water system.
(Ord. 182, passed 6-10-1987)
§ 1044.10 SALE OR USE OF WATER.
   No person shall , except by express permission of Council, sell water from
any private well or use the water for any purpose other than as specifically
authorized in the permit issued in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 182, passed 6-10-1987)
§ 1044.11 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   Any permit granted under this chapter shall be revocable at the will of
Council, provided that Council, prior to revoking the permit, gives the owner
or operator of the well at least 90 days written notice of its intent to revoke
the permit. The notice shall be deemed sufficient if served on the owner
personally, or by registered or regular mail, and by posting a copy of the
notice on the premises where the well is located. Use of water from the well
shall be discontinued immediately on revocation of the permit, and the well
shall be capped or otherwise treated as required by order of Council.
(Ord. 182, passed 6-10-1987)
§ 1044.12 APPEALS.
   The applicant for a well permit may appeal to Council from a decision of the
city official designated by Council refusing to grant a permit. Application for
appeal may be made when it is claimed that the true intent of this chapter or
its provisions have been incorrectly interpreted.
(Ord. 182, passed 6-10-1987)
§ 1044.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1046: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
1046.001   Title
1046.002   Findings
1046.003   Purpose
1046.004   Applicability, exemptions and general provisions
1046.005   Definitions
Storm Water Permits
1046.020   Storm water standards
1046.021   Storm water permit review procedures
1046.022   Storm water plan
1046.023   Storm water permit review fees
1046.024   Financial guarantee
1046.025   Certificate of occupancy
1046.026   No change in approved facilities
1046.027   Terms and conditions of permits
Storm Water System, Floodplain and Other Standards, Soil Erosion Control
1046.040   Management of and responsibility for storm water system
1046.041   Storm water system
1046.042   Floodplain and sensitive areas standards
1046.043   Building openings
1046.044   Sump pump discharge
1046.045   Public health, safety or welfare
Prohibitions and Exemptions
1046.060   Illicit discharges
1046.061   Exempted discharges
1046.062   Interference with natural or artificial drainageway
1046.063   Storage of hazardous or toxic materials in drainageway
Inspection, Monitoring, Reporting and Recordkeeping
1046.075   Investigate, inspect and monitor suspected illicit discharges
1046.076   Storm water monitoring facilities
1046.077   Accidental discharges
1046.078   Record keeping requirement
Enforcement
1046.090   Sanctions for violation
1046.091   Stop work order
1046.092   Failure to comply; completion
1046.093   Emergency measures
1046.094   Cost recovery for damage to storm drain system
1046.095   Collection of costs; lien
1046.096   Appeals
Storm Water Easements and Maintenance Agreements
1046.110   Applicability of requirements
1046.111   Storm water management easements
1046.112   Maintenance agreements
1046.113   Establishment of county drains
Performance and Design Standards
1046.125   Reference to requirement manual
1046.126   Relationship of Genesee County storm water and flood control design
standard requirements (GCSWSR) to other laws and regulations
1046.127   Changes to standards and specifications
1046.128   Amendments to requirement manual
1046.129   Conflict of laws
1046.130   Private agreements
1046.131   Violations continue
Other Matters
1046.145   Interpretation
1046.146   Catch-line headings
1046.147   Severability
1046.148   Other ordinances
1046.149   Effective date
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1046.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “City of Grand Blanc Storm Water
Management Ordinance” and may be so cited.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.002 FINDINGS.
   The city finds that:
   (a)   Water bodies, roadways, structures and other property within, and
downstream of the city are at times subjected to flooding;
   (b)   Flooding is a danger to the lives and property of the public and is
also a danger to the natural resources of the city and the region;
   (c)   Land development alters the hydrologic response of watersheds,
resulting in increased storm water runoff rates and volumes, increased
flooding, increased stream channel erosion , and increased sediment transport
and deposition;
   (d)   Storm water runoff produced by land development contributes to
increased quantities of water-borne pollutants;
   (e)   Increases of storm water runoff, soil erosion , and non-point source
pollution have occurred as a result of land development, and cause
deterioration of the water resources of the city and downstream municipalities;
   (f)   Storm water runoff, soil erosion and non-point source pollution, due
to land development within the city, have resulted in a deterioration of the
water resources of the city and downstream municipalities;
   (g)   Increased storm water runoff rates and volumes, and the sediments and
pollutants associated with storm water runoff from future development projects
within the city will, absent reasonable regulation and control, adversely
affect the city water bodies and water resources, and those of downstream
municipalities;
   (h)   Storm water runoff, soil erosion , and non-point source pollution can
be controlled and minimized by the regulation of storm water runoff from
development;
   (i)   Adopting the standards, criteria and procedures contained in this
chapter and implementing the same will address many of the deleterious effects
of storm water runoff;
   (j)   Adopting these standards is necessary for the preservation of the
public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.003 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum storm water
management requirements and controls to accomplish, among others, the following
objectives:
   (a)   To reduce artificially induced flood damage;
   (b)   To minimize increased storm water runoff rates and volumes from
identified new land development;
   (c)   To minimize the deterioration of existing watercourses, culverts and
bridges, and other structures;
   (d)   To encourage water recharge into the ground where geologically
favorable conditions exist;
   (e)   To prevent an increase in non-point source pollution;
   (f)   To maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions, as well as for drainage and other purposes;
   (g)   To minimize the impact of development upon stream bank and streambed
stability;
   (h)   To reduce erosion from development or construction projects;
   (i)   To preserve and protect water supply facilities and water resources by
means of controlling increased flood discharges, stream  erosion and runoff
pollution;
   (j)   To reduce storm water runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion , and
non-point source pollution, wherever practicable, from lands that were
developed without storm water management controls meeting the purposes and
standards of this chapter; and
   (k)   To reduce the adverse impact of changing land use on water bodies and,
to that end, this chapter establishes minimum standards to protect water bodies
from degradation resulting from changing land use where there are insufficient
storm water management controls.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.004 APPLICABILITY, EXEMPTIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   To prevent an increase in non-point source pollution; this chapter
shall apply to any earth-disturbing activities greater than or equal to one
acre ( ≥ 1 ac.) for new development or redevelopment projects or earth
disturbing activities less than one acre on parcels with greater than or equal
to 50% ( ≥ 50%) impervious surface which will alter storm water drainage
characteristics of the development site .
   (b)   Typically these developments require approval of a plat, a site
development plan , building permit, and other permits to be obtained. However,
this chapter shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Development on one single-family lot, parcel or condominium unit
where the city determines that due to the size of the development site or other
circumstances, the quantity, quality and or rate of storm water flow does not
materially alter storm water flow from the property in terms of rate and/or
volume;
      (2)   The installation or removal of individual mobile homes within a
mobile home park. This exemption shall not be construed to apply to the
construction, expansion, or modification of a mobile home park;
      (3)   Ongoing farm operations such as tilling or plowing. Earth
disturbances that are not directly related to farming are not exempt from this
chapter;
      (4)   Plats with preliminary plat approval and other developments with
final land use approval prior to the effective date of this chapter, where such
approvals remain in effect;
      (5)   Additions or modifications to any single-family or duplex structure
disturbing less than 20,000 square feet of land ;
      (6)   Landscaping or gardening involving less than 5,000 square feet of
land ;
      (7)   Construction of a dwelling on a legal lot within a development that
itself previously received approval under this chapter, provided that less than
5,000 square feet of land is cleared or graded for such construction.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section unless the context
in which they are used specifically indicates otherwise:
   APPLICANT.  Any person proposing or implementing the development of land .
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). A practice, or combination of practices
and design criteria that comply with the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality’s Guidebook of BMPs for Michigan Watersheds, the Low Impact Development
Manual for Michigan, or equivalent practices and design criteria that
accomplish the purposes of this chapter (including, but not limited to
minimizing storm water runoff and preventing the discharge of pollutants into
storm water) as determined by the City Engineer and, where appropriate, the
standards of the Genesee County Drain Commissioner.
   BUILDING OPENING. Any opening of a solid wall such as a window or door,
through which floodwaters could penetrate.
   CONSTRUCTION SITE STORM WATER RUNOFF. Storm water runoff from a development
site  following an earth change .
   CONVEYANCE FACILITY. A storm drain , pipe, swale  or channel.
   DESIGN ENGINEER. The registered professional engineer responsible for the
design of the storm water management plan .
   DETENTION. A system which is designed to capture storm water and release it
over a given period of time through an outlet structure at a controlled rate.
   DEVELOPED or DEVELOPMENT. The installation or construction of impervious
surfaces on a development site  that require, pursuant to state  law  or local
ordinance , the city’s approval of a site plan , plat, site condominium,
special land  use, planned unit development, rezoning of land , land  division
approval, private road approval or other approvals required for the development
of land  or the erection of buildings or structures; provided, however, that
for purposes of §§
1046.020 through
1046.027 only, DEVELOPED or DEVELOPMENT shall not include the actual
construction of, or an addition, extension or modification to, an individual
single-family or a two-family detached dwelling or appurtenances to the same,
if the City Manager  finds that such construction, addition, extension or
modification will not result in adverse storm water runoff. In making his or
her written finding, the City Manager  may  consult with the Zoning
Administrator, Planning Commission , the code enforcement official and/or the
City Engineer.
   DEVELOPER. Any person  proposing or implementing the development of land .
DEVELOPER can also be interpreted to include his or her designated design
representative (e.g., architects and engineers).
   DEVELOPMENT SITE. Any land  that is being or has been developed, or that a
developer  proposes for development.
   DISCHARGER. Any person  or entity who directly or indirectly discharges
storm water from any property . DISCHARGER also means any employee, officer,
director, partner, contractor or other person  who participates in, or is
legally or factually responsible for, any act or omission which is or results
in a violation of this chapter.
   DRAIN. Any drain as defined in the Drain Code of 1956, as amended, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 280.1 et seq., other than an established county  or intercounty
drain.
   DRAINAGE. The collection, conveyance or discharge of ground water and/or
surface water.
   DRAINAGEWAY. The area within which surface water or ground water is carried
from one part of a lot or parcel to another part of the lot or parcel or to
adjacent land .
   EARTH CHANGE. Any human activity which removes ground cover, changes the
slope or contours of the land , or exposes the soil surface to the actions of
wind and rain. EARTH CHANGE includes, but is not limited to, any excavating,
surface grading , filling, landscaping or removal of vegetative roots.
   EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   ENGINEERING SITE GRADING PLAN. A sealed drawing or plan  and accompanying
text prepared by a registered engineer or landscape architect which shows
alterations of topography, alterations of watercourses, flow directions of
storm water runoff, and proposed storm water management and measures, having as
it purpose to ensure that the objectives of this chapter are met.
   EROSION.  The process by which the ground surface is worn away by action of
wind, water, gravity or a combination thereof.
   EXEMPTED DISCHARGES. Discharges other than storm water as specified in §§
1046.004 and
1046.061 of this chapter.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land  areas resulting from the overflow of water
bodies or the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface water runoff from any
source.
   FLOODPLAIN (REGULATED). A river, stream , lake or drain  may  on occasion
overflow their banks and inundate adjacent land  areas. The land  that is
inundated by water is defined as a FLOODPLAIN. Floodplains of rivers, streams
or drains which have a drainage  area that is two square miles or greater are
regulated by the state  under Part 31, Water Resources Protection of the
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (NREPA), Public Act 451 of
1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.3101 et seq., as amended.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The base flood  elevation plus one foot at
any given location.
   GRADING. Any stripping, excavating, filling and stockpiling of soil or any
combination thereof and the land  in its excavated or filled condition.
   HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC MATERIAL. OSHA defines hazardous and toxic substances as
those chemicals which are capable of causing harm. In this definition, the term
chemical includes dusts, mixtures, and common materials such as paints, fuels
and solvents. OSHA currently regulates exposure to approximately 400 substances
and the OSHA chemical sampling information file contains listings for
approximately 1,500 substances. Some industrial libraries maintain files of
material safety data sheets (MSDS) for more than 100,000 substances.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION. Any method or means for conveying an illicit discharge
into water bodies or the city’s storm water system.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to water bodies that does not consist
entirely of storm water, discharges pursuant to the terms of an NPDES permit,
or exempted discharges  as defined in this chapter.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Surface that does not allow storm water runoff to slowly
percolate into the ground.
   INFILTRATION. The percolation of water into the ground, expressed in inches
per hour.
   IMPROVEMENTS. Those features and actions associated with a project that are
considered necessary by the body or official granting zoning approval to
protect natural resources or the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
a local unit of government and future users or inhabitants of the proposed
project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks,
screening and drainage . IMPROVEMENTS do not include the entire project that is
the subject of zoning approval.
   MS4.  Municipal Separate Storm Water Sewer System.
   MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT. A binding agreement that sets forth the terms,
measures and conditions for the maintenance of storm water systems and
facilities.
   MDEQ. Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
   NPDES. National Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, association, public or private
corporation, public agency, instrumentality or any other legal entity.
   PLAN. Written narratives, specifications, drawings, sketches, written
standards, operating procedures, or any combination of these which contain
information pursuant to this chapter.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. A city planning commission created under the Michigan
Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 et seq.
   POLLUTANT. A substance discharged which includes, but is not limited to the
following: any dredged spoil, solid waste, vehicle fluids, yard wastes, animal
wastes, agricultural waste products, sediment, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological wastes,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, commercial and agricultural waste, or
any other contaminant or other substance defined as a pollutant under the Clean
Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   PROPERTY OWNER. Any person  having legal or equitable title to property  or
any person  having or exercising care, custody, or control over any property .
   RETENTION. A system which is designed to capture storm water and contain it
until it infiltrates the soil or evaporates.
   RUNOFF. The water flow that occurs when soil is infiltrated to full capacity
and excess water from rain, snowmelt, or other sources flows over the land .
   SEDIMENT. Mineral or organic particulate matter that has been removed from
its site of origin by the processes of soil erosion , is in suspension in
water, or is being transported.
   SENSITIVE AREAS. Inland lakes, watercourses and wetlands  (> 5 ac as
specified by MDEQ  unless a stricter local requirement is specified).
   SITE PLAN. A plat, a site development plan , construction drawings, a
building permit, and any other permits that need to be obtained before
development can occur. These documents and drawings, required by the zoning
ordinance , are to insure that a proposed land  use or activity is in
compliance with local ordinances and state  and federal statutes.
   SOIL EROSION. The stripping of soil and weathered rock from land  creating
sediment for transportation by water, wind or ice, and enabling formation of
new sedimentary deposits.
   STATE OF MICHIGAN WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. All applicable State  rules,
regulations, and laws pertaining to water quality, including the provisions of
§ 3106 of Part 31 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act,
Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.3101 et seq., as amended.
   STORM DRAIN. A system of open or enclosed conduits and appurtenant
structures intended to convey or manage storm water runoff, ground water and
drainage .
   STORM WATER PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
   STORM WATER PLAN. Written narratives, specifications, drawings, sketches,
written standards, operating procedures, or any combination of these which
contain information pursuant to this chapter.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF FACILITY. The method, structure, area, system or other
equipment or measures which are designed to receive, control, store, or convey
storm water as well as treat it for pollutants.
   STREAM. A river, stream  or creek which may  or may not be serving as a
drain , or any other water body that has definite banks, a bed, and visible
evidence of a continued flow or continued occurrence of water.
   SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE. Consistent with the Part 4 Rules (Mich. Admin.
Code, R 323.1041 through 323.1117) to mean all of the following, but not
including drainage  ways and ponds (detention  and retention  ponds or lagoons)
used solely for wastewater conveyance, treatment, or control:
      (1)   The Great Lakes and their connecting waters;
      (2)   All inland lakes;
      (3)   Rivers;
      (4)   Streams;
      (5)   Impoundments;
      (6)   Open drains; and
      (7)   Other surface bodies of water within the confines of the state
   SWALE. Defined contour of land  with gradual slopes that transport and
direct the flow of storm water.
   WATERBODY. A river, lake, stream , creek or other watercourse  or wetlands .
   WATERCOURSE. One that has not been altered artificially.
   WETLANDS (REGULATED). Wetlands are regulated by the state  under Part 303,
Wetlands Protection of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act
(NREPA), 1994 Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.30301 et seq., as
amended, which defines a WETLAND as “land characterized by the presence of
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, wetland vegetation or aquatic life, and is commonly
referred to as a bog, swamp or marsh”.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
STORM WATER PERMITS
§ 1046.020 STORM WATER STANDARDS.
   Developments subject to this chapter shall require a storm water permit and
a storm water plan , and shall be designed, constructed and maintained to
prevent flooding, minimize stream channel impacts, protect water quality, and
achieve the purposes of this chapter, as stated above. The city has adopted the
current edition of the Genesee County Storm Water and Flood Control Design
Standard Requirements (GCSWSR), as amended, to meet the objectives of managing
the quantity and quality of storm water runoff from a site as its municipality
engineering standards.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.021 STORM WATER PERMIT REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   The city shall grant a storm water permit , which may impose terms and
conditions in accordance with §
1046.027, and which shall be granted only upon compliance with each of the
following requirements:
   (a)   The developer will engage in the following sequence of events:
      (1)   Pre-development information gathering. For all applicable projects,
developers will contact representatives from each of the following: the City
Manager ; Zoning Administrator; City Engineer; and Public Works Director. The
purpose will be to gather information on design standards, development
guidelines, and to identify the type of information developers and their
representatives must furnish to comply with this chapter. In some instances it
may  be expedient to hold one conference with all the involved parties;
      (2)   Development and review of conceptual site plan. Review of the
conceptual site plan  for approval at the City and County  level by the
appropriate personnel in Engineering, Zoning, Water & Waste Services, SESW
Management, the Department of Public Works. Comments are returned to the owner
/client and designer. At this time the design engineer  will submit a statement
that this site has been reviewed and determined sufficient to accommodate soil
erosion  and soil conservation measures;
      (3)   Coordinated review and approval. Review of the storm water plan
and the proposed BMPs will occur at the same time as the review of the site
plan  by representatives from the appropriate agencies; and
      (4)   City review and approval. Developers shall  provide a storm water
plan  for postconstruction management of storm water to the city for review and
approval. Guidance will be provided to the zoning administrators and the
planning commission  members on the ordinance  and design standards and they
will be provided with a checklist for reference during site plan  review. At
this stage all necessary permits should have been obtained from federal, state
, and county  agencies. Once all of the above documents have been obtained a
building permit will be issued by the municipality .
   (b)   The developer has submitted a storm water plan complying with §
1046.022.
   (c)   The storm water plans contain adequate storm water BMPs to address the
requirements laid out in the Genesee County Storm Water and Flood Control
Design Standard Requirements (GCSWSR). At a minimum the developer will have to
satisfy one of the following conditions:
      (1)   A permanent on-site storm water system that includes on-site
detention of storm water runoff (see Genesee County Storm Water and Flood
Control Design Standard Requirements for requirements); and
      (2)   A direct connection for all storm water runoff that will be
discharged from and through the development site (see GCSWSR/BMP Requirement
Manual for requirements); or
      (3)   The developer provides a permanent on-site storm water system with
a restricted outlet designed to result in no net increase in storm water runoff
volume or rate onto any adjacent property , (see GCSWSR /BMP Requirement Manual
for requirements).
   (d)   The developer has paid or deposited the storm water permit review fee
pursuant to §
1046.023.
   (e)   The developer has paid or posted the applicable financial guarantee
pursuant to §
1046.024.
   (f)   The developer provides all easements necessary to implement the
approved storm water plan and to otherwise comply with this chapter including,
but not limited to, §
1046.111. All easements shall be acceptable to the municipality in form and
substance and shall be recorded with the Genesee County Register of Deeds.
   (g)   The storm water plan is designed in conformity with the Municipality
’s design and performance standards for drains and storm water management
systems, as set forth in §§
1046.125 through
1046.131.
   (h)   All storm water runoff facilities shall be designed in accordance with
the then-current BMPs.
   (i)   The developer provides the required maintenance agreement for routine,
emergency, and long-term maintenance of all storm water runoff facilities and
in compliance with the approved storm water plan and this chapter. The
maintenance agreement  shall be acceptable to the city in form and substance
and at minimum contain the requirements outlined in §§
1046.110 through
1046.113.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.022 STORM WATER PLAN.
   (a)   The storm water management plan must be designed to meet the Genesee
County Storm Water Standards as set out in the companion document to the Low
Impact Development Manual for Michigan. The city is authorized to establish
minimum design standards for storm water discharge release rates and to require
dischargers to implement on-site retention , detention or other methods
necessary to control the quality, rate and volume of surface water runoff
discharged into the storm water drainage system and surface waters of the state
. The city water quality and quantity standards are to be achieved through the
techniques and methodologies outlined in the Low Impact Development Manual,
SEMCOG 2008, as amended.
   (b)   The storm water plan  shall identify and contain all of the following:
      (1)   The location of the development site and water bodies that will
receive storm water runoff (national wetland database). Information to consider
and include where appropriate should be the drainage district ID, zoning,
aerial imagery, soils and floodplain maps, traffic and utility information;
      (2)   The existing and proposed natural feature of the development site ,
including the vegetation, topography, and alignment and boundary of the natural
drainage courses, with contours having a maximum interval of two foot (using
NAVD 83 datum). The information shall be superimposed on the pertinent Genesee
County soil map;
      (3)   The development drainage area to each point of discharge from the
development;
      (4)   Calculations for the existing and final peak discharge rates (based
on design criteria);
      (5)   Calculations for any facility or structure size and configuration;
      (6)   A drawing showing all proposed storm water runoff facilities with
existing and final grades, as well as storm water easements;
      (7)   The sizes and locations of upstream and downstream culverts serving
the major drainage routes flowing into and out of the development site . Any
significant off-site and on-site drainage outlet restrictions other than
culverts should be noted on the drainage map;
      (8)   An implementation plan for construction and inspection of all storm
water runoff facilities necessary to the overall storm water plan , including a
schedule of the estimated dates of completing construction of the storm water
runoff facilities shown on the plan and an identification of the proposed
inspection procedures to ensure that the storm water runoff facilities are
constructed in accordance with the approved storm water plan ;
      (9)   Drawings, profiles and specifications for the construction of the
storm water runoff facilities (BMP) reasonably necessary to ensure that storm
water runoff will be drained, stored, or otherwise controlled in accordance
with this chapter;
      (10)   A maintenance agreement , in form and substance acceptable to the
municipality , for ensuring maintenance of any privately-owned storm water
runoff facilities. The maintenance agreement  shall include the developer ’s
written commitment to provide routine, emergency, and long-term maintenance of
the facilities and, in the event that the facilities are not maintained in
accordance with the approved storm water plan , the agreement shall authorize
the municipality to maintain any on-site storm water runoff facility as
reasonably necessary, at the developer ’s expense (see §§
1046.110 through
1046.113);
      (11)   The name of the engineering firm and the registered professional
engineer that designed the storm water plan and that will inspect final
construction of the storm water runoff facilities;
      (12)   All design information must be compatible for conversion to
standard GIS shape files; and
      (13)   Any other information necessary for the municipality to verify
that the storm water plan complies with the city’s design and performance
standards for drains and storm water management systems.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.023 STORM WATER PERMIT REVIEW FEES.
   (a)   All expenses and costs incurred by the city directly associated with
processing, reviewing and approving or denying a storm water permit application
shall be paid (or reimbursed) to the city from the funds in a separate escrow
account established by the developer , as provided in division (b) below. The
municipality  may draw funds from a developer ’s escrow account to reimburse
the municipality for out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the city relating to
the application. Such reimbursable expenses include, but are not limited to,
expenses related to the following:
      (1)   Services of the City Attorney directly related to the application;
      (2)   Services of the City Engineer directly related to the application
including inspections fees;
      (3)   Services of other independent contractors working for the city
which are directly related to the application; and
      (4)   Any additional public hearings, required mailings and legal notice
requirements necessitated by the application.
   (b)   At the time a developer applies for a storm water permit , the
developer  shall deposit with the City Clerk, as an escrow deposit, an initial
amount as determined by resolution of the City Council for such matters and
shall provide additional amounts as requested by the municipality in such
increments as are specified in said resolution. Any excess funds remaining in
the escrow account after the application has been fully processed, reviewed and
the final municipality denial or approval and acceptance of the development has
occurred will be refunded to the developer with no interest to be paid on those
funds. At no time prior to the city’s final decision on an application shall
the balance in the escrow account fall below the required initial amount. If
the funds in the account are reduced to less than the required initial amount,
the developer shall deposit into the account the additional amount needed to
restore the account to the required amount before the application review
process will be continued. Additional amounts may be required to be placed in
the escrow account by the developer , at the discretion of the city.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.024 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.
   (a)   The City Engineer shall not approve a storm water permit until the
developer submits to the city, in a form and amount satisfactory to the city, a
letter of credit or other financial guarantee for the timely and satisfactory
construction of all storm water runoff facilities and site grading in
accordance with the approved storm water plan . Upon certification by a
registered professional engineer that the storm water runoff facilities have
been completed in accordance with the approved storm water plan including, but
not limited to, the provisions contained in §
1046.022(b)(8), the city may release the letter of credit, or other financial
guarantee subject to final city acceptance and approval.
   (b)   The letter of credit or other financial guarantee may be accessed
when:
      (1)   Violation of this chapter has occurred as determined by the
municipality ;
      (2)   Three notifications to the developer detailing the infraction have
been issued; and
      (3)   No corrective action has being taken by the developer within 30
days of final notification.
   (c)   Except as provided in division (e) below, the amount of the financial
guarantee shall be as determined by the City Council in a resolution of fees
for city services, unless the municipality determines that a greater amount is
appropriate, in which case the basis for such determination shall be provided
to the developer in writing. In determining whether an amount greater than the
amount established by resolution of City Council is appropriate, the
municipality shall consider the size and type of the development, the size and
type of the on-site storm water system, and the nature of the off-site storm
water runoff facilities the development will utilize.
   (d)   The letter of credit or other financial guarantee will not be
permitted to expire until any necessary maintenance agreements for storm water
facilities established by the developer has been signed.
   (e)   A maintenance bond shall be provided to the appropriate agency. The
maintenance bond shall be provided for a period of two years commencing from
the date of the final approval of the storm water plan .
   (f)   The City Manager  may reduce or waive the amount of the financial
guarantee for a development that will not increase the percentage of impervious
surface of the development site by more than 10%.
   (g)   This chapter shall not be construed or interpreted as relieving a
developer of its obligation to pay all costs associated with on-site private
storm water runoff facilities as well as those costs arising from the need to
make other storm water improvements in order to reduce a development’s impact
on a drain consistent with adopted design standards.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.025 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until storm water runoff
facilities have been completed in accordance with the approved storm water plan
; provided, however, the municipality  may issue a certificate of occupancy if
an acceptable letter of credit or other financial guarantee has been submitted
to the municipality , for the timely and satisfactory construction of all storm
water runoff facilities and site grading in accordance with the approved storm
water plan .
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.026 NO CHANGE IN APPROVED FACILITIES.
   (a)   Storm water runoff facilities, after construction and approval, shall
be maintained in good condition, in accordance with the approved storm water
plan , and shall not be subsequently altered, revised or replaced except in
accordance with the approved storm water plan , or in accordance with approved
amendments or revisions in the plan .
   (b)   The city has the right to take corrective action if alterations to
approved storm water facilities occur and to seek compensation from the
responsible party for all costs associated with the corrective action.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.027 TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF PERMITS.
   In granting a storm water permit , the municipality  may impose such terms
and conditions as are reasonably necessary to implement the purposes of this
chapter. A developer  shall comply with such terms and conditions.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
STORM WATER SYSTEM, FLOODPLAIN AND OTHER STANDARDS,
SOIL EROSION CONTROL
§ 1046.040 MANAGEMENT OF AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR STORM WATER SYSTEM.
   The city is not responsible for providing drainage facilities on private
property for the management of storm water on said property . It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to provide for, and maintain, private
storm water runoff facilities serving the property and to prevent or correct
the accumulation of debris that interferes with the drainage function of a
water body.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.041 STORM WATER SYSTEM.
   All storm water runoff facilities shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with all applicable federal, state and local ordinances, and rules
and regulations.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.042 FLOODPLAIN AND SENSITIVE AREAS STANDARDS.
   (a)   All new buildings and substantial improvements to existing buildings
shall be protected from flood damage up to the flood protection elevation (FPE)
and shall be in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local
ordinances, and rules and regulations. Floodway alteration shall be permitted
only upon review and approval by the municipality , in accordance with an
approved storm water plan .
   (b)   A storm water plan providing for the filling or alteration of a
floodway may include provisions for maintaining stability of the banks of
streams or other water bodies, by means of the establishing of buffer zones and
other means of providing protection of the slopes and banks of water bodies.
   (c)   Within any required buffer zone, no earth change  shall take place
except in accordance with the approved storm water plan . Such a plan  may also
include provisions for the replacement of floodplain storage volume, where such
storage volume is lost or diminished as a result of approved development.
   (d)   Where appropriate, permanent setbacks based on site slopes and soils
will be established in accordance with the specifications outlined in the
Genesee County Storm Water and Flood Control Design Standard Requirements
(GCSWSR).
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.043 BUILDING OPENINGS.
   (a)   No building openings, including basement walkouts, shall be
constructed below the following elevations:
      (1)   One foot above the 100-year floodplain ;
      (2)   The building opening established at the time of plat or development
approval and on file in the city’s Engineering Department;
      (3)   Three feet above the top of any downstream culvert;
      (4)   Four feet above the bottom of any permanent and defined drain ; and
      (5)   One foot above an adjacent detention basin design high water.
   (b)   A waiver from elevations stated in division (a)(1) above may be
granted by the City Engineer following receipt of a certification from a
registered professional engineer demonstrating that the proposed elevation does
not pose a risk of flooding.
   (c)   Upon completion of construction of the structure’s foundation and or
slab on grade, a registered land surveyor shall certify any minimum building
opening elevation specified by this chapter. This certificate shall attest that
the building opening elevation complies with the standards of this chapter. The
permittee for the building permit shall submit the certificate to the Chief
Building Inspector prior to the commencement of framing and/or structural steel
placement. If the surveyor should find that the minimum building opening
elevation is below the elevation specified in divisions (a)(2) or (a)(3), that
opening must be raised using a method that meets with the approval of the
municipality . After reconstruction, a registered land surveyor or engineer
shall re-certify that the minimum building opening elevation complies with the
standards of this chapter prior to the commencement of framing and or
structural steel placement.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.044 SUMP PUMP DISCHARGE.
   (a)   When a sump pump is employed to discharge a buildings footing drains a
check valve will be installed between the pump and the storm system. A gravity
discharge to an enclosed system is not permitted unless it can be shown that
the discharge point is above the overflow elevation for the storm water system.
   (b)   A storm water lateral shall be provided for each parcel at the time of
storm sewer construction.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.045 PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY OR WELFARE.
   Protection of the public health, safety or welfare shall be a primary
consideration in the design of all storm water runoff facilities.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
PROHIBITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS
§ 1046.060 ILLICIT DISCHARGES.
   (a)   No person  shall discharge to a water body, directly or indirectly
(i.e., via an illicit connection ), any substance other than storm water or an
exempted discharge. Any person discharging storm water shall effectively
prevent pollutants from being discharged with the storm water, except in
accordance with best management practices .
   (b)   The city is authorized to require dischargers to implement pollution
prevention measures, utilizing BMPs, necessary to prevent or reduce the
discharge of pollutants into the city’s storm water drainage system or surface
waters of the state . Discharges to storm drains and waters of the state other
than storm water and the exempted discharges listed in §
1046.061 are strictly prohibited.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.061 EXEMPTED DISCHARGES.
   The following non-storm water discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established by this chapter, provided that they are not identified
as significant contributors to violations of the state ’s water quality
standards :
   (a)   Water supply line flushing;
   (b)   Landscape irrigation;
   (c)   Diverted stream flows;
   (d)   Rising ground water;
   (e)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration to storm drains;
   (f)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
   (g)   Discharges from potable water sources;
   (h)   Foundation drains;
   (i)   Air-conditioning condensate;
   (j)   Individual residential car washing;
   (k)   Dechlorinated swimming pool waters from single-, two- or three-family
residences;
   (1)   Residual street wash water;
   (m)   Discharges or flows from emergency firefighting activities; and
   (n) Discharges for which a specific federal or state permit has been issued.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014; Ord. 1701-09, passed 12-13-2017)
§ 1046.062 INTERFERENCE WITH NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL DRAINAGEWAY.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, fill, dam, confine, pave,
alter the course of, or otherwise interfere with any natural or constructed
drain , or drainage way without first submitting a storm water plan to the city
and all appropriate agencies (state and Genesee County Drain Commissioner’s
office) and receiving approval of that plan .
   (b)   Any deviation from the approved plan is a violation of this chapter.
   (c)   This section shall not prohibit, however, necessary emergency action
so as to prevent or mitigate drainage that would be injurious to the
environment, the public health, safety or welfare.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.063 STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS IN DRAINAGEWAY.
   Except as permitted by law , it shall be unlawful for any person to store or
stockpile within a drainageway any hazardous or toxic materials unless adequate
protection and/or containment has been provided so as to prevent any such
materials from entering a waterway.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
INSPECTION, MONITORING, REPORTING AND RECORDKEEPING
§ 1046.075 INVESTIGATE, INSPECT AND MONITOR SUSPECTED ILLICIT DISCHARGES.
   To investigate potential illicit discharges or connections and to assure
compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter, the city may
investigate, inspect and/or monitor any discharge. Upon request, the discharger
 shall allow the city’s properly identified representative to enter upon the
premises of the discharger at all hours necessary for the purposes of such
inspection or sampling. The city shall provide the discharger reasonable
advance notice of such inspection and/or sampling. The city or its properly
identified representative may place on the discharger ’s property the equipment
or devices used for such sampling, monitoring or inspection.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.076 STORM WATER MONITORING FACILITIES.
   The city may require, in writing, that a discharger of storm water runoff
provide and operate equipment or devices for the monitoring of storm water
runoff, so as to provide for inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of each
discharge to a water body or a storm water runoff facility . The city may
require a discharger to provide and operate such equipment and devices if it is
necessary or appropriate for the inspection, sampling and flow measurement of
discharges in order to determine whether adverse effects from or as a result of
such discharges may occur. All such equipment and devices for the inspection,
sampling and flow measurement of discharges shall be installed and maintained
in accordance with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. All monitoring
results will be made available and reported to the city at an agreed upon time.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.077 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
   (a)   Any discharger who accidentally discharges into a MS4 or water of the
state any substance other than storm water or an exempted discharge shall
inform the city within 24 hours of knowledge of the incident. If such
information is given orally, a written report concerning the discharge shall be
filed with the city within five days. The written report shall specify:
      (1)   The composition of the discharge and the cause thereof;
      (2)   The exact date, time and estimated volume of the discharge;
      (3)   All measures taken to clean up the accidental discharge, and all
measures proposed to be taken to reduce and prevent any recurrence; and
      (4)   The name and telephone number of the person making the report, and
the name of a person who may be contacted for additional information on the
matter.
   (b)   A properly-reported accidental discharge shall be an affirmative
defense to a civil infraction proceeding brought under this chapter against a
discharger for such discharge. It shall not, however, be a defense to a legal
action brought to obtain an injunction, to obtain recovery of costs or to
obtain other relief as a result of or arising out of the discharge. A discharge
shall be considered properly reported only if the discharger complies with all
the requirements of division (a) above.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.078 RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENT.
   Any person subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve for no less
than three years any and all books, drawings, plans, prints, documents,
memoranda, reports, correspondence and records, including records on magnetic
or electronic media and any and all summaries of such records, relating to
monitoring, sampling and chemical analysis of any discharge or storm water
runoff from any property .
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 1046.090 SANCTIONS FOR VIOLATION.
   (a)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to a fine to cover
costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions as authorized under Chapter 87 of
the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8701 et seq., and
other applicable laws, including, without limitation, equitable relief;
provided, however, that the violation stated in division (b) below shall be a
misdemeanor. Each day such violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a
separate offense and shall make the violator liable for the imposition of a
fine for each day. The rights and remedies provided for in this section are
cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law . An admission
or determination of responsibility shall not exempt the offender from
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE means a violation
of the provisions of this chapter committed by the same person  within 12
months of a previous violation of the same provision of this chapter for which
said person  admitted responsibility  or was adjudicated to be responsible.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator, code enforcement official, building
inspector, Public Works Director and police officers of the municipality are
authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations to any person alleged
to be violating any provision of this chapter.
   (b)   Any person who neglects or fails to comply with a stop work order
issued under §
1046.091 shall , upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a
fine of not more than $500 per violation per day or imprisonment in the county
jail for not more than 93 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, and such
person shall also pay such costs as may be imposed in the discretion of the
court.
   (c)   Any person who aids or abets a person in a violation of this chapter
shall be subject to the sanctions provided in this section.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.091 STOP WORK ORDER.
   Where there is work in progress that causes or constitutes in whole or in
part, a violation of any provision of this chapter, the city is authorized to
issue a stop work order so as to prevent further or continuing violations or
adverse effects. All persons to whom the stop work order is directed, or who
are involved in any way with the work or matter described in the stop work
order shall fully and promptly comply therewith. The city may also undertake or
cause to be undertaken, any necessary or advisable protective measures so as to
prevent violations of this chapter or to avoid or reduce the effects of
noncompliance herewith. The cost of any such protective measures shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the property upon which the work is being done
and the responsibility of any person carrying out or participating in the work,
and such cost shall be a lien upon the property .
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.092 FAILURE TO COMPLY; COMPLETION.
   In addition to any other remedies, should any owner fail to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, the city may , after the giving of reasonable
notice and opportunity for compliance, have the necessary work done, and the
owner  shall be obligated to promptly reimburse the city for all costs of such
work.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.093 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
   When emergency measures are necessary to moderate a nuisance, to protect
public safety, health and welfare, and/or to prevent loss of life, injury or
damage to property , the city is authorized to carry out or arrange for all
such emergency measures. Property owners shall be responsible for the cost of
such measures made necessary as a result of a violation of this chapter, and
shall promptly reimburse the city for all of such costs.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.094 COST RECOVERY FOR DAMAGE TO STORM DRAIN SYSTEM.
   A discharger  shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city as the
result of causing a discharge that produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes
damage to, or impairs a storm drain , or violates any of the provisions of this
chapter. Costs include, but are not limited to, those penalties levied by the
Environmental Protection Agency or MDEQ for violation of an national pollutant
discharge elimination system permit, attorney fees and other costs and
expenses.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.095 COLLECTION OF COSTS; LIEN.
   Costs incurred by the city pursuant to §§
1046.091,
1046.092,
1046.093 and
1046.094 shall be a lien on the premises which shall be enforceable in
accordance with Public Act 94 of 1933, being M.C.L.A. §§ 141.101 through
141.138, as amended from time to time. Any such charges which are delinquent
for six months or more may be certified annually to the City Treasurer who
shall enter the lien on the next tax roll against the premises and the costs
shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as
provided for in the collection of taxes assessed upon the roll and the
enforcement of a lien for taxes. In addition to any other lawful enforcement
methods, the City shall have all remedies authorized by Public Act 94 of 1933,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 141.101 through 141.138, as amended, and any other remedies
available under applicable law .
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.096 APPEALS.
   (a)   Any person as to whom any provision of this chapter has been applied
may appeal in writing, not later than 30 days after the action or decision
being appealed from, to the City Council the action or decision whereby any
such provision was so applied. Such appeal shall identify the matter being
appealed, and the basis for the appeal. The City Council shall consider the
appeal and make a decision whereby it affirms, rejects or modifies the action
being appealed. In considering any such appeal, the City Council may consider
the recommendations of the City Engineer and the comments of other persons
having knowledge of the matter.
   (b)   In considering any such appeal, the Council may grant a variance from
the terms of this chapter so as to provide relief, in whole or in part, from
the action being appealed, but only upon finding that the following
requirements are satisfied:
      (1)   The application of the ordinance provisions being appealed will
present or cause practical difficulties for a development or development site ;
provided, however, that practical difficulties shall not include the need for
the developer to incur additional reasonable expenses in order to comply with
the chapter; and
      (2)   The granting of the relief requested will not substantially prevent
the goals and purposes sought to be accomplished by this chapter, nor result in
less effective management of storm water runoff.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
STORM WATER EASEMENTS AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS
§ 1046.110 APPLICABILITY OF REQUIREMENTS.
   The requirements of this chapter concerning storm water easements and
maintenance agreements shall apply to all persons required to submit a storm
water and/or storm water plan to the city for review and approval.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.111 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT EASEMENTS.
   The developer  shall provide all storm water management easements necessary
to implement the approved storm water plan and to otherwise comply with this
chapter in form and substance required by the city and shall record such
easements as directed by the city. The easements shall assure access for proper
inspection and maintenance of storm water runoff facilities and shall provide
adequate emergency overland flow-ways.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.112 MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS.
   (a)   Purpose of maintenance agreement. The purpose of the maintenance
agreement  is to provide the means and assurance that maintenance of storm
water BMPs shall  be undertaken.
   (b)   Maintenance agreement required.
      (1)   A maintenance agreement  shall be submitted to the city, for review
by the City Manager and his or her designee and the City Attorney, for all
development, and shall be subject to approval in accordance with storm water
plan . A formal maintenance plan shall be included in the maintenance agreement
.
      (2)   Maintenance agreements shall be approved by the City Council prior
to final subdivision plat or condominium approval, as applicable, and prior to
construction approval in other cases.
      (3)   A maintenance agreement is not required to be submitted to the city
for Chapter 18 of the Drain Code of 1956, Public Act 40 of 1956, Chapter 18,
M.C.L.A. §§ 280.421 et seq., that will be maintained by the Genesee County
Drain Commissioner.
   (C)   Maintenance agreement provisions.
      (1)   The maintenance agreement  shall include a plan for routine,
emergency and long-term maintenance of all storm water BMPs, with a detailed
annual estimated budget for the initial three years, and a clear statement that
only future maintenance activities in accordance with the maintenance agreement
 plan shall be permitted without the necessity of securing new permits. Written
notice of the intent to proceed with maintenance shall be provided by the party
responsible for maintenance to the city at least 14 days in advance of
commencing work.
      (2)   The maintenance agreement  shall be binding on all subsequent
owners of land served by the storm water BMPs and shall be recorded in the
office of the Genesee County Register of Deeds prior to the effectiveness of
the approval of the City Council.
      (3)   If it has been found by the City Council, following notice and an
opportunity to be heard by the property owner , that there has been a material
failure or refusal to undertake maintenance as required under this chapter and/
or as required in the approved maintenance agreement as required hereunder, the
city shall then be authorized, but not required, to hire an entity with
qualifications and experience in the subject matter to undertake the monitoring
and maintenance as so required, in which event the property owner shall be
obligated to advance or reimburse payment (as determined by the city) for all
costs and expenses associated with such monitoring and maintenance, together
with a reasonable administrative fee. The maintenance agreement required under
this chapter shall contain a provision spelling out this requirement and, if
the applicant objects in any respect to such provision or the underlying rights
and obligations, such objection shall be resolved prior to the commencement of
construction of the proposed development on the Property.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.113 ESTABLISHMENT OF COUNTY DRAINS.
   Prior to final approval, all storm water management facilities for platted
subdivisions shall be established as county drains, as authorized in § 433,
Chapter 18 of the Michigan Drain Code (Public Act 40 of 1956, being M.C.L.A. §§
280.1 et seq., as amended) for long-term maintenance.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 1046.125 REFERENCE TO REQUIREMENT MANUAL.
   (a)   The municipality or its designate shall use the policy, criteria and
information, including technical specifications and standards, in the Genesee
County Storm Water and Flood Control Design Standard Requirements (GCSWSR) as
the basis for decisions about storm water permits and about the design,
implementation and performance of structural and non-structural storm water
BMPs.
   (b)   The State LID Manual includes a list of storm water treatment
practices, including the specific design criteria for each them. Storm water
treatment practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these
design and sizing criteria should meet the minimum water quality and channel
protection performance standards outlined in the Genesee County Storm Water and
Flood Control Design Standard Requirements and the federal Phase II Storm Water
Rules. Calculations to demonstrate that BMP designs will perform to meet
required water quality, channel protection and flood control standards are to
be submitted to the appropriate reviewing agency. Failure to construct storm
water treatment practices in accordance with these standards may subject the
violator to a civil penalty as described in §§
1046.090 through
1046.096.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.126 RELATIONSHIP OF GENESEE COUNTY STORM WATER AND FLOOD CONTROL DESIGN
STANDARD REQUIREMENTS (GCSWSR) TO OTHER LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
   If the specifications or guidelines of the Genesee County Storm Water and
Flood Control Design Standard Requirements are more restrictive or apply a
higher standard than other laws or regulations, that fact shall not prevent
application of the specifications or guidelines in the GCSWSR.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.127 CHANGES TO STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   Standards, specifications, guidelines, policies, criteria or other
information in the GCSWSR in affect at the time of acceptance of a complete
application shall control and shall be utilized in reviewing the application
and in implementing this chapter with regard to the application.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.128 AMENDMENTS TO REQUIREMENT MANUAL.
   The GCSWSR may be updated and expanded from time to time, based on
advancements in technology and engineering, improved knowledge of local
conditions, or local monitoring or maintenance experience. Prior to amending or
updating the GCSWSR, proposed changes shall be generally publicized and made
available for review, and an opportunity for comment by interested persons
shall be provided.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.129 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance , rule,
regulation or other provision of law . The requirements of this chapter are in
addition to the requirements of any other ordinance , rule, regulation or other
provision of law , and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance , rule, regulation or other
provision of law , whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher
protective standards for human or environmental health, safety and welfare,
shall control.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.130 PRIVATE AGREEMENTS.
   This chapter is not intended to revoke or repeal any easement, covenant or
other private agreement. However, where the regulations of this chapter are
more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easement,
covenant or other private agreement, then the requirements of this chapter
shall govern. Nothing in this chapter shall modify or repeal any private
covenant or deed restriction, but such covenant or restriction shall not
legitimize any failure to comply with this chapter. In no case shall the county
or city be obligated to enforce the provisions of any easements, covenants or
agreements between private parties.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.131 VIOLATIONS CONTINUE.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter existing as of the effective
date of this chapter shall continue to be a violation under this chapter and be
subject to penalties and enforcement unless the use, development, construction
or other activity complies with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
OTHER MATTERS
§ 1046.145 INTERPRETATION.
   Words and phrases in this chapter shall be construed according to their
common and accepted meanings, except that words and phrases defined in §
1046.005 shall be construed according to the respective definitions given in
that section. Technical words and technical phrases that are not defined in
this chapter but which have acquired particular meanings in law or in technical
usage shall be construed according to such meanings.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.146 CATCH-LINE HEADINGS.
   The catch-line headings of the articles and sections of this chapter are
intended for convenience only, and shall not be construed as affecting the
meaning or interpretation of the text of the articles or sections to which they
may refer.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.147 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable, and if
any part or provision of this chapter should be declared invalid or
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or
unenforceability shall not affect any other part or provision of the ordinance
.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.148 OTHER ORDINANCES.
   This chapter shall be in addition to other ordinances of the city and shall
not be deemed to repeal or replace other ordinances or parts thereof except to
the extent that such repeal is specifically provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
§ 1046.149 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective February 3, 2015, following its
publication or following the publication of a summary of its provisions in a
local newspaper of general circulation.
(Ord. 1411-04, passed 12-10-2014)
TITLE SIX: OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES
      
Chap. 1060. Garbage and Rubbish Collection and Disposal.
      
Chap. 1062. Parks.
      
Chap. 1066. Cost Recovery of Emergency Services.
CHAPTER 1060: GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Section
1060.01   Definitions
1060.02   Collection regulations; containers
1060.03   Rates
1060.04   Billing; payment; delinquency
1060.05   Collection of unpaid charges
1060.06   Vacant dwellings (Repealed)
1060.07   Receptacles; use and specifications
1060.08   Burning, incineration and burial
1060.09   Scavenging of recyclable materials from curbside
1060.10   Leaf and chipper collection and disposal charges
1060.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Garbage and refuse generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 46.171 et seq., 123.361 et
seq.
   Municipal authority, see M.C.L.A. §§ 123.301 et seq.
§ 1060.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   CONTRACTOR. The person who has the contract with the city for the removal of
garbage and refuse.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   NOXIOUS WASTE. Any rubbish or other matter, except garbage, which, because
of deterioration, decay, burning, incineration of otherwise, is likely to
produce dangerous noxious or unpleasant odors or fumes or attract flies,
insects, vermin, rodents or disease carrying animals.
   PERSON. The property owner and/or occupant requiring garbage and rubbish
curbside pick-up services.
   PREMISES. A single-family dwelling unit.
   RUBBISH. All ashes, magazines, newspapers, tin cans, glassware, bottles,
small automobile parts and other like substances ordinarily discarded by
householders.
   UNIT. A single-family dwelling unit and includes each condominium unit and
multi-family unit desiring curbside garbage and rubbish pick-up.
   YARD WASTE. Leaves, wood clippings, garden trimmings, lawn clippings and/or
tree limbs.
(Ord. 29, passed 8-10-1960; Ord. 174, passed 6-11-1986; Ord. 2512-07, passed 1-
14-2026)
§ 1060.02 COLLECTION REGULATIONS; CONTAINERS.
   Persons who use the municipal refuse collection service are subject to the
following regulations.
   (a)   The property owner and/or occupant of any single-family dwelling unit
in the city in which garbage and/or rubbish is accumulated shall maintain all
garbage and/or rubbish in watertight containers or garbage bags and shall place
such receptacles at the curb or at the edge of the nearest public street
abutting the dwelling unit, immediately in front of the residence, not sooner
than 24 hours prior to the prescribed day for pick-up of such garbage and/or
rubbish and shall retrieve such receptacles by midnight on the prescribed day
for pick-up.
   (b)   No garbage and/or rubbish container shall exceed 50 pounds.
   (c)   Containers shall be stored on private property at all times except on
the regularly scheduled day of pick-up.
   (d)   Newspapers and magazines shall be tied securely in bundles or placed
in covered containers.
   (e)   Garden trimmings and lawn clippings shall be placed in garbage bags.
Tree limbs shall be bundled in four-foot or less tied bundles.
   (f)   Building, construction or demolition materials, rocks, bricks, stones,
dirt, stumps and any material not suitable for loading into a packer-type truck
shall not be collected.
   (g)   Garbage and/or rubbish receptacles are to be stored so they are not
seen from the street while standing in front of the dwelling unit, with the
exception of pick-up day as in division (a) of this section.
(Ord. 174, passed 6-11-1986; Ord. 2504-02, passed 5-14-2025)
§ 1060.03 RATES.
   (a)   Rates for the collection of garbage, yard waste and/or rubbish from
single-family dwelling units shall be established from time to time by Council.
   (b)   Those multi-family dwelling units not desiring curbside pick-up shall
provide for their own garbage and/or rubbish collection on at least a weekly
basis.
(Ord. 197, passed 6-8-1988; Ord. 2512-07, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 1060.04 BILLING; PAYMENT; DELINQUENCY.
   The charges for garbage, yard waste and/or rubbish collection shall be
billed bimonthly on the twenty-first day of the month and shall be due on the
tenth day of the following month. A 10% penalty shall be charged if such
charges are not fully paid by the due date.
(Ord. 174, passed 6-11-1986; Ord. 2512-07, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 1060.05 COLLECTION OF UNPAID CHARGES.
   The payment of the garbage, yard waste, and/or rubbish collection charges
shall be enforced by an action of assumpsit against an owner or occupant, and
such charges shall be a lien on the premises receiving the service. The City
Clerk shall report annually, at the regular April Council meeting, all unpaid
charges for such service furnished to any premises which, on April 5 preceding,
have remain unpaid for six months. Council shall thereupon, after due notice to
the owners of the premises so served, assess the amount so found to be due as a
tax against the premises, and the same shall be certified to the City Assessor
who shall place the same on the next tax roll of the city. Such charges so
assessed shall be collected in the same manner as city taxes.
(Ord. 174, passed 6-11-1986; Ord. 2512-07, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 1060.06 VACANT DWELLINGS. (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 1060.06 was repealed by Ordinance 2407-01, passed August 14, 2024.
§ 1060.07 RECEPTACLES; USE AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter for single-family dwelling
units, no person shall deposit or place or permit the accumulation of any
garbage or noxious wastes in any street, alley or public place, or upon any
private property, regardless of whether or not such property is owned by such
person, in the city, unless the same is contained in metal containers or
equivalent containers equipped with a cover and equipped with handles so that
they may be lifted and carried by one man. No such container shall have a
capacity of less than ten gallons or more than 20 gallons. Additional garbage
and rubbish may be placed at the curb in plastic bags securely tied. All
cardboard boxes or containers having any dimension greater than four feet shall
be broken down and dismantled. All magazines and newspapers not in containers
shall be securely tied in bundles weighing not more than 50 pounds each. No
branches, limbs or other items of a similar nature shall be longer than four
feet in length.
(Ord. 29, passed 8-10-1960; Ord. 54, passed 12-10-1969)
§ 1060.08 BURNING, INCINERATION AND BURIAL.
   No person shall burn, incinerate or bury garbage or noxious wastes in the
city. However, the incineration of garbage and noxious wastes may be done on a
limited and small scale with written permission from the Building Inspector.
Such permission shall be granted only if the facilities for such incineration
are such that complete reduction of the garbage and noxious wastes can be
accomplished; that no dangerous, noxious or unpleasant odors or fumes will
result therefrom; that no flies, insects, vermin, rodents or disease-carrying
animals will be attracted; and that no nuisance will be created thereby. Such
permission from the Building Inspector is subject to revocation at any time by
him or her or by Council.
(Ord. 29, passed 8-10-1960)
§ 1060.09 SCAVENGING OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS FROM CURBSIDE.
   (a)   This section shall be known and may be cited as the “Anti-Scavenging
Ordinance of the City of Grand Blanc”.
   (b)   Recyclable materials, including, but not limited to, glass (clear,
green and brown), ferrous and nonferrous metals, plastic, aluminum, cardboard,
newspaper and other designated recyclable materials agreed to between the city
and its authorized recycler, placed appropriately at curbside for recycling,
shall become the property of the city or its authorized recycler.
   (c)   No person, other than a representative of the city or its authorized
recycler, shall collect, remove or pick up, or cause to be collected, removed
or picked up, any recyclable material after it is placed at curbside.
(Ord. 233, passed 1-10-1996)
§ 1060.10 LEAF AND CHIPPER COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL CHARGES.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall  apply:
      CHIPPER COLLECTION. A service provided semiannually by the City's
Department of Public Works (DPW) involving the use of a chipper to collect,
process, and dispose of tree branches and brush placed at the street curb by
residential property owners. The dates and times for this service shall  be
published and determined by the DPW Director or their authorized designee.
      LEAF COLLECTION. A service provided annually by the City's Department of
Public Works (DPW) involving the systematic collection and disposal of leaves
raked to the street curb by residential property owners. The dates and times
for this service shall  be published and determined by the DPW  Director or
their authorized designee.
   (b)   Applicability and service fee.
      (1)   Applicability. Leaf collection and chipper collection services
shall  be available to, and may  be utilized by, all developed residential
parcels within the city that are receiving general municipal services from the
Department of Public Works.
      (2)   Service fee. The cost of providing the annual leaf collection and
semiannual chipper collection and disposal services shall  be established in
the city's annual fee schedule and is applicable to all eligible residential
parcels regardless of utilization.
(Ord. 2512-08, passed 1-14-2026)
§ 1060.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1062: PARKS
Section
1062.01   Property destruction
1062.02   Garbage and rubbish
1062.03   Motor vehicles; traffic regulations
1062.04   Supervision by Council
1062.05   Alcoholic beverages; public intoxication; drugs
1062.06   Miscellaneous regulations
1062.99   Penalty
Constitutional reference:
   Parks generally, see Mich. Const. Art. 7, § 23
Statutory reference:
   Littering, see M.C.L.A. §§ 324.8901 et seq.
   Misapplication of funds, see M.C.L.A. § 123.67
   Parks in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4e, 117.5
§ 1062.01 PROPERTY DESTRUCTION.
   No person in a public park of the city shall :
   (a)   Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or
remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, paving or paving material,
water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs,
notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts
or other boundary markers, recreational or sporting equipment, or other
structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal; or
   (b)   Dig, remove any earth, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, or make
any excavation, except with a written permit issued by the City Manager .
(Ord. 118, passed 7-12-1978)
§ 1062.02 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH.
   No person in a public park of the city shall dump, deposit or leave therein
any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste,
garbage, refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any
waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof,
but shall be placed in proper receptacles where these are provided. Where
receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried
away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly
disposed of elsewhere.
(Ord. 118, passed 7-12-1978)
§ 1062.03 MOTOR VEHICLES; TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   No person in a public park of the city shall :
   (a)   Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Traffic
Code as adopted by the city, and as amended from time to time, in regard to
equipment and operation of vehicles, together with such regulations as are
contained in this chapter and other city ordinances;
   (b)   Fail to obey all traffic officers and park employees. Such persons are
hereby authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed
in the parks and on the highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto
in accordance with this chapter and such supplementary regulations as may be
issued subsequently by the Chief of Police;
   (c)   Fail to obey all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution,
stopping or parking, and all other signs posted for proper traffic control
pursuant to orders of the Chief of Police;
   (d)   Drive any motor vehicle, motorcycle or other motorized conveyance on
any area, except park roads or parking areas or such other areas as may , on
occasion, be specifically designated by the Chief of Police; and
   (e)   Operate any motor vehicle, motorcycle or other motorized conveyance in
or through any of the city parks, other than to drive into the park and to park
such vehicle or conveyance therein, unless specifically permitted by the Chief
of Police.
(Ord. 118, passed 7-12-1978)
§ 1062.04 SUPERVISION BY COUNCIL.
   All recreational activities taking place in city parks, whether scheduled or
unscheduled, shall be under the supervision of Council and its Park and
Greenspace Committee or the Parks and Recreation Commission. The operation of
all activities and use of the parks shall be subject to regulations issued from
time to time by Council.
(Ord. 118, passed 7-12-1978)
§ 1062.05 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; PUBLIC INTOXICATION; DRUGS.
   No person in a city park shall :
   (a)   Possess, use or sell any alcoholic or intoxicating beverage, unless
special permission has been obtained from the Chief of Police for the
possession and consumption of alcoholic or intoxicating beverages in the park;
or
   (b)   Appear in any park while under the influence of intoxicants, drugs or
narcotics, or possess, use, sell or distribute any drugs or narcotics while in
the park.
(Ord. 118, passed 7-12-1978)
§ 1062.06 MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Hours. Parks shall  be open to the public during reasonable hours,
except under unusual circumstances and emergencies. The opening and closing
hours for each individual park shall be established by Council, except that in
unusual circumstances and emergencies, the City Manager  or his or her designee
may  regulate the same. The hours during which each park shall be open for
public use shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each such park.
   (b)   Closed areas. Any section or part of any park may  be declared closed
to the public by the City Manager  or his or her designee as is reasonably
necessary.
   (c)   Fund raising activities. No activities shall  be carried on for profit
or other fund raising purposes, except upon a special written permit issued by
the City Manager .
   (d)   Ejection. The Chief of Police or his or her designee may  eject from a
park any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 118, passed 7-12-1978)
§ 1062.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1066: COST RECOVERY OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
Section
1066.01   Cost recovery for emergency services related to traffic violations
1066.02   Cost recovery for fire runs and general emergency services
§ 1066.01 COST RECOVERY FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES RELATED TO TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   Definitions.
      EMERGENCY RESPONSE. The providing, sending and/or utilizing of police,
firefighting, emergency medical and/or rescue services by the city, or by a
private individual or corporation operating at the request or direction of the
city, to an incident resulting in:
         A.   An accident involving one or more motor vehicles operated by one
or more drivers who were under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or
controlled substance; or
         B.   An incident resulting in a traffic stop and arrest involving a
driver who was operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an
alcoholic beverage and/or controlled substance by a police officer.
      EXPENSES OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE. The direct and reasonable costs
incurred by the city or by a private person or corporation operating at the
request or direction of the city in the course of emergency response to an
incident, including the costs of providing police, firefighting, emergency
medical and/or rescue services at the scene of a incident. These costs further
include all of the salaries and wages of the city personnel responding to a
incident, all salaries and wages of the city personnel engaged in
investigation, supervision and reporting preparation, all costs connected with
the administration and preparation of all chemical tests of the driver’s blood,
breath or urine, and all costs related to any prosecution of the person causing
a incident, and all costs relating to any prosecution of the person causing a
incident, including the costs of the city attorneys.
   (b)   Liability for expense of an emergency response.
      (1)   Person responsible. A person is liable for the expense of an
emergency response  if, while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or
controlled substance, or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and a
controlled substance, such person’s operation of a motor vehicle proximately
causes any incident in an emergency response .
      (2)   Presumption. For the purpose of this division (b), a person is
under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance, or the
combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and controlled substance, when said
person’s physical or mental abilities are impaired to a degree that said person
no longer has the ability to operate a motor vehicle with ordinary prudence.
Further, it shall  be presumed that a person was operating a motor vehicle
while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage if a chemical analysis of
his or her blood, urine or breath indicates that the amount of alcohol in his
or her blood was in excess of 0.07%.
      (3)   Charge against person. The expense of an emergency response  shall
be a charge against the person liable for the expenses under this division (b).
The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the city in
the same manner as in the case of an obligation under an expressed or implied
contract.
      (4)   Alternative method of collection of expenses of emergency response
in form of collection of costs at the time of sentencing. In the event that a
person is found guilty by a judge or jury of, enters a plea of guilty to, or
enters a plea of “no contest” to a violation of any statute of the state , or
ordinance  of the city, prohibiting the operation of a motor vehicle while
under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance, or a
combination thereof, or of any lesser included offense, then at the time of
imposition of a sentence by the court the costs shall  be assessed by the
court, in addition to costs assessed under the provisions of any other statute
or ordinance , in an amount equal to the expenses of an emergency response  at
the time of a incident for which the person is being sentenced. The amount of
such costs shall be set forth in an affidavit filed by the city with the court
prior to sentencing. The charges for the individual items of expense shall not
exceed those set forth in the schedule of costs adopted by the city pursuant to
division (b)(5) of this section. Such costs shall be paid to the clerk of the
court for transmittal to the treasurer of the city in accordance with the
procedure to be established by the mutual agreement.
      (5)   Costs recoverable. All reasonable costs associated with emergency
response  will be determined by the city, its designees, officials and/or
Police Chief.
      (6)   Billing. The Chief of Police, or his or her designee, may , within
ten days of receiving itemized costs, or any part thereof, incurred for an
emergency response , submit a bill for these costs by first class mail or
personal service to the person liable for the expenses as enumerated under this
division (b), unless such costs are to be taxed by a court pursuant to division
(b)(4) of this section. The bill shall  require full payment within 30 days
from the date of service.
      (7)   Failure to pay. Any failure by the person described in this
division (b) as liable to pay the bill for the expense of an emergency response
within 30 days of service shall  be considered in default. In case of default,
the city may  commence a civil suit to recover such expenses plus any costs
allowed by law .
(Ord. 2406-01, passed 7-10-2024)
§ 1066.02 COST RECOVERY FOR FIRE RUNS AND GENERAL EMERGENCY SERVICES.
   (a)   Definitions.
      BOMB THREAT. The verbal or written threat of a bomb or other explosive
device which, if discharged as threatened, would violate a federal, state , or
local law .
      CITY. The City of Grand Blanc and all of its departments, specifically
including its Police and Fire Departments.
      COST RECOVERY CHARGES. The non-exhaustive list of fire protection
services and other emergency services enumerated in division (b) below.
      DEMOLITION OF A STRUCTURE. The tearing down of a structure damaged by
fire that must, as determined by the city Fire Chief, be promptly demolished
following the fire to protect public safety.
      DOWNED POWER LINE OR OTHER NON-HAZMAT PUBLIC UTILITY HAZARD RESPONSE. The
disabling of any transmission, distribution, or service line, cable, conduit,
pipeline, wire or the like used to provide, collect, or transport electricity,
natural gas, communication or electronic signals (including, but not limited
to, telephone, computer, cable television, and stereo signals or electronic
impulses), water or sanitary or storm sewage if the owner  or party responsible
for the maintenance of such utility line does not respond within one hour to a
request to repair or correct such failure.
      FALSE ALARM. Any automated or manual device that requests or summons
emergency assistance whether such device is activated intentionally or
otherwise, in the absence of an actual need for emergency assistance. The
determination that there was no actual need for emergency assistance shall  be
made by the City of Grand Blanc Fire Department Chief. A FALSE ALARM shall not
be deemed to have occurred if it was caused by an act of God.
      LIFT SERVICES. Any request for a lift service, which is conducted by
human or mechanical means, that a privately owned and operated ambulance
company could have provided.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled or towed vehicle designed or used on
the public streets, roads, and highways to transport passengers or property
which is required to be registered for use upon such public streets, roads, and
highways. For the purposes of this section, all trailers and appurtenances
attached to any motor vehicle are deemed to be a MOTOR VEHICLE.
      RECEIVING A DIRECT BENEFIT. Causing, requesting, or being involved in an
accident or incident within the city limits that causes a response by the city
to provide fire or other emergency services.
      RESPONSIBLE PERSON. An individual, firm, corporation, association,
partnership, entity, consortium, or joint venture responsible for cost recovery
charges and receiving a direct benefit from the fire protection services and/or
other emergency services provided by the city, and the heirs, estates,
successors, and assigns of such responsible person(s), subject to any
limitations expressly stated in divisions (e) and (f) herein.
      THREATS OF HARM TO ONESELF OR OTHERS. Any verbal or written threat of
physical harm to oneself or another’s property  that, if carried out, would be
a violation of federal, state , or local law .
   (b)   Cost recovery charges. Subject to division (e) of this section, the
following is a nonexhaustive
list of fire protection services and other emergency services that, when
provided by the city within the city limits, are billable and collectible as
“cost recovery charges”. All reasonable costs associated with emergency
response will be determined by the city, its designees, officials, Fire Chief
and/or Police Chief and will be billed and collectable as a cost recovery
charge.
      (1)   Responding to a downed power line or other non-HAZMAT public
utility hazard response.
      (2)   Responding to a false alarm.
      (3)   Responding to a request for lift services.
      (4)   Responding to a bomb threat.
      (5)   Responding to a threat to harm oneself or others.
      (6)   Demolition of a structure.
      (7)   Other emergency rescue service(s).
      (8)   Other services not specifically listed that are determined by the
city Fire Department Chief to be fire protection or other emergency services.
      (9)   Investigation, issuance, prosecution and enforcement of a criminal
charge, misdemeanor or felony, resulting in a conviction whether by plea
(including a plea of nolo contender) or trial.
      (10)   The investigation, issuance, prosecution and enforcement of a
civil infraction citation charging a violation of city ordinance resulting in a
determination of responsibility , whether by plea or by decision of the court.
   (c)   Time for payment. The cost recovery charges under this section are due
and payable by the responsible person(s) within 30 days from the date on the
city’s invoice mailed to the responsible person(s) at his/her/its last known
address. If payment is not made within 30 days from the date on the city’s
invoice mailed to the responsible person(s) at his/her/its last known address,
such cost recovery charges are collectible through proceedings in district
court or in any court of competent jurisdiction as a matured debt.
   (d)   Collection of charges. The city may  proceed in district court, or any
other court of competent jurisdiction, by suit to collect any cost recovery
charges remaining unpaid from a responsible person(s), after the time limit for
payment provided in division (c) of this section and shall  have any and all
other remedies provided by and subject to law  for the collection of such
charges. After the time limit for payment provided in division (c) of this
section, unpaid cost recovery charges constitute a lien upon the real property
of the responsible person(s) in the city from which, upon which, or related to
which the cost recovery charges were incurred. The City Treasurer shall, prior
to March 1 of each year, certify to the City Assessor the fact that such cost
recovery charges are delinquent and unpaid. The City Assessor shall then enter
the delinquent amount on the next general ad valorem tax roll as a charge
against the affected property , and the lien thereon shall be enforced in the
same manner as provided and allowed by law  for delinquent and unpaid real
property  taxes.
   (e)   Exemptions. The following properties and services are exempt from cost
recovery charges under this section:
      (1)   Responding to a fire involving city buildings, grounds, and/or
property .
      (2)   Responding to a fire or providing other emergency services that are
provided and performed outside of the city. Notwithstanding such exemption for
services provided outside of the city, the city and other municipalities may
adopt (an) ordinance (s) to impose fees for fire and emergency service runs
within their respective territories.
   (f)   When a fire protection activity or other emergency service rendered by
the city directly benefits more than one person, each person so benefited is
liable for the payment of the full charge for such service. Provided, however,
that if a court of competent jurisdiction determines that one or more persons
who received fire protection or other emergency service rendered by the city
was at fault for a incident resulting in such service, the other person(s)
involved in a incident shall not be considered “responsible persons” for the
purposes of this section. The interpretation and application of this section is
delegated to the city Fire Chief, subject only to written appeal within the
time limits for payment in division (c) of this section to the City Council,
which written appeal tolls the time limit for payment, and shall be
administered so that cost recovery charges shall only be collected from the
recipients of the service.
(Ord. 2406-02, passed 7-10-2024)
PART TWELVE: PLANNING AND ZONING CODE
   TITLE TWO - Planning
      
Chap. 1220. Planning Commission.
      
Chap. 1222. Planning Generally.
      
Chap. 1224. Subdivision Regulations.
      
Chap. 1226. Road and Utility Requirements and Specifications for Proposed Plats
and Condominiums and Land Divisions.
   TITLE FOUR - Zoning
      
Chap. 1240. Zoning.
TITLE TWO: PLANNING
      
Chap. 1220. Planning Commission.
      
Chap. 1222. Planning Generally.
      
Chap. 1224. Subdivision Regulations.
      
Chap. 1226. Road and Utility Requirements and Specifications for Proposed Plats
and Condominiums and Land Divisions.
CHAPTER 1220: PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
1220.01   Establishment
1220.02   Composition
1220.03   Compensation
1220.04   Terms of office
1220.05   Vacancies
1220.06   Removals
1220.07   Chairperson; meetings; rules; records
1220.08   Powers and duties
1220.09   Expenditures; appropriations
Statutory reference:
   County planning commissions, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 et seq.
   Municipal planning commissions, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 et seq.
   Zoning and planning generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.11 et seq., 125.3801 et
seq., 125.3101 et seq.
   Zoning and planning in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i
§ 1220.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A Planning Commission is hereby established in and for the city.
(Ord. 132, passed 5-14-1980)
§ 1220.02 COMPOSITION.
   The Planning Commission shall consist of nine members. One member shall be
the Mayor, one member shall be an administrative official of the city selected
by the Mayor, and one member shall be a member of Council to be selected by it.
Such three persons shall be ex officio members. The remaining six members shall
be appointed by the Mayor and shall hold no other city office.
(Ord. 132, passed 5-14-1980)
§ 1220.03 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the Planning Commission shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 132, passed 5-14-1980)
§ 1220.04 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The terms of office of the ex officio members shall correspond to their
respective official tenures, except that the term of the administrative
official selected by the Mayor shall terminate with the term of the Mayor
selecting him or her. The term of each appointed member, where six are
appointed, shall be three years or until his or her successor takes office,
except that the respective terms of two of the members first appointed shall be
for one year and two for two years.
(Ord. 132, passed 5-14-1980)
§ 1220.05 VACANCIES.
   Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of a term shall be
filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor, in the case of members selected or
appointed by him or her, and by Council in the case of the member appointed by
Council.
(Ord. 132, passed 5-14-1980)
§ 1220.06 REMOVALS.
   A member of the Planning Commission, other than the member selected by
Council, may , after a public hearing, be removed by the Mayor for
inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance. Council may, for like cause,
remove the member selected by it.
(Ord. 132, passed 5-14-1980)
§ 1220.07 CHAIRPERSON; MEETINGS; RULES; RECORDS.
   The Planning Commission shall elect its Chairperson from among the appointed
members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The
term of office of the Chairperson shall be one year, with eligibility for re-
election. The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month.
It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of
its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall
be a public record.
(Ord. 132, passed 5-14-1980)
§ 1220.08 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning Commission shall have the powers, duties and responsibilities
set forth in the statutes of the state , particularly in M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801
et seq., as amended, but such powers shall not be limited thereto. In addition,
the Planning Commission, when convened as the City Sign Review Committee, shall
assume the powers and authority and perform the duties and responsibilities of
the Sign Review Committee as defined in Chapter 272 of the Administration Code.
However, the powers of the Commission shall not supersede the powers and duties
of Council.
(Ord. 213, passed 4-11-1990)
§ 1220.09 EXPENDITURES; APPROPRIATIONS.
   Expenditures of the Planning Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within
the amounts made available by appropriation by Council, which shall determine
the funds necessary for the Commission’s work. Neither the Commission, nor any
member thereof, shall incur any financial liability in the name of the city.
(Ord. 132, passed 5-14-1980)
CHAPTER 1222: PLANNING GENERALLY
Section
1222.01   Partitioning or division of platted lots
Statutory reference:
   Blighted area rehabilitation, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.71 et seq.
   County planning commissions, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 et seq.
   Municipal planning commissions, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 et seq.
   Zoning and planning generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.11 et seq., 125.3801 et
seq., 125.3101 et seq.
   Zoning and planning in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i
§ 1222.01 PARTITIONING OR DIVISION OF PLATTED LOTS.
   Platted lots may be partitioned or divided into not more than four parts,
provided that the resulting lots, parcels or combinations of portions of two or
more divided lots shall be not less in width or size than the more restrictive
of the city’s Zoning Code or the Michigan Subdivision Control Act of 1967,
formally titled the Land Division Act and popularly known as the Plat Act and
the Subdivision Control Act, being M.C.L.A. § 560.101, and provided, further,
that each resulting lot shall have direct access to a public roadway and to
public utilities necessary or required to service such lot. In addition, all
such resulting lots shall conform in all particulars to the requirements of the
Michigan Subdivision Control Act of 1967 and all city ordinances.
(Ord. 49, passed 5-8-1969)
CHAPTER 1224: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
1224.01   Short title
1224.02   Purpose
1224.03   Legal basis
1224.04   Scope; interpretation; conflicts
1224.05   Administration
1224.06   Definitions
1224.07   Lots and land divisions
1224.08   Streets and alleys
1224.09   Easements for utilities
1224.10   Subdivision improvements
1224.11   Requirements for underground wiring
1224.12   Water supply system
1224.13   Sanitary sewer system
1224.14   Greenbelts and decorative entranceways
1224.15   Storm sewers or drains; special sewer or water facilities
1224.16   Building finish grade
1224.17   Site improvements
1224.18   Site condominium or condominium development
1224.19   Commercial and industrial developments
1224.20   Flood plain zone
1224.21   Appeals and variances
1224.22   Road and utility requirements and specifications for proposed plats
and condominiums and land divisions
Statutory reference:
   Approval of plats; street system, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 et seq.
   Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect, see M.C.L.A. §§
125.3801 et seq.
   Certification of city plats, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.51 et seq.
   Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 et seq.
   Zoning and planning generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.11 et seq., 125.3801 et
seq., 125.3101 et seq.
   Zoning and planning in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i
§ 1224.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Grand Blanc
Land Division, Subdivision and Condominium Control Ordinance”.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990)
§ 1224.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the subdivision of
land within the city , to regulate the development of land under the
Condominium Act , by establishing minimum standards and procedures for review
and approval, thereby assuring that all developments are designed and reviewed
in a manner consistent with developments under another form of ownership, and
to promote the safety, public health and general welfare of the community. The
regulations and standards are specifically designed to:
   (a)   Provide for orderly growth and harmonious development of the
community, consistent with orderly growth policies;
   (b)   Secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems
with proper relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining developments and public
facilities;
   (c)   Promote efficient use and livability of the land ;
   (d)   Ensure adequate provisions for water, drainage and sanitary sewer
facilities and other health requirements.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990)
§ 1224.03 LEGAL BASIS.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the statutory authority granted by the
Condominium Act (Public Act 58 of 1978), being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 et seq., as
amended; and Public Act 168 of 1959, now being Public Act 33 of 2008, M.C.L.A.
§§ 125.3811 et seq., as amended, providing for the City Planning Commission ;
and all subsequent amendments in support of stated public acts.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990)
§ 1224.04 SCOPE; INTERPRETATION; CONFLICTS.
   This chapter shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a
subdivision created and recorded prior to the effective date of this chapter
except for the further dividing of lots. Nor is it intended by this chapter to
repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing
provisions of other laws, ordinances or regulations, or with private
restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant or other private
agreements, or with restrictive covenants, or with restrictive covenants
running with the land to which the city is a party. Where this chapter imposes
a greater restriction upon land than is imposed or required by such existing
provision of any other ordinance of this city , the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990)
§ 1224.05 ADMINISTRATION.
   The approval provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the City
Council unless such authority shall be granted to the Planning Commission , the
City Manager , the Clerk or the Building and Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990)
§ 1224.06 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application. For the purpose of this
chapter, certain words and terms shall be defined as follows:
      AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land  in the flood plain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
      BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
      CITY. The City of Grand Blanc.
      CONDOMINIUM. A form of ownership which can apply to any type of
development .
      CONDOMINIUM ACT. Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 through
559.272, as amended.
      CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION. Includes all single-family detached condominium
developments and shall  be equivalent to the term “subdivision ,” as used in
the Zoning Code and the “Land Division, Subdivision and Condominium Control
Ordinance”.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Grand Blanc.
      DEVELOPER. A person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or a
combination of any of them, which may  hold any ownership interest in land
whether recorded or not.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate
, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, mobile home placement, excavation or
drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard .
      EASEMENT. An irrevocable grant by the property  owner  of the use of a
parcel  of land  by the city , by the public or a public utility, by a
corporation, or by a private person or persons, for a specific purpose or
purposes.
      FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards, and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
      FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal
Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Boundary-
Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood .
      IMPROVEMENTS (SITE IMPROVEMENTS). Grading street  surfacing, curbs and
gutters, sidewalks, water mains and lines, sanitary sewers, culverts, bridges,
utilities, underground sprinkling systems, fences, walls, signs, monuments,
light poles, poles, landscaping , streams, lakes, impoundments and other
additions to the natural state of land  which increases its value, utility or
habitability.
      LANDSCAPING. The treatment of the ground surface with live plant
materials normally grown in Genesee County such as, but not limited to, grass,
berms, ground cover, trees, shrubs, vines and other live plant material. In
addition, a landscape design may  include other decorative natural or processed
materials, such as wood chips, crushed stone, boulders or mulch. Structural
features such as fountains, pools, statues and benches shall  also be
considered a part of landscaping  if provided in combination with live plant
material.
      LOT. A parcel  of land  occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main
building or a group of buildings, and/or utilized for a principal use;
described on a recorded plat or by a metes and bounds description; having
frontage along a public street ; and having sufficient size to comply with the
requirements of this chapter for minimum lot  area or overall density,
setbacks, maximum building coverage and open space.
      MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A sketch plan showing the lot , street  and open
space for the overall development  of a tract of land , indicating that part of
the development  not proposed in the first subdivision  application.
      PARCEL or TRACT. A continuous area or acreage of land  under one
proprietor .
      PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Grand Blanc.
      PLAT ACT. Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through
560.293, as amended, formally titled the Land Division Act and popularly known
as the Plat Act.
      PROPRIETOR. A person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or a
combination of any of them, which may  hold any ownership interest in land
whether recorded or not.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A street , alley or other thoroughfare or easement
intended to be occupied by a street , crosswalk, railroad, electric
transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer
main, shade trees or other special use, permanently established for passage of
persons or vehicles and under the legal authority  of the agency having
jurisdiction over the right-of-way.
      SITE CONDOMINIUM. A development  which creates detached condominium
units intended for use as single-family dwellings, and which are subject to
this chapter.
      SUBDIVIDE or SUBDIVISION. The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or
tract  of land  by the proprietor  thereof or by his or her heirs, executors,
administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, for the purpose
of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development , where the
act of division creates five or more parcels of land  each of which is ten
acres or less in area; or five or more parcels of land  each of which is ten
acres or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of
ten years. SUBDIVIDE or SUBDIVISION does not include a property  transfer
between two or more adjacent parcels if the property  taken from one parcel  is
added to an adjacent parcel ; and any resulting parcel  shall  not be
considered a building site unless the parcel  conforms to the requirements of
this chapter or the requirements of any other city  ordinance . This shall also
mean, for the purpose of this chapter, any division of land  into condominium
units and common elements.
      VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
   (b)   All other definitions shall be held in accordance with other parts of
this chapter, the Subdivision Control Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, formally
titled Land Division Act and also popularly known as the Plat Act , being
M.C.L.A. § 560.101, or the Condominium Act , Public Act 58 of 1978, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 et seq., all as amended.
(Ord 215, passed 9-5-1990; Ord. 222, passed 4-10-1991; Ord. 234, passed 7-12-
2000)
§ 1224.07 LOTS AND LAND DIVISIONS.
   (a)   Conformity to Zoning Code. The lot  width, depth, and area shall  not
be less than the particular district requirements of the Zoning Code, except
where outlots are provided for some permitted purpose.
   (b)   Width related to length. Narrow deep lots shall  be avoided. The depth
of a lot  generally shall not exceed three times the width as measured at the
building line for platted subdivisions or four times the width for unplatted
lands.
   (c)   Corner lots. Corner lots shall  have extra width to permit appropriate
building setback from both streets for orientation to both streets.
   (d)   Lot frontage. All lots shall  front upon a publicly dedicated street ,
except for those provided with a private driveway easement  dedicated to the
use of those lots not fronting a public street . No subdivision  shall be
processed in this manner without being approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
Variances may  be permitted for approved planned community developments and as
otherwise approved by the City Council with private street  variance .
   (e)   Lot division. The division of an existing lot  in a recorded
subdivision  plat is prohibited, unless approved following application to the
Zoning Administrator. The application shall  state the reasons for the proposed
division. No lot  in a recorded plat shall be divided into more than four parts
and the resulting lots shall be not be less in area than permitted by the
Zoning Code. No building permit shall be issued, or any building construction
commenced, until the division has been approved by the city  and the
suitability of the land  for building sites has been approved by the Department
of Public Works. The division of a lot  resulting in a smaller area than
prescribed herein may  be permitted but only for the purpose of adding it to an
existing building site or sites. The division and description shall be in
accordance with Public Act 132 of 1970, being M.C.L.A. §§ 54.211 et seq.,
certified survey by registered land  surveyor and copies shall be provided to
the city .
   (f)   Division of unplatted parcel .
      (1)   The division of an unplatted parcel of land  shall require the
approval of the city prior to taking such action. The division of an unplatted
parcel of land upon existing streets shall require the approval of the city in
order to ensure that the ordinances of the city have been satisfied, and to
ensure that interior lands are not “landlocked” or provided with inadequate
means of future access.
      (2)   A division of unplatted land , between two or more parcels, when
being added to an existing parcel which has public road frontage, shall not be
considered “landlocked”. This division of land  shall also require approval of
the city .
      (3)   All such applications shall be made in writing and shall be
accompanied by a preliminary drawing indicating dimensions, all land areas and
public road access points of the proposed divisions.
      (4)   No building or occupancy permit shall be issued in such cases until
the city has approved the division of such land . Upon approval, the final
division and descriptions shall be in accordance with Public Act 132 of
Michigan, certified survey by registered land surveyor and copies shall be
provided to the city .
   (g)   Traffic ways; streets and roads. The standards set forth in this
chapter shall  be the minimum standards for streets, roads and intersections.
Streets shall be dedicated to public use.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990; Ord. 222, passed 4-10-1991)
§ 1224.08 STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (a)   Street location and arrangements. When a major street  plan has been
adopted, subdivision  streets shall  be required to conform to the plan.
   (b)   Local or minor streets. Such streets shall  be so arranged as to
discourage their use by through traffic.
   (c)   Street continuation and extension. The arrangement of streets may  be
required to provide for the continuation of existing streets from adjoining
areas into new subdivisions by the Planning Commission  and/or the City
Council.
   (d)   Stub streets. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the
arrangement of streets in new subdivisions may  be required to be extended to
the boundary line of the tract to make provision for the future projection of
streets into adjacent areas. Outlots may be substituted for stub streets by the
Planning Commission  and or City Council.
   (e)   Alleys. Alleys shall not be permitted.
   (f)   Acceleration/deceleration lanes. Where entrances to a plat are from an
arterial street , the Planning Commission  and/or City Council may  require an
acceleration/deceleration lane.
   (g)   Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sacs shall not be more than 1,500 feet in
length. The Planning Commission  and City Council may  give special
consideration to longer cul-de-sacs under certain topographic conditions or
other unusual situations.
   (h)   Private streets. Private streets and roads shall  generally be
prohibited.
   (i)   Street names.
      (1)   Street names shall not duplicate any existing street name in the
city , except where a new street is a continuation of an existing street .
      (2)   Street names that may be spelled differently but sound the same
shall also be avoided.
      (3)   Duplications can be avoided by checking new street names with the
Planning Commission ’s Master Listing and the County Road Commission’s Master
Listing.
      (4)   All new streets shall be named “Avenue”, “Road”, “Street”,
“Highway”, “Drive”, “Lane”, “Path” or “Trail”; and cul-de-sacs shall be named
“Circle”, “Court”, “Way” or “Place,” unless approval for a substitute is
granted by the Planning Commission .
      (5)   All street signs, including traffic control signs, shall be
purchased by the city and all costs involved in the initial purchase and
installation of said signs shall be billed to the developer . After the initial
installation, the city will be responsible for the cost of maintaining said
signage.
   (j)   Clear vision.
      (1)   There shall be a clear vision zone at all corners of intersecting
roads or road junctions, consisting of a triangular area defined by:
         A.   The point of intersection of the right-of-way lines; and
         B.   The line drawn between two points extended along such right-of-
way lines a distance of 25 feet from the point of intersection, and within
which area no obstruction to vision, excluding existing topography, shall be
permitted from a height of two feet to eight feet above the centerline
elevation of abutting streets.
      (2)   Where existing and anticipated traffic volumes, traffic speeds,
intersection configurations, and geographic and topographic conditions may
require a greater clear vision zone, the area of the clear vision zone shall be
shown as an easement on the plat.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990)
§ 1224.09 EASEMENTS FOR UTILITIES.
   All subdivision plans shall include all necessary easements granted to the
city without cost for the purposes of constructing, operating, inspecting,
maintaining, repairing, altering, replacing and/or removing pipelines, mains,
conduits, and other installations of a similar character; for the purpose of
providing public utilities, including conveyance of sewage, water and storm
water run-off across, through and under the property subject to said easement ;
and for the purpose of excavating and refilling ditches and trenches necessary
for the location of said structures. All other easements of benefit or burden
to the project shall also be included with the plans. All utilities shall be
underground unless the Planning Commission approves them in another manner
because of unusual circumstances.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990)
§ 1224.10 SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish and define the
public improvements  which will be required to be constructed by the subdivider
as conditions for final plat approval and also to outline the procedures and
responsibilities of the subdivider and the various public officials and
agencies concerned with the administration, planning, design, construction, and
financing of public facilities, and to further establish procedures for
assuring compliance with these requirements.
   (b)   Responsibility for plans. It shall  be the responsibility  of the
subdivider of every proposed subdivision  to have prepared by a registered
engineer, a complete set of construction plans, including profiles, cross-
sections, specifications and other supporting data, for the hereinafter
required public streets, utilities and other facilities. Such construction
plans shall be based on the preliminary plat or condominium  site plan, and
shall be prepared in conjunction with the final plat or condominium  plan.
Construction plans are subject to approval by the responsible public agencies.
All construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with the city  standards
or specifications.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990)
§ 1224.11 REQUIREMENTS FOR UNDERGROUND WIRING.
   The proprietor  shall make arrangements for all lines for telephone,
electric, television and other similar services distributed by wire or cable to
be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area. Such conduits or
cables shall be placed within private easements provided to such service
companies by the proprietor or within dedicated public ways. All such
facilities placed in dedicated public ways shall be planned so as not to
conflict with other underground utilities.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990)
§ 1224.12 WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
   All land divisions, condominiums and subdivisions shall be serviced by a
public water supply system, fire hydrants and other required water system
appurtenances. This system shall be provided by the subdivider in accordance
with the requirements of the city .
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990)
§ 1224.13 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   All land divisions, condominiums and subdivisions shall be serviced by a
public sanitary sewerage system. Sanitary sewers and other required
appurtenances thereto shall be provided by the subdivider in accordance with
the requirements of the City Council. No septic tanks will be allowed.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990)
§ 1224.14 GREENBELTS AND DECORATIVE ENTRANCEWAYS.
   (a)   Where the proprietor /subdivider elects to provide greenbelts and/or
constructs decorative or other improved entranceways, financial or other
guarantees shall be made to the City Council to ensure continued upkeep and
maintenance of all improvements . Such guarantees may consist of a deed
restriction or covenant which requires all future purchasers of lots in the
subdivision or condominium to belong to a homeowners association and to pay an
annual fee adequate to maintain and upkeep the improvements to their original
condition. Failure to provide adequate funds to accomplish this to the
satisfaction of the City Council shall empower the city to carry out the
improvements and upkeep and to make such assessments as are required to pay the
costs incurred to the city against the owner of the lots contained within the
subdivision or condominium .
   (b)   Each entranceway to any newly developed condominium or subdivision
 development  shall have no less than two street lights installed, which meet
the theme, standards and style of those installed along the South Saginaw
Street (downtown) Streetscape Project. All costs for the initial installation
shall be the responsibility of the developer . After the installation, all
maintenance costs shall be the responsibility of the city .
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990)
§ 1224.15 STORM SEWERS OR DRAINS; SPECIAL SEWER OR WATER FACILITIES.
   No subdivision will be accepted for final plat or condominium approval
unless water mains, storm water sewers or drains have been dedicated to the
public for that purpose and will be available to the use of other lands in the
city within the drainage district. Further, in the event the city  shall
determine that the public health, safety and welfare require such drains to be
tiled and covered, the subdivider will agree to do so. Further, in the event
the general plan of development of the city requires that pipelines and
facilities for storm water, public sanitary sewer or public water supply need
to be larger or deeper than the sizes and depth required to serve this
subdivision alone, for future development of other lands in the city , the
subdivider will place such larger or deeper pipelines available for connection
to other lands of the city , provided that the city allows for payback to the
developer in cash, or in a manner to be agreed upon, for the additional cost of
larger or deeper pipelines or facilities deemed necessary.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990)
§ 1224.16 BUILDING FINISH GRADE.
   (a)   Any building requiring yard space shall be located at such an
elevation that a sloping grade shall be maintained to cause the flow of surface
water to run away from the walls of the building. A sloping grade, beginning at
the sidewalk level, shall be maintained and established from the center of the
front lot line to the finished grade line at the front of the building, and
also from the rear lot line to the front, both grades sloping to the front
property line. Where rear lot drainageways are required, an enclosed drain and/
or surface swale drain along the rear lot lines shall be provided with
easements provided in accordance with the city approval. However, this shall
not prevent the grading of a yard space to provide sunken or terraced areas,
provided proper means are constructed and maintained to prevent the run-off of
surface water from flowing onto the adjacent properties. Grade elevations shall
be determined by using the elevation at the centerline of the road in front of
the lot as the established grade or such grade determined by the City Engineer
or the Building and Zoning Administrator.
   (b)   When a new building is constructed on a vacant lot between two
existing buildings or adjacent to an existing building, the existing
established grade shall be used in determining the grade around the new
building and the yard around the new building and the yard shall be graded in
such a manner as to meet existing grades and not to permit run-off of surface
water to flow onto the adjacent property .
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990)
§ 1224.17 SITE IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   No site improvement shall be installed within the city ’s right-of-way
without the express written permission of the city , provided the following
site improvements shall not require a separate review or permit when located
outside of the required clear vision zone:
      (1)   A site entrance feature, berm, wall or fence approved as part of a
site plan or subdivision plat;
      (2)   A.   Landscaping that does not impose a hazard to the motoring
public or create conflicts with public or franchised utilities such as ground
level planters, flower beds, small ornamental shrubs not expected to attain a
height greater than three feet, trees, sprinklers and decorative items at
residential driveways on subdivision streets when located at least six feet
from the back of the curb or six feet from the edge of the curb or six feet
from the edge of the road shoulder; and
         B.   The city reserves the right to remove or alter any such
landscaping to provide a required clear vision zone, maintain or construct
public utilities or make other improvements in the right-of-way with no
obligation to preserve or replace such landscaping .
      (3)   An essential service structure;
      (4)   Mail boxes that meet USPS standards;
      (5)   Underground sprinkler systems when installed and located so the
street , non-motorized paths, and sidewalks are not impacted by overspray,
drift or run-off. Control panels, electrical systems or water supplies to the
sprinkler system or water supplies shall be located outside of the right-of-way
;
      (6)   Regulatory signs; and
      (7)   An existing natural feature that has been preserved.
   (b)   Any existing construction or site improvement currently within the
city ’s right-of-way and not previously approved, shall obtain approval or
shall be removed. The city shall not be responsible for replacing or repairing
any approved or non-approved construction, landscaping or other site
improvement.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990; Ord. 234, passed 7-12-2000)
§ 1224.18 SITE CONDOMINIUM OR CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT.
   (a)   Condominium land use. Condominiums may  be planned for and developed
within any zoning district, provided the use of condominium  units or land  use
within the condominium  project is an allowable use within the zoning district.
Condominiums may be developed for residential, office, industrial or
recreational use, provided the land  proposed for development  has the proper
zoning or is processed through a rezoning request.
   (b)   Permitted area or placement. Condominium  units may  be placed on land
in accordance with plans approved by the city ’s Planning Commission . All
elements of the schedule of regulations in Ordinance 70, as amended, may not
apply to the placement of condominium  units within a condominium  project
because of a clustering plan approved by the Planning Commission . However, the
minimum land  area required for the total residential dwelling units and the
maximum density allowed in each zoning district of Ordinance 70, as amended,
will be applicable.
   (c)   Condominium site plan review.
      (1)   A site plan along with a preliminary exhibit (A) master deed
document shall be submitted to the Planning Commission showing all buildings,
parking areas, recreation areas, limited common elements, general common
elements and landscaping , on a scale as required by the Zoning Code. The site
plan shall also contain all elements of the city ’s site plan check list.
      (2)   In addition, the proposed site plan of the development  shall show
all adjacent properties, including existing buildings, located within 200 feet
of the proposed site and any other site design elements which the Planning
Commission deems necessary. If the plans indicate no adverse effects which
cause injury to adjoining property or the city as a whole, the Planning
Commission and City Council may grant approval. Plans so approved shall
regulate development on said premises unless modified with Planning Commission
approval.
      (3)   A final master deed, both exhibit (A) and (B) documents, must be
submitted and approved by the city prior to any occupancy permits being issued.
Proof of the master deed being recorded at the Genesee County Register of Deeds
must also be provided.
      (4)   Among the items required in a master deed are provisions for
funding maintenance of private driveways, pedestrianways, entryways,
subdivision signage, private utilities, public road dedications, all other
common areas and any other items so required by the city .
   (d)   Streets and utilities.
      (1)   All streets shall be dedicated to the public and be constructed to
the specifications of the city as defined in other sections of this chapter.
All parking lots and driveways included as part of common elements shall be
constructed to the city ’s specifications, unless otherwise approved by the
Planning Commission .
      (2)   Utilities, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains,
shall be constructed in accordance with existing city and public utility
requirements. All utility services shall be placed underground. Easements shall
be provided for all public utilities and city utilities as specified in other
sections of this chapter.
   (e)   Phased development . Condominium  projects may  be constructed in
phases. However, any phased plan shall  show the total project proposed with
phases clearly identified. Building permits for a phase thereof will not be
issued until all streets and utilities have been constructed for that phase,
unless bonds are posted to guarantee construction of said unfinished roads and
utilities.
   (f)   Procedures. The proprietor  shall  submit a site plan to the Planning
Commission  with detail as required by this chapter. The Planning Commission
will review the plan and make recommendations to the City Council. The City
Council will act on the site plan, either approving or disapproving the plan.
An approved site plan will regulate development  of the property , unless
alterations are approved by the Planning Commission  and City Council.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990; Ord. 222, passed 4-10-1991)
§ 1224.19 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENTS.
   (a)   These subdivision design standards may be modified in the case of
subdivisions specifically designed for commercial or industrial development ,
including shopping districts, wholesaling areas and planned industrial
districts.
   (b)   In all cases, however, adequate provision shall be made for off-street
parking and loading as well as for traffic circulation. Streets shall be
dedicated to the city in accordance with standard requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990)
§ 1224.20 FLOOD PLAIN ZONE.
   (a)   Intent. It is the intent of this section to significantly reduce
hazards to persons and damage to property  as a result of flood conditions in
the city , and to comply with provisions and requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   (b)   Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study  (FIS) entitled
“Genesee County, Michigan and dated September 25, 2009 and the Flood Insurance
Rate Map(s) (FIRMs)  panel number(s) of 26049C: 0309D, 0317D, 0328D, 0336D,
0337D and dated September 25, 2009 are adopted by reference for the purposes of
administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to be a part of
§ 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the
“Flood Hazards” section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code.
   (c)   Designation and duties of the Administrator. The Building and Zoning
Administrator of the city  is hereby appointed Administrator and is to review
all development  and subdivision  proposals to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
   (d)   Development  prohibition. All development  shall  be prohibited within
areas of special flood hazard unless granted a permit by the Department of
Natural Resources and the city  under appropriate rules and regulations.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990; Ord. 09-04, passed 10-28-2009)
§ 1224.21 APPEALS AND VARIANCES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals of the city  shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. The manner in
which a Board hearing is convened shall be by the procedure already
established.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990)
§ 1224.22 ROAD AND UTILITY REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR PROPOSED PLATS
AND CONDOMINIUMS AND LAND DIVISIONS.
   See
Chapter 1226 of the codified ordinances of the city for required street
specifications.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-5-1990)
CHAPTER 1226: ROAD AND UTILITY REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS
FOR PROPOSED PLATS AND CONDOMINIUMS AND LAND DIVISIONS
Section
1226.01   Requirements and covenants generally; definitions
1226.02   Preliminary requirements for plat approval
1226.03   Submission of street and drainage plan
1226.04   Design standards
1226.05   Final plat requirements
1226.06   Special provisions
1226.07   Materials and inspection
1226.08   Street and drainage construction specifications and requirements
1226.09   Legal requirements and safety precautions
1226.10   Construction methods and techniques
1226.11   Surfacing and base requirements
1226.12   Turn-around provisions for dead-end streets
1226.13   Easements
1226.14   Utilities and street lights
§ 1226.01 REQUIREMENTS AND COVENANTS GENERALLY; DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   The following minimum requirements and specifications for streets,
alleys and utilities apply to all proposed plats, condominiums and land
divisions coming under the jurisdiction of the city in accordance with state
and local laws or ordinances.
   (b)   As used in this chapter:
      AASHO. The American Association of State Highway Officials.
      ASTM. The American Society for Testing Materials.
      CITY’S SPECIFICATIONS. This chapter.
      CONDOMINIUM ACT. Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 through
559.272, as amended.
      DEVELOPMENT. Either a PLAT or a CONDOMINIUM as defined in this section,
respectively.
      DPW. The City Department of Public Works, its supervisor or authorized
representative.
      ENGINEER. The City Consulting Engineer or his or her authorized
representative, or an engineer appointed by the city. The City Engineer shall
be licensed by the state .
      INSPECTION. The close observation and examination of the various
construction operations as a means of determining the acceptability of
completed streets.
      MDOT. The Michigan Department of Transportation.
      MDOT SPECIFICATIONS. The MDOT 2020 Standard Specifications for
Construction, current editions and Supplemental Specifications thereto as
issued by the Michigan Department of Transportation.
      PLAT ACT. Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through
560.293, as amended, formally titled the Land Division Act and popularly known
as the Plat Act.
      PROPRIETOR or DEVELOPER. A natural person, firm, association,
partnership, corporation, or any combination thereof, which may  hold any
ownership interest in land , whether recorded or not.
      SURVEYOR. As defined in the Subdivision Control Act, Public Act 288 of
1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq., and in the Condominium Act , being
Public Act 58 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 et seq. A surveyor shall  be
licensed by the state .
(Res. passed 11-12-1986)
§ 1226.02 PRELIMINARY REQUIREMENTS FOR PLAT APPROVAL.
   (a)   Submission of preliminary plat.
      (1)   Step 1. Action by City Planning Commission.
         A.   The Planning Commission, established in
Chapter 1220, shall be the first step in submitting a plat for approval. The
Commission shall recommend to Council one of the following:
            1.   Disapproval;
            2.   Approval; or
            3.   Approval upon meeting specific conditions.
         B.   Every recommendation made by the Commission shall be submitted
immediately to Council for its approval or disapproval or for the deletion or
addition of conditions.
      (2)   Step 2. Tentative approval by Council.
         A.   Council shall review the Planning Commission’s decision and,
pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 560.112, shall, within 90 days:
            1.   Approve the preliminary plat as presented without any
conditions for approval; or
            2.   Disapprove the preliminary plat and set forth written reasons
for such disapproval and requirements for tentative approval.
         B.   Either decision by Council shall be valid for one year from the
date of the decision but the plat may be given one-year extensions thereafter
upon application to Council.
      (3)   Step 3. Final Approval by Council.
         A.   Council shall review the tentative approval previously given and
shall:
            1.   Approve the plat if tentative approval requirements and
conditions are met;
            2.   Disapprove the plat if the tentative approval requirements and
conditions are not met; or
            3.   Disapprove the plat pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 560.120.
         B.   Approval shall be valid for two years from the date of decision,
but two-year extensions may be granted if timely application is made to
Council.
      (4)   Step 4. Council action re Plat Act. Council, after review of the
final approval of the preliminary plat, shall :
         A.   Approve the plat; or
         B.   Disapprove the plat if it does not conform with the specific
provisions of the Plat Act, formally titled the Land Division Act, and being
Act 288 of 1967, as set forth in M.C.L.A. § 560.167.
   (b)   Right-of-way requirements.
      (1)   State or national trunklines shall be of the width required by the
MDOT.
      (2)   County section-line roads, quarter section-line roads and existing
roads shall be a minimum of 100 feet wide, being 50 feet on each side of the
centerline or section line.
      (3)   All other streets and roads shall have a minimum right-of-way width
of 60 feet, unless additional right-of-way is required for proper construction.
      (4)   All dead-end streets shall be provided with an approved turn-around
constructed within the boundaries of the plat, unless otherwise approved by the
city. If there is even a remote possibility of the street ever being extended
into adjoining property , it shall extend to the plat line. In any event, the
maximum length of streets having only one means of ingress and egress shall be
subject to the approval of the city. Additional requirements shall be as
provided in §§
1226.04 and
1226.12.
      (5)   Outlots intended for future street extensions will be permitted if
expansion of the street system into adjacent property is contemplated, if it is
compatible with the plat layout and if, by circumstances, it is pertinent to
the area being platted. Provision shall be made, either as a part of the plat
dedication or by other means satisfactory to the city, to assure that outlots
intended for the future expansion of the street system are reserved and
restricted for that purpose, in satisfaction of Plat Act requirements. Also,
the arrangement of streets should provide for the continuation of existing
streets from adjoining areas into the new subdivision where desirable and
required by the city. The minimum outlot width for future streets shall be 60
feet.
      (6)   The right-of-way on all curves of curvilinear streets shall be the
same width as the right-of- way on the tangents.
      (7)   A.   Reverse frontage lots shall be required in all plat
development adjacent to the following types of highways:
            1.   Statewide arterials;
            2.   Local arterials; and
            3.   Major collectors.
         B.   The concept of fronting on an internal road is encouraged for
reasons of safety and public convenience. Therefore, the best interest of the
public welfare on the aforementioned highways, plat and condominium design
shall include the limited access principle so that private driveways from
platted lots or condominiums shall be served by marginal access streets,
reverse frontages or similar means as a condition of approval of the project.
The streets requiring use of the back lot principle are: Perry Road, Reid Road,
Center Road, Saginaw (M-54) Road, Holly Road, Genesee Road and Grand Blanc
Road.
   (c)   Miscellaneous geometric requirements.
      (1)   All newly developed streets which intersect with existing highways,
or with proposed platted streets, will do so at 90 degree angles with a minimum
straightaway of 150 feet, measured from the centerline of the existing highway.
The grade in the 150 foot straightway shall not exceed 4%.
      (2)   Each horizontal curve on curvilinear streets shall have a minimum
radius, measured from the centerline, as approved by the city. Curves or other
features whose purpose is principally to obtain a particular lot size, shape,
appearance or scenic attraction, not in keeping with good engineering design,
will not be permitted.
(Res. passed 11-12-1986)
§ 1226.03 SUBMISSION OF STREET AND DRAINAGE PLAN.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   After approval of the preliminary plat layout, three sets of street
and drainage plans, covering all streets within the plat or condominium, shall
be submitted to the city for approval. These plans must show plan and profile,
typical cross-sections and special details and shall be accompanied by a plat
layout on the title or first sheet. This implies a workmanlike execution of the
street plans in every respect. The plans and special details must be complete
to the extent that they can be used as construction plans and must bear the
seal of a registered engineer licensed in the state . Suggested cross-sections
can be found in §
1226.11.
      (2)   Separate enlarged details showing unusual installations and
situations must be included. These details should include, but are not limited
to, pipe arches, acceleration/deceleration lanes and widened intersections or
other areas of construction which cannot be clearly shown and understood from
the conventional plan and profile.
   (b)   Street plans; information required. The plans must show plainly all of
the following information:
      (1)   A plan view with the centerline or top of the curb profile directly
below the plan view;
      (2)   The proposed grades taken from datum determined from a permanent
benchmark, the location of which shall be shown on the plans; and
      (3)   All pertinent design and construction information necessary to
construct and inspect the improvements.
   (c)   Drainage plans; information required. The plans must show plainly at
least all of the following information:
      (1)   The location, size and depth of all underground structures used for
street drainage within the plat or condominium. The drainage plans may be
incorporated as a part of the street plans if this can be done without
sacrificing clarity. A composite layout of the sewers and other drainage
structures must be shown on the overall street system submitted as a part of
the plans. A schematic drawing of this layout will suffice. Drainage plans
should be approved by both the County Drain Commissioner (if he or she shares
jurisdiction in these facilities with the city) and the city. Road plans should
be approved by the County Road Commission (if it shares jurisdiction in the
facilities with the city) and the city. In case of differences in standards
between these two organizations, the higher standard shall prevail.
      (2)   Sizes, lengths and locations of all cross culverts and/or storm
sewers existing or proposed within the development limits and adjacent to the
developed area which are to be used to drain the area and adjoining lands;
      (3)   The location and type of inlets and clean-out points for
underground drainage systems; and
      (4)   The MDOT detail number or reference to the standard plan number for
all catchbasins, inlets, manholes and similar structures.
(Res. passed 11-12-1986)
§ 1226.04 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (a)   Generally. An all-weather, paved-surface street  with curb and gutter
and proper drainage facilities is required. The roadway surface should conform
to the typical cross-section of abutting curbed, platted streets, except where
a higher type of surface is required.
   (b)   Street design requirements.
      (1)   Two-lane sections.
         A.   The width of the street  shall be a minimum of 27 feet from back
of curb to back of curb. (See Figures 1, 2 and 3, following the text of this
chapter.)
         B.   For a curb and gutter cross-section, the crown shall be three
inches minimum.
         C.   The sight distance over a crest shall be a minimum of 300 feet
viewed from a point three feet, six inches above the surface of the pavement,
with the object sighted being three feet, six inches above the surface of the
pavement.
         D.   The maximum grade on any portion of a street shall not exceed 6%
(a rise or fall of six feet in 100 feet). The minimum grade shall be 0.40%
measured along the centerline of the street , except that on the circle area of
a cul-de-sac, the developed minimum grade shall be 0.6%, measured along the
outside edge of the cul-de-sac.
         E.   The minimum radii on platted street intersections shall be as
follows:
            1.   State and federal highways: as approved by the MDOT;
            2.   Major local or primary roads: forty feet to the back of the
curb;
            3.   Residential area streets: thirty feet to the back of the curb;
and
            4.   Commercial and industrial platted streets: thirty-five feet to
the back of the curb.
      (2)   Boulevard platted streets at intersections.
         A.   Pavement width on each side of the median divider shall be not
less than 27 feet from back of curb to back of curb.
         B.   All medians shall be curbed in essentially the same manner and
according to the same detail of curb and gutter used elsewhere throughout the
development . High curbs, flagstone walls or similar medians will not be
permitted.
         C.   The distance from the back of the curb to the street right-of-way
line shall be not less than the minimum distance approved elsewhere in the
plat, except on cul-de-sacs with approval from the city.
         D.   The median divider maximum length from end to end shall be 200
feet. The minimum length along the same dimensions shall be 100 feet.
         E.   Median dividers shall be not less than 12 feet nor more than 20
feet in width from back of curb to back of curb and shall be of uniform even
width. Hour glass or other odd shaped medians shall not be permitted. Minimum
radii at median ends shall be one-half of the uniform median width.
         F.   The material placed between the curbs, inside the median, may
consist of sodded earth, limestone chips, brick or similar material approved by
the city.
         G.   The only other items to be sanctioned within the limits of the
median, until such time as the plat is approved, will be low growing shrubbery,
a maximum of 18 inches in height.
         H.   The typical cross-section of the boulevard section, at its
midpoint, showing the pavement crown and other pertinent information, shall be
required as a part of the street and drainage plans.
      (3)   Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sac length should be limited to seven times the
average lot width and in no case should a cul-de-sac exceed 1,200 feet in
length. Special consideration may  be given to longer cul-de-sacs under certain
topographic conditions or other unusual situations.
   (c)   Drainage design requirements; underground storm sewers.
      (1)   All underground drainage used to drain the streets in a development
must be approved by the city’s DPW. When requested, design data supporting the
adequacy of the underground drainage system shall be furnished before approval
of the plans. Storm sewer pipe shall be C76, 12-inch minimum diameter placed at
a minimum 2.5 fps grade slope. Storm sewer design shall be at no less than a
25-year storm. The minimum initial time of concentration shall be 20 minutes.
The run-off coefficient for single-family shall be 0.4, for multifamily 0.5,
and for commercial-industrial 0.75. Adjustments of run-off factors must be
approved by the city’s DPW prior to use.
      (2)   Where possible, the underground storm sewer of adequate diameter
shall be laid with sufficient gradient to be self-cleaning. Catchbasins, when
used, shall have minimum two-foot sumps. Structures may be two feet interior
for less than four feet of depth. All structures exceeding four feet in depth
must be at least four feet interior diameter.
      (3)   The proper type of pipe and bedding, complying with MDOT
specifications, shall be used as necessary for good design. Granular material
backfill must be used in trenches under all roadways and in all trenches, the
inside edges of which are within three feet of the back of the curb. Backfill
material shall be compacted to a minimum of 95% modified Proctor (ASTM Test T-
99).
      (4)   Manholes (or other approved clean-out points) on underground
drainage systems must be placed at maximum intervals of 400 feet.
      (5)   Manholes shall be built according to the MDOT Standard Plan with
Cover A. Catchbasins shall be built according to the MDOT Standard Plan with
the approved cover, unless otherwise approved by the city.
      (6)   Where applicable, an approved method must be used to drain the
subbase or subgrade. The minimum size open joint drain tile used shall be six
inches in diameter.
      (7)   Approaches to catchbasins or inlets behind the curbs shall be
sodded or otherwise protected from erosion.
      (8)   On cul-de-sacs having circular turn-arounds, a catchbasin or inlet
will be required in the gutter to drain the circular area, unless it can be
positively determined by the city’s DPW that the gradients and the like, are
sufficient to warrant omitting these structures (minimum pavement grade slope
within the circle area of a cul-de-sac shall be 0.6%). If a planting island is
created in such turn-arounds, a similar structure must be built in the island
gutter or the island gutter must be built 0.4% higher than the outside radius
gutter and the island shall have a slope-away gutter. Following construction,
if these areas do not drain to the satisfaction of the city, the installation
of the necessary drainage structures will be required before acceptance of the
street .
      (9)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be required.
      (10)   The proprietor  shall provide an acceptable auxiliary system of
underground drainage to enable lot owners to drain sump pump outlets, roof
drains and similar private drainage into an approved storm sewer network. This
sump pump system may be an approved solid wall PVC pipe a minimum of eight
inches in diameter with standard structures for clean-outs.
(Res. passed 11-12-1986)
§ 1226.05 FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   The final plat should not be submitted until all streets within the
plat have been completed according to the plans and specifications as set forth
in this chapter, or until satisfactory arrangements have been made to complete
them.
      (2)   All plats submitted for final approval must be accompanied by as-
built storm sewer, water main, sanitary sewer and road elevation plans and
profile views from an accredited surveying or engineering firm bearing a
registered engineer’s seal. In instances wherein the street construction is to
be completed subsequent to plat approval, the aforesaid as-builts and plan
submittal may be deferred pending approval of the completed streets.
      (3)   These plans must be complete in all respects, must show the as-
constructed design and must equal or surpass the quality of the originally
approved plans. These plans must be submitted prior to the approval of the
final plat and bear the seal of a registered engineer.
      (4)   All utilities installed within the street right-of-way, prior to
submitting the final plat for approval, shall be shown on the revised street
plans.
      (5)   The proprietor  shall , when submitting the final plat for
approval, pay for furnishing and placing all street name, traffic control and
similar signs as determined necessary by the city. These signs shall be located
and placed by the city’s personnel.
   (b)   Performance guarantee and contract deposit.
      (1)   Any request made of the city to accept a performance guarantee
deposit in lieu of completing all street construction, prior to having the city
endorse the plat, must be confirmed in writing and must be accompanied by an
estimate of the costs of the remaining street improvements. This estimate must
be furnished by the proprietor ’s engineer. It must be complete in all
respects, including estimated quantities and unit prices, and bear the
engineer’s seal of registration. If approved by the city, this estimate will
provide the basis for the amount of performance deposit and the written
agreement. Generally, the amount of performance guarantee deposit required will
be equal to 100% of the estimate plus 15% of such estimate for contingencies.
The agreement shall be so written that any part of the performance deposit, as
required, may be used to reimburse the city for costs incurred in connection
with the examination and inspection of the plat. All maintenance, including
snow and ice removal, shall be performed by the proprietor ’s personnel until
street construction is completed and approved for acceptance by the city,
whenever a plat is approved by the city subject to a performance agreement.
      (2)   Performance deposits in the form of certified checks or irrevocable
bank letters of credit shall be made payable to the city.
      (3)   Irrevocable bank letters of credit shall be valid for a minimum
time period of six months, commencing at the approximate date the final plat is
approved by the city. (See attached sample, Figure 4.)
      (4)   Whenever a plat is approved under terms of a performance agreement,
the proprietor  shall , prior to plat approval, furnish the city a copy of an
insurance certificate disclosing that the proprietor has adequate insurance to
afford protection against all claims for damage to public property and for
injuries or death to persons arising out of and during the progress of the work
until its completion. This certificate shall also incorporate a “hold harmless”
clause. Limits of insurance coverage shall be set forth in §
1226.09(b).
   (c)   Fees for plat review.
      (1)   The fee for plat review to ascertain that the provisions of the
Plat Act have been complied with, for each final plat submitted to the city for
approval, is as follows:
 
Plats without platted streets $125
Plats with platted streets    $125 (plus a charge of $0.25 per foot of lot
                              frontage on each platted street *)
*An additional fee of $50 is required in each instance when a special
agreement or contract deposit is to be executed prior to approval of the final
plat
 
      (2)   Fifty percent of the plat review fees required are to be paid at
the time of submittal of the preliminary plat. The remaining amount will be due
upon submittal of the final plat for city approval. Also, all payments for
street  name and other signs shall  be due and payable at the time of final
plat review. The cost of these signs shall be in addition to review fees and
shall be determined by the city’s DPW.
      (3)   Water main testing and chlorination testing shall be performed by
the city. Initial flushing shall be done by the contractor. A fee will be
charged to the contractor for pressure testing and chlorination testing. The
fee shall be $50 per hour for the pressure test and $150 minimum plus $0.10 per
foot of water main for the chlorination test.
(Res. passed 11-12-1986)
§ 1226.06 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   These published requirements and specifications are subject to change
without notice by the city. However, changes shall not apply to previously
approved preliminary plats.
   (b)   The city reserves the right to reject any plat which does not comply
with the requirements of Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101
through 560.293, as amended.
   (c)   Requirements and specifications not covered by this publication shall
comply with MDOT 2020 Standard Specifications for Construction, and with
subsequent editions and specifications supplemental thereto.
   (d)   Approval of the street and drainage plans shall not be construed to
mean that approval of the finished street is forthcoming or automatic.
Unforeseen circumstances may result in a re-evaluation of the original design
and require changes in construction. The city can assume no responsibility for
additional costs or claims for damage arising from such changes. However, all
reasonable precautions and efforts will be made to minimize the necessity for
such changes.
   (e)   Verbal agreements will not be recognized unless confirmed in writing.
(Res. passed 11-12-1986)
§ 1226.07 MATERIALS AND INSPECTION.
   (a)   Material requirements.
      (1)   All materials must be approved by the City Engineer or by the city.
      (2)   All materials used must equal or surpass the requirements of MDOT
Specifications.
   (b)   Inspection requirements.
      (1)   At the time the final plat is submitted for the approval of the
city, an acceptance report shall be made by the DPW Supervisor or his or her
authorized representative concerning the suitability of the streets therein as
public highways. In order to provide reliable information on which to base this
report, periodic observations and examinations will be made by the city on
subdivision projects to assure that streets are satisfactorily constructed. It
is recommended that the proprietor or his or her authorized representative
request such inspection at the completion of each major street construction
stage. Otherwise approval of the finished street  may be delayed until it can
be determined that the city’s specifications have been complied with.
      (2)   The city will require a reasonable (24-hour minimum) notice prior
to inspecting any construction stage or the finished street .
      (3)   No inspection will be provided on Sunday or on legal holidays.
      (4)   Requests for inspection will not be granted on any proposed plat
for which street and drainage plans have not been approved by the city.
(Res. passed 11-12-1986)
§ 1226.08 STREET AND DRAINAGE CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   A systematic procedure of construction must be followed to produce a
satisfactory quality of work.
   (b)   The contractor shall , at all times during his or her absence from the
job site, have, as his or her agent at the job, a competent superintendent or
foreman who thoroughly understands the plans and specifications.
   (c)   It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor to keep all traffic
off the streets until otherwise authorized by the city. Approval of the plat
and acceptance of the constructed streets shall be contingent on their
condition at the time of final inspection. In the event that any damage is done
to the streets by traffic or otherwise, all damage must be repaired before
acceptance of the finished street .
(Res. passed 11-12-1986)
§ 1226.09 LEGAL REQUIREMENTS AND SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.
   (a)   Permits.
      (1)   A permit issued by the MDOT is required for all proposed streets
intersecting state highways. Whenever the proposed subdivision is adjacent to,
or within 500 feet of, or affects drainage from or onto, a state highway right-
of-way, it is recommended that the permit office of the County Road Commission,
as agent for the MDOT, be contacted as to the appropriate procedure to follow
in applying for the necessary permit.
      (2)   A permit issued by the County Road Commission is also required for
all proposed streets intersecting or otherwise connecting with any existing
county highways. This permit must be obtained before any work is done within a
public right-of-way and is available at the aforementioned permit office. Any
work done by the contractor without notification to the County Road Commission
will be unauthorized and may be ordered removed or replaced at the proprietor
’s expense.
      (3)   A permit issued by the office of the DPW, Street Administrator, is
also required for all proposed streets intersecting or otherwise connecting
with any existing city streets. This permit must be obtained before any work is
done within the public right-of-way and is available at the aforementioned
permit office. Any work done by the contractor without notification to the DPW
will be unauthorized and may be ordered removed or replaced at the contractor’s
expense.
   (b)   Insurance.
      (1)   Prior to performing any work within any existing city road right-
of-way, the contractor shall file with the city evidence that, with respect to
the operations he or she or any of his or her subcontractors perform, he or she
carries adequate insurance satisfactory to afford protection against all claims
for damage to the public or to private property and for injuries to or death of
persons arising out of and during the progress of the work and until its
completion.
      (2)   The minimum protective liability insurance requirements are as
follows:
 
Property Damage Liability Bodily Injury Liability
Each accident $500,000    Each person   $1,000,000
Aggregate     $1,000,000  Each accident $1,000,000
 
   (c)   Public safety. The contractor shall  be responsible for the provision
of proper barricades and lighting conforming to the Michigan Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, whenever necessary for public safety. No traffic
hazards shall be left overnight on any existing city streets. If a traffic
hazard exists, the city shall have the right to correct such conditions and
bill the contractor for the cost. No subsequent work shall be approved until
such bills are paid.
(Res. passed 11-12-1986)
§ 1226.10 CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND TECHNIQUES.
   (a)   General requirements.
      (1)   Existing road ditches, county drains or watercourses shall be
properly cleaned by the proprietor ’s contractor when essential to provide
necessary drainage for the development . Such cleaning shall be as required by
the DPW.
      (2)   All fences, obstructions, brush, shrubs and roots thereof shall be
removed entirely from the right-of-way where construction connected with the
plat is performed, unless otherwise authorized by the DPW. Trees shall be
removed as directed by the DPW. Depressions left after the removal of stumps
and roots must be filled and graded to conform with the surrounding ground.
   (b)   Underground drainage structures.
      (1)   The grade and alignment of 30-inch diameter pipes or less shall not
vary more than one-fourth of an inch at any joint, and pipes greater than 30
inches in diameter shall not vary more than one-half of an inch. Batter boards
with string lines or laser or other methods approved by the DPW must be
provided for checking grade and alignment to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
      (2)   Any trench, the inside edge of which is located within three feet
from the edge of the existing or proposed pavement or the back of the curb,
shall be backfilled with an approved granular material, placed and compacted in
layers with a mechanical compactor, all as approved by the DPW.
   (c)   Right-of-way cleanup, seeding and mulching requirements.
      (1)   Cleanup shall be Class A which means that no irregularity shall
exist greater than one tenth of a foot above or below the lines as shown on the
cross-section between the curb and right-of-way line.
      (2)   Seeding and mulching shall be in accordance with MDOT
Specifications.
         A.   Seeding shall be MDOT roadside seeding, which consists of 50%
perennial rye, 50% Kentucky bluegrass and 25% creeping red fescue. Combined
seeds shall be spread at the minimum rate of 100 pounds per acre. A minimum of
240 pounds per acre of chemical fertilizer nutrients shall also be applied to
seeded areas.
         B.   Mulching shall consist of dry straw or hay spread at the rate of
two tons per acre.
(Res. passed 11-12-1986)
§ 1226.11 SURFACING AND BASE REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Cross-sections. (See Figures
1,
2 and
3, following the text of this chapter.) Testing of compaction and materials,
when required by the city, will be provided by the contractor at no expense to
the city. The contractor shall  employ a testing firm having a registered
engineer certifying the testing reports.
   (b)   Bituminous aggregate pavement with limestone base.
      (1)   Materials.
         A.   The subgrade shall be properly compacted in accordance with MDOT
2020 Standard Specifications for Construction and shall be properly drained
with tile underdrain, if required by the city. Following compaction,
immediately prior to paving, the subgrade shall be fine graded with equipment
utilizing a templated screed so that the exact crown and shape of the subgrade
surface will be positively established. A final compaction by rolling shall
immediately precede the limestone placement.
         B.   The limestone base material shall be 23-A crushed and washed. The
limestone shall be placed and graded to meet the required thickness, crown and
slope. Compaction by rolling shall immediately precede the paving. A tolerance
of one-half inch, plus or minus, will be allowed in the compacted limestone
base. Modification of materials and/or procedures shall be as approved by the
city.
         C.   A bituminous limestone bond coat must be applied between layers
of base course, and between the base course and the surface course. The type of
bond coat and rates of application will be as approved by the city.
         D.   A bituminous aggregate surface course must be according to § 4.00
of the MDOT 2020 Standard Specifications for Construction. Modifications of
materials and/or procedures shall be as approved by the city.
      (2)   Construction.
         A.   Each compacted limestone base course lift shall be laid in a
maximum of seven inches in thickness. (See cross-sections for total thickness
requirement.) Each separate course thickness shall be as approved by the city.
(See details for additional specifications.)
         B.   The base course pavement material must be according to § 4.00 of
the MDOT 2020 Standard Specifications for Construction laid at a compacted
minimum uniform depth of three inches. (Greater thicknesses are required for
some uses.) A tolerance of one-half inch, plus or minus, will be allowed in the
compacted bituminous aggregate base course. Modification of materials and/or
procedures shall be as approved by the city.
         C.   The bituminous wearing surface shall be laid at a uniform minimum
thickness of one and one-half inches. However, a tolerance of one-eighth of an
inch, plus or minus, will be allowed. (Greater thicknesses are required in some
uses.) The bituminous pavement shall be laid with equipment utilizing automatic
screed controls, unless otherwise directed by the city. (See details for
additional specifications.)
         D.   Each stage of construction shall be approved by the city’s DPW
before proceeding with the next stage.
   (c)   Bituminous aggregate pavement with semirigid bituminous base.
      (1)   Materials.
         A.   The subgrade shall be properly compacted in accordance with MDOT
2020 Standard Specifications for Construction and shall be properly drained
with tile underdrain, if required by the city. Following compaction,
immediately prior to paving, the subgrade shall be fine graded with equipment
utilizing a templated screed so that the exact crown and shape of the subgrade
surface will be positively established. A final compaction by rolling shall
immediately precede the paving.
         B.   The base course pavement material must be according to § 4.00 of
the MDOT 2020 Standard Specifications for Construction laid at a compacted
minimum uniform depth of seven and one-half inches. (Greater thicknesses are
required for some uses.) The base course shall be laid with lifts containing a
maximum thickness of five inches. A tolerance of one-half inch, plus or minus,
will be allowed in the compacted bituminous aggregate base course. Modification
of materials and/or procedures shall be as approved by the city.
         C.   A bituminous bond coat must be applied between each layer of base
course, and between the base course and the surface course. The type of bond
coat and rates of application shall be as approved by the city.
         D.   A bituminous aggregate surface course must be according to § 4.00
of the MDOT 2020 Standard Specifications for Construction. Modification of
materials and/or procedures shall be as approved by the city.
      (2)   Construction.
         A.   The compacted bituminous aggregate base shall be laid in a
minimum of two separate courses. Each separate course shall be of a thickness
approved by the city. (See details for additional specifications.)
         B.   The bituminous wearing surface shall be laid at a uniform minimum
thickness of one and one-half inches. However, a tolerance of one-eighth of an
inch, plus or minus, will be allowed. (Greater thicknesses are required in some
uses.) The bituminous pavement shall be laid with equipment utilizing automatic
screed controls, unless otherwise directed by the city. (See details for
additional specifications.)
         C.   Each stage of construction shall be approved by the city’s DPW
before proceeding with the next stage.
   (d)   Concrete pavement.
      (1)   Materials.
         A.   The concrete shall be 3,500 psi concrete according to MDOT 2020
Standard Specifications for Construction with a minimum thickness of six inches
(reinforced). (See details for additional specifications.) The mix must be
approved by the city’s DPW prior to placement.
         B.   Longitudinal lane joint tie bars may be mill bent steel deformed
one-half inch round bars, held in place by mastic or metal chairs, or 16 inches
long, one-half inch in diameter, joint dowel hook bolts fastened directly to
the forms.
         C.   Transverse expansion joint basket assembly of approved standard
plan will be required where directed.
      (2)   Construction.
         A.   The sub-base construction shall be according to § 2.11 and tested
in accordance with § 2.08 of the MDOT 2020 Standard Specifications for
Construction.
         B.   The concrete construction shall be according to § 4.14 of the
MDOT 2020 Standard Specifications for Construction. However, that part of the
prepared grade (roadbed) on which the concrete pavement is to be placed shall
not be used for hauling purposes. A tolerance of one-fourth of an inch will be
allowed in pavement thickness.
         C.   Where sawed joints are called for, their minimum depth shall be
one-fourth of the thickness of the concrete, and the maximum interval between
transverse sawed joints shall be 20 feet, unless otherwise directed by the
Engineer. Sawed joints shall be filled with an approved rubber base joint-
sealing compound, preferably hot, in two applications performed at separate
intervals as directed by the Engineer. All expansion and dummy joints in excess
of one-eighth of an inch in width must be filled with hot poured rubber-base
type joint-filling compound.
         D.   Each stage of construction must be approved by the city’s DPW
before proceeding with the next stage.
   (e)   Soil cement base pavements. This type of pavement will not be allowed
in the city for use on public streets. Any private street  constructed of this
material may  not be accepted into the public system in the future.
(Res. passed 11-12-1986)
§ 1226.12 TURN-AROUND PROVISIONS FOR DEAD-END STREETS.
   (a)   Turn-around provisions within the boundaries of the plat must be
constructed on all dead-end streets, unless otherwise directed by the city.
   (b)   On circular turn-arounds, the distance between the right-of-way line
and the back of the outside curb shall not be less than ten feet. The radii on
circular turn-arounds shall not be less than is shown in the Figures that
follow the text of this chapter.
   (c)   “T” type turn-arounds shall be constructed as shown in the Figures
that follow the text of this chapter.
   (d)   “L” type turn-arounds shall not be permitted.
(Res. passed 11-12-1986)
§ 1226.13 EASEMENTS.
   (a)   Generally. Easements shall  be provided to the owners of all utilities
in order that construction and maintenance can be facilitated without need for
condemnation of property .
   (b)   Plats and condominiums.
      (1)   Cross-lot easements. Easements for utilities running cross-lots
shall  be a minimum of 15 feet in width for utilities which are maintained and
owned by the city. These easements are to be permanent easements.
      (2)   Street easements. An easement shall  be provided continuously along
each street  line at a width of ten feet in addition to the street  right-of-
way. This easement shall run along and parallel to the street  right-of-way
line. This frontage easement shall be for the use of city utilities and public
utilities.
      (3)   All other easements. Easements provided for other than city
utilities shall  be not less than six feet in half-width.
(Res. passed 11-12-1986)
§ 1226.14 UTILITIES AND STREET LIGHTS.
   (a)   Generally. The proprietor  shall  make arrangements for the
installation of all public and other utilities required and necessary to make
his or her development  inhabitable.
   (b)   Installation of street lights and poles. The proprietor  shall
contract with a company to place street  lights and poles which meet city
standards. The installation shall be at the cost of the proprietor  or
developer while the maintenance and lighting fees shall be paid by the city.
The lights and poles shall be in place prior to the city issuing occupancy
permits or the proprietor  shall post appropriate moneys with the city to
guarantee placement of poles and lights.
   (c)   Underground installation of utilities. The proprietor  shall  have all
utilities placed underground. All three of these agencies shall have their
cables and lines in place prior to the city issuing occupancy permits. The
developer is encouraged to have cable television installed prior to
construction clean up.
(Res. passed 11-12-1986)
`FIGURE 1: BITUMINOUS AGGREGATE PAVEMENT WITH LIMESTONE BASE
 
   A.   Residential use - 13 feet six inches for one-half street width
   B.   Commercial and light industrial uses - 15 feet zero inches for one-half
street width
   C.   Heavy industrial uses - 15 feet zero inches for one-half street width
Residential uses                     Stone base shall be 7 inches compacted
                                     thickness
                                     Bituminous base course shall be 3.5 inches
                                    compacted thickness (est. at 368 lbs. per
                                     sq. yd.)
                                     Bituminous finish course shall be 1.5
                                    inches compacted thickness (est. at 165
                                     lbs, per sq. yd.)
Commercial and light industrial uses Stone base shall be 13 inches compacted
                                     thickness
                                     Bituminous base course shall be 3 inches
                                    compacted thickness (est. at 315 lbs. per
                                     sq. yd.)
                                     Bituminous finish course shall be 2 inches
                                    compacted thickness (est. at 220 lbs. per
                                     sq. yd.)
Heavy industrial uses                Stone base shall be 14 inches compacted
                                     thickness
                                     Bituminous base course shall be 3.5 inches
                                    compacted thickness (est. at 368 lbs. per
                                     sq. yd.)
                                     Bituminous finish course shall be two
                                    inches thickness (est. at 220 lbs. per sq.
                                     yd.)
 
FIGURE 2: BITUMINOUS AGGREGATE PAVEMENT WITH SEMI-RIGID BITUMINOUS BASE
 
   A.   Residential uses -13 feet six inches for one-half street width
   B.   Commercial and light industrial uses -15 feet zero inches for one-half
street width
   C.   Heavy industrial uses -15 feet zero inches for one-half street width
 
                                     Bituminous base course shall  be 7.5
Residential uses                     inches compacted thickness (est. at 788
                                     lbs. per sq. yd.)
                                     Bituminous finish shall  be 1.5 inches
                                    compacted thickness (est. at 165 lbs. per
                                     sq. yd.)
                                     Bituminous base course shall  be 9 inches
Commercial and light industrial uses compacted thickness (est. at 945 lbs. per
                                     sq. yd.)
                                     Bituminous finish course shall  be 2
                                    inches compacted thickness (est. at 220
                                     lbs. per sq. yd.)
                                     Bituminous base course shall  be 11 inches
Heavy industrial uses                compacted thickness (est. at 1,155 lbs.
                                     per sq. yd.)
                                     Bituminous finish course shall  be two
                                    inches thickness (est. at 220 lbs. per sq.
                                     yd.)
 
FIGURE 3: CONCRETE PAVEMENT
 
   A.   Residential uses -13 feet six inches for one-half street width
   B.   Commercial and light industrial uses - 15 feet zero inches for one-half
street width
   C.   Heavy industrial uses - 15 feet zero inches for one-half street width
 
                               Concrete shall  be 6 inches thickness and
Residential uses               concrete shall be MDOT Grade 35P with welded
                               wire fabric #66-44
Commercial and industrial uses Shall be 7 inches thickness and concrete shall
                               be MDOT Grade 35P with welded wire fabric #66-33
Heavy industrial uses          Shall be 8 inches thickness and concrete shall
                               be MDOT Grade 35P with welded wire fabric #66-22
 
FIGURE 4
ANYBANK   MICH.
            _______________________________
            (Date Issued)
City of Grand Blanc
200 High Street
P.O. Box 846
Grand Blanc, Michigan 48439
Gentlemen:
RE:   Performance Deposit, Irrevocable Letter of Credit No. ____________,
Plat of                                     .
We hereby open our Irrevocable Letter of Credit No.                          
in your favor for the account of                              for a sum not
exceeding                             (              ) Dollars, U.S. Currency,
available by your draft at sight on                           of
                           ,                    .
All drafts drawn under this Credit must be marked “Drawn under
                       of                       ,                            ,
Letter of Credit No.                          .” Any amendment to the terms of
this Credit must be in writing over authorized signatures of this Bank.
The original Letter of Credit must be submitted to us together with any
drawings hereunder for our endorsement of any payments effected by us.
We engage with you that each draft drawn under and in compliance with the terms
of this Credit will be duly honored if presented at this office on or before .
Very truly yours,
                                                
(Bank officer and title)
(Res. passed 11-12-1986)
TITLE FOUR: ZONING
      
Chap. 1240. Zoning.
CHAPTER 1240: ZONING
Section
1240.01   Adoption by reference
§ 1240.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Grand Blanc is adopted and incorporated
as part of this code of ordinances as Appendix A of this chapter.
APPENDIX A: ZONING ORDINANCE
   
TITLE
   
PREAMBLE
   ENACTING CLAUSE
ARTICLE I: SHORT TITLE
Sec. 100   Short Title
Sec. 101   Purpose
Sec. 102(a)   Conflicting Regulations
Sec. 102(b)   Conflicting Laws
Sec. 103   Vested Rights: Effects on Projects where Significant Construction
has Begun, and Site Plans Approved Prior to Effective Date
Sec. 104   Validity and Severability Clause
Sec. 105   Repeal of Prior Ordinance
Sec. 106   Certification and Effective Date
ARTICLE II : CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS
Sec. 200   Construction of Language
Sec. 201   Definitions
ARTICLE III: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 300   Introduction
Sec. 301   Withholding of Approval
Sec. 302   Voting Place
Sec. 303   Lot Area
Sec. 304   Principal Building, Structure or Use
Sec. 305   Single Family Dwelling Design Standards
Sec. 306   Regulations on Use of Building for Dwelling
Sec. 307   Parking, Storage and Repair of Vehicles
Sec. 308   Recreational Vehicle Parking and Storage
Sec. 309   Determination of “Similar Uses”
Sec. 310   Prohibited Uses
Sec. 311   Essential Public Services
Sec. 312   Accessory Buildings
Sec. 313   Swimming Pools
Sec. 314   Waste Receptacles
Sec. 315   Fences
Sec. 316   Reception Antennas
Sec. 317   Accessory Use and Building Parking
Sec. 318   Natural Features Preservation: Woodlands
Sec. 319   Natural Features Preservation: Wetlands
Sec. 320   Natural Features Preservation: Grading, Removal and Filling of land
Sec. 321   Minimum Frontage on Public Street
Sec. 322   Calculation of (Buildable) Lot Area
Sec. 323   Exterior Lighting
Sec. 324   Entrance Features
Sec. 325   Building Grades
Sec. 326   Excavation or Holes
Sec. 327   Buildings to be Moved
Sec. 328   Requirements for Impact Assessment
Sec. 329   Minimum Contents of Traffic Impact Study
Sec. 330   Clear Vision Zone
Sec. 331   Access Through Yards
Sec. 332   Temporary Uses and Seasonal or Special Events Sales
Sec. 333   Maintenance of Commonly Owned Private Facilities
Sec. 334   Review, Construction and Maintenance of Wireless Communication
Facilities
ARTICLE IV: ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
Sec. 400   Districts Established
Sec. 401   District Boundaries
Sec. 402   District Boundaries Interpreted
Sec. 403   Zoning of Annexed Areas
Sec. 404   Zoning of Vacated Areas
Sec. 405   District Requirements
ARTICLE V: R-1 THROUGH R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Sec. 500   Intent
Sec. 501   Permitted Uses
Sec. 502   Accessory Home Occupations
Sec. 503   Special Land Uses
Sec. 504   Required Conditions
Sec. 505   Additional Site Development Standards
ARTICLE VI: R-T TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Sec. 600   Intent
Sec. 601   Permitted Uses
Sec. 602   Special Land Uses
Sec. 603   Additional Site Development Standards
ARTICLE VII: MH MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICTS
Sec. 700   Intent
Sec. 701   Principal Permitted Uses
Sec. 702   Mobile Home Park Required Conditions Standards
ARTICLE VIII: LDMF AND HDMF MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
(Amended 2-14-1996)
Sec. 800   Intent
Sec. 801   Permitted Uses
Sec. 802   Special Land Uses
Sec. 803   Additional Site Development Standards
ARTICLE IX: OS-1 OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICTS
Sec. 900   Intent
Sec. 901   Permitted Uses
Sec. 902   Special Land Uses
Sec. 903   Required Conditions
Sec. 904   Additional Site Development Standards
ARTICLE X: CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Sec. 1000   Intent
Sec. 1001   Permitted and Special Land Uses
Sec. 1002   Required Conditions
Sec. 1003   Additional Site Development Standards
ARTICLE XI: B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Sec. 1100   Intent
Sec. 1101   Permitted Uses
Sec. 1102   Special Land Uses
Sec. 1103   Required Conditions
Sec. 1104   Additional Site Development Standards
ARTICLE XII: B-2 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Sec. 1200   Intent
Sec. 1201   Permitted Uses
Sec. 1202   Special Land Uses
Sec. 1203   Required Conditions
Sec. 1204   Additional Site Development Standards
ARTICLE XIII: B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Sec. 1300   Intent
Sec. 1301   Permitted Uses
Sec. 1302   Special Land Uses
Sec. 1303   Additional Site Development Standards
ARTICLE XIV: R-P RESEARCH PARK DISTRICTS
Sec. 1400   Intent
Sec. 1401   Permitted Uses
Sec. 1402   Special Land Uses
Sec. 1403   Additional Site Development Standards
ARTICLE XV: I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Sec. 1500   Intent
Sec. 1501   Permitted Uses
Sec. 1502   Special Land Uses
Sec. 1503   Additional Site Development Standards
ARTICLE XVI: I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Sec. 1600   Intent
Sec. 1601   Permitted Uses
Sec. 1602   Special Land Uses
Sec. 1603   Additional Site Development Standards
ARTICLE XVII: P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICTS
Sec. 1700   Intent
Sec. 1701   Permitted Uses
Sec. 1702   Required Conditions
Sec. 1703   Minimum Distances and Setbacks
Sec. 1704   Additional Site Development Standards
ARTICLE XVIII: (PUD) PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
Sec. 1801   Intent
Sec. 1802   Definitions
Sec. 1803   Eligibility
Sec. 1804   Submittal and Approval Process
Sec. 1805   Mixed Use Design and Review Standards
Sec. 1806   Open Space /Residential Design and Review Standards
Sec. 1807   Appeals, Violations, Variances and Expiration
ARTICLE XIX: (PRD) PUBLIC RECREATION DISTRICT
Sec. 1900   Intent
Sec. 1901   Permitted Uses
Sec. 1902   Special Land Uses
Sec. 1903   Uses Not Permitted
Sec. 1904   Required Conditions
Sec. 1905   Additional Site Development Standards
ARTICLE XX: SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
Principal Buildings: Residential Districts - Schedule of Regulations
Principal Buildings:Non-Residential and PUD Districts - Schedule of Regulations
Central Business District Building Setbacks
Sec. 2000   Averaged Lot Size Option
Sec. 2001   Subdivision Open Space Option
ARTICLE XXI: SPECIAL LAND USES
Sec. 2100   Intent
Sec. 2101   Application, Review and Approval Procedures
Sec. 2102   General Review Standards for All Special Land Uses
Sec. 2103   Conditions of Approval
Sec. 2104   Validity of Permit
Sec. 2105   Inspections
Sec. 2106   Revocation
Sec. 2107   Amendments to Special Land Use Permits
Sec. 2108   Special Land Use Expansions
Sec. 2109   Restrictions on Resubmittal of a Special Land Use Permit
Sec. 2110   Special Land Use Specific Requirements
ARTICLE XXII: PARKING AND LOADING
Sec. 2200   Off-Street Parking Requirements
Sec. 2201   Parking Units of Measurement
Sec. 2202   Stacking Space Requirements
Sec. 2203   Barrier Free Parking Requirements
Sec. 2204   Off-Street Parking Space Layout, Standards, Construction and
Maintenance
Sec. 2205   Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Sec. 2206   Restrictions of the Use of Parking Lots
ARTICLE XXIII: LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
Sec. 2300   Intent
Sec. 2301   Requirements and Timing of Landscaping
Sec. 2302   Special Provisions for Existing Sites
Sec. 2303   Required Landscaping along Public Streets
Sec. 2304   Interior Landscaping
Sec. 2305   Parking Lot  Landscaping
Sec. 2306   Waste Receptacle and Mechanical Equipment Screening
Sec. 2307   Plant Materials and Minimum Spacing
Sec. 2308   General Layout and Design Standards
Sec. 2309   Incentives to Preserve Existing Trees
Sec. 2310   Walls and Buffer Strips between Land Uses
Sec. 2311   Waiver or Modification of Standards for Special Situations
ARTICLE XXIV: SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL
Sec. 2400   Intent
Sec. 2401   Relationship to Platting and Land Divisions or Combinations
Sec. 2402   Uses Requiring Site Plan Review
Sec. 2403   Projects Eligible for Sketch Plan Review (i.e., Administrative
Approval)
Sec. 2404   Exceptions to Site Plan Review
Sec. 2405   Criteria of Site Plan Review
Sec. 2406   Application for Site Plan Review
Sec. 2407   Environmental Impact Assessment
Sec. 2408   Performance Guarantee
Sec. 2409   Building Permits
Sec. 2410   Recorded and As-Built Condominium Documents
Sec. 2411   Effect of Approval
Sec. 2412   Amendment of Site Plan
Sec. 2413   Revocation
Sec. 2414   Property Maintenance After Approval
ARTICLE XXV: RESERVED
ARTICLE XXVI : NONCONFORMING LOTS, NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND, NONCONFORMING
STRUCTURES AND NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES
Sec. 2600   Intent
Sec. 2601   Definitions
Sec. 2602   Nonconforming Lots
Sec. 2603   Nonconforming Use of Land
Sec. 2604   Nonconforming Structures
Sec. 2605   Nonconforming Uses of Structures and Land
Sec. 2606   Nonconforming Sites
Sec. 2607   Repairs and Maintenance
Sec. 2608   Uses Under Exception Provisions Not Nonconforming Uses
Sec. 2609   Change of Tenancy or Ownership
Sec. 2610   Acquisition of Nonconforming Uses
ARTICLE XXVII: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 2700   Enforcement
Sec. 2701   Duties of Building and Zoning Administrator
Sec. 2702   Plot Plan
Sec. 2703   Permits
Sec. 2704   Certificates
Sec. 2705   Final Inspection
Sec. 2706   Fees
Sec. 2707   Violations
Sec. 2708   Public Nuisance Per Se
Sec. 2709   Fines, Imprisonment
Sec. 2710   Each Day a Separate Offense
Sec. 2711   Rights and Remedies are Cumulative
ARTICLE XXVIII: ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
Sec. 2800   Initiation of Amendments
Sec. 2801   Application Procedure
Sec. 2802   Amendment Procedure; Public Hearing and Notice
Sec. 2803   Amendments Required to Conform to Court Decree
Sec. 2804   Criteria for Amendment of the Official Zoning Map
Sec. 2805   Criteria for Amendment to the Zoning Ordinance Text
Sec. 2806   Restrictions on Resubmittal of a Rezoning Request
ARTICLE XXIX: BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Sec. 2900   Creation and Membership
Sec. 2901   Meetings
Sec. 2902   Appeal
Sec. 2903   Jurisdiction
Sec. 2904   Standards for Variances and Appeals
Sec. 2905   Orders
Sec. 2906   Notice
Sec. 2907   Miscellaneous
ZONING ORDINANCE
CITY OF GRAND BLANC
GENESEE COUNTY, MICHIGAN
TITLE
An ORDINANCE enacted under Public Act 207 of 1921, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.581
through 125.590, and as amended, M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 et seq., governing the
incorporated portions of the City of Grand Blanc, Genesee County, Michigan, to
regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures and land
for trade, industry, residence  and for public and semi-public or other
specified uses; and to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings and
other structures; to regulate and to determine the size of yards, courts, and
open spaces; to regulate and limit the density of population; and for said
purposes, to divide the municipality  into districts and establishing the
boundaries thereof; providing for changes in the regulations, restrictions and
boundaries of such districts; defining certain terms used herein; providing for
enforcement; establishing a Board of (Zoning) Appeals; and imposing penalties
for the violation of this Ordinance.
PREAMBLE
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Public Acts of the State of Michigan
in such case, made and provided and for the purpose of promoting and protecting
the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience, and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Grand Blanc, by protecting and
conserving the character and social and economic stability of the residential,
commercial, industrial and other use areas; by securing the most appropriate
use of land; preventing overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of
population; providing adequate light, air, and reasonable access ; and
facilitating adequate and economical provision of transportation, water,
sewers, schools, recreation, and other public requirements, and by other means,
all in accordance with a comprehensive plan. It is further the intent of this
Ordinance publication to include all uses, special approval uses, and
procedures to be permitted in the City of Grand Blanc. Any land use not listed
in this Ordinance is not permitted unless determined to be a similar use
following the procedure described in
Article III, General Provisions.
ENACTING CLAUSE
The City of Grand Blanc Ordains:
ARTICLE I: SHORT TITLE
Section
Sec. 100   Short Title
Sec. 101   Purpose
Sec. 102   Conflicting Regulations
Sec. 103   Vested Rights: Effects on Projects where Significant Construction
has Begun, and Site Plans Approved Prior to Effective Date
Sec. 104   Validity and Severability Clause
Sec. 105   Repeal of Prior Ordinance
Sec. 106   Certification and Effective Date
SECTION 100   SHORT TITLE.
   This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the City of Grand Blanc
Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 101   PURPOSE.
This Zoning Ordinance is based on the City of Grand Blanc Master Plan adopted
by the Planning Commission which provides goals, objectives and a future land
 use map for the City. This Ordinance is intended to implement the Master Plan
by regulating the use of land , buildings and structures to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare by accomplishing the following:
   a.   Establish zoning districts and uniform regulations applicable to each
district governing the use of the land , and dimensions for building and site
development with such minimum regulations as are deemed necessary to carry out
the provisions of this Ordinance.
   b.   Accommodate and promote land uses which are compatible with the City’s
character and conserve the property values and long term stability of resident
neighborhoods, community facilities, the downtown area, commercial districts
and industrial areas.
   c.   Encourage use of the lands and natural resources in accordance with
their character and capability. The Ordinance acknowledges the importance of
these features on the long term economic climate of all uses in the City and
the overall quality of life for City residents.
   d.   Limit or prohibit improper use of land .
   e.   Reduce hazards to life and property .
   f.   Facilitate adequate and cost effective infrastructure systems, and
protect the substantial public investment in those systems, including:
transportation, sewage disposal, safe and adequate water supply, education and
recreational facilities.
   g.   Establish controls over potential conflicting land uses and uses which
may need special regulations as Special Land Uses to be compatible with
surrounding development patterns and zoning.
   h.   Promote the gradual elimination of uses, buildings and structures which
do not conform with the regulations and standards of this Ordinance.
   i.   Provide for administering this Ordinance, including resolving conflicts
with other ordinances, collection of fees, procedures for petitions, hearings
and appeals; and to provide for any other matters authorized by the City or
Village Zoning Act .
   j.   Balance the City’s right to compatible and quality development
consistent with the future land  use plan with the property owners’ right to a
reasonable rate of return on investment.
SECTION 102(a)   CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   1.   Where any provision of this Ordinance imposes either greater or lesser
restrictions, limitations, conditions, standards or requirements upon the use
of buildings, structures or land ; the height of buildings or structures; lot
coverage ; lot areas; yards , wetlands, woodlands or other open spaces; or any
other use or activity which is regulated by this Ordinance, the provision or
standard which is more restrictive or limiting shall govern.
   2.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every building and
structure  erected ; every use of any lot , building or structure established;
every structural alteration or relocation of an existing building or structure
and every enlargement of, or addition to, an existing use , building or
structure occurring after the effective date of this section shall be subject
to all regulations of this section which are applicable in the zoning district
in which such use , building or structure is located.
   3.   No setback area or lot existing at the time of adoption of this section
shall be reduced in dimensions or area below the minimum requirements set forth
herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of the section shall
meet at least the minimum requirements established herein.
4.   This Ordinance shall not abrogate or annul any easement , bylaw, master
deed , deed restriction, covenant or private agreement, except that the
regulations or provisions of this Ordinance shall govern if determined by the
Board of Zoning Appeals to be more restrictive or impose a higher standard.
5.   Uses, buildings and structures that were nonconforming under the previous
Zoning Ordinance gain no new rights through the adoption of the standards of
this Ordinance unless they become conforming or more conforming by the
regulations of this Ordinance.
(Amended 11- -2010)
SECTION 102(b)   CONFLICTING LAWS.
   1.   Uses that are contrary to or in violation of local, state or federal
law , ordinances or other regulations are prohibited.
   2.   The regulations herein established shall be the minimum regulations for
promoting and protecting the public health, safety and general welfare; any
conflicting laws of a more restrictive nature shall supersede the appropriate
provisions of this Ordinance.
(Amended 11- -2010)
SECTION 103   VESTED RIGHTS: EFFECTS ON PROJECTS WHERE SIGNIFICANT CONSTRUCTION
HAS BEGUN, AND SITE PLANS APPROVED PRIOR TO EFFECTIVE DATE.
   1.   Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require any change in the
plans, construction or designated use of any building upon which actual
construction was begun prior to the enactment of this Ordinance, provided
significant construction has lawfully begun, is being diligently carried on and
shall be completed within one (1) year of the effective date of this Zoning
Ordinance. The Board of Zoning Appeals may permit one (1) extension of up to
one (1) year.
   2.   If a lot has an approved site plan within twelve (12) months prior to
the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, such site plan  shall remain valid
if construction is begun within one (1) year and completed within two (2) years
of the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance.
   3.   If the conditions of this section are not met, the standards and
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall govern.
   4.   Except as noted above, nothing in this Ordinance should be interpreted
or construed to provide any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any
particular use , district , zoning classification of any permissible activities
therein, and they are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment,
change or modification as may be necessary for the preservation or protection
of public health, safety and welfare.
SECTION 104   VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
This Ordinance and the various components, articles, sections, subsections,
sentences and phrases are hereby declared to be severable. If any court of
competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this Ordinance to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions
of this Ordinance not specifically included in said ruling. Further, if any
court of competent jurisdiction shall declare unconstitutional or invalid the
application of any provision of this Ordinance to a particular parcel , lot ,
use , building or structure , such ruling shall not affect the application of
said provision to any other parcel , lot , use , building or structure not
specifically included in said ruling.
SECTION 105   REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCE.
The Zoning Ordinance adopted by the City of Grand Blanc, and all amendments
thereto, are hereby repealed. The repeal of the above Ordinance and its
amendments does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed, or right
accruing, accrued, or acquired, or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred prior to the time enforced, prosecuted or inflicted.
SECTION 106   CERTIFICATION AND EFFECTIVE DATE.
The Public Hearing has been held as required by the City and Village Zoning Act
(Public Act 207 of 1921, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.581 through 125.590, as
amended). The provisions of this Ordinance are hereby given immediate effect
upon publication of its summary.
Made and passed by the City Council of the City of Grand Blanc, Genesee County,
Michigan on this day of August 11, 1993.
   1.   Date of Public Hearing: June 15,1993
   2.   Date of Adoption by City Council: August 11,1993
   3.   Date of Publication: August 29,1993
   4.   Date Ordinance shall take effect: August 31,1993
ARTICLE II: CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS
Section
Sec. 200   Construction of Language
Sec. 201   Definitions
SECTION 200   CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE.
The following rules of construction apply to the text of this Ordinance:
   a.   The particular shall control the general.
   b.   In case of any differences of meaning or implication between the text
of this Ordinance and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.
   c.   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word
“may” is permissive.
   d.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular,
unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
   e.   A “building” or “structure ” includes any part thereof.
   f.   The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for”, “designed for”,
“intended for”, “maintained for”, or “occupied for”.
   g.   The word “person” includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership,
an incorporated association, or any other similar entity.
   h.   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation
involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the
conjunction “and”, “or”, “either...or”, the conjunction shall be interpreted as
follows:
      1.   “And” indicates that all the connected items, conditions,
provisions, or events shall apply.
      2.   “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or
events may apply singly or in any combination.
      3.   “Either...or” indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination.
   i.   The phrase “such as” shall mean “such as, but not limited to.”
   j.   The word “including” shall mean “including, but not limited to.”
   k.   Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to
them.
   l.   The words “abutting or adjacent” shall not include lots separated   by
streets or   roadways.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
SECTION 201   DEFINITIONS.
Whenever used in these Zoning Regulations, the following words and phrases
shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section:
Accessory use, building, or structure: A use , building, or structure  which is
clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, subordinate to,
and is located on the same zoning lot  as the principal use  to which it is
exclusively related and is devoted exclusively to an accessory use .
Accessory use or accessory: A use  which is clearly incidental to, customarily
found in connection with, and (except in the case of accessory off-street
parking spaces  or loading ) located on the same zoning lot  as the principal
use  to which it is related. When “accessory” is used in this text, it shall
have the same meaning as accessory use . Accessory use  includes, but it is not
limited to uses such as those that follow:
   a.   Residential accommodations for servants and/or caretakers within the
principal building .
   b.   Swimming pools for the use of the occupants of a residence , or their
guests.
   c.   Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool room , or
similar accessory building or other structure .
   d.   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with a
business or industrial use , unless such storage is excluded in the applicable
district regulations.
   e.   Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses or related
activities, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district
regulations.
   f.   Accessory off-street parking spaces , open or enclosed, subject to the
accessory off-street parking regulations for the district in which the zoning
lot is located.
   g.   Uses clearly incidental to a principal use such as offices of an
industrial or commercial complex located on the site of the commercial or
industrial complex.
   h.   Accessory signs, subject to the City Sign Ordinance for the district in
which the zoning lot is located.
Act: The term “Act” or “doing of an act” includes “omission to act” and for the
purpose of this Ordinance does not include legislation.
Adult foster care facility: A residential structure  licensed to provide room ,
board and supervised care, but not continuous nursing care, for unrelated
adults over the age of 17, in accordance with Public Act 218 of 1979, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 400.701 et seq., as amended, and the Adult Foster Care
Administrative Rules as administered by the Michigan Department of Social
Services, being Mich. Admin. Code, R 400.1401 et seq. The following four (4)
types of Adult Foster Care Homes are provided for by these rules:
   a.   Adult Foster Care Home: Private residence  for six (6) or fewer adults.
Licensee must live in the home, and local zoning approval is not required prior
to issuance of a license.
   b.   Adult Foster Care Small Group Homes: Residence for twelve (12) or fewer
adults. Licensee is not required to live in the home. Local zoning approval is
required prior to issuance of a license only if seven (7) or more residents
will live in the home.
   c.   Adult Foster Care Large Group Family: Residence for thirteen (13) to
twenty (20) adults. Licensee is not required to live in the home. Local zoning
approval is required   prior to issuance of a license.
   d.   Congregate Care Facility: See “Housing for the Elderly .”
Adult day care: A facility which provides care for over twelve (12) adults for
less than 24 hours.
Adult regulated uses: As used in these Zoning Regulations, the following
definitions shall  apply to adult regulated uses:
   a.   Adult physical culture establishment: Any establishment, club , or
business by whatever name designated, which offers or advertises, or is
equipped or arranged so as to provide as part of its services, massages, body
rubs, alcohol rubs, physical stimulation, baths, or other similar treatment by
any person . The following uses shall not be included within the definition of
an adult physical culture establishment:
      1.   establishments which routinely provide such services by a licensed
physician, a licensed chiropractor, a licensed osteopath, a licensed physical
therapist, a licensed practical nurse, or any other similarly licensed medical
professional;
      2.   electrolysis treatment by a licensed operator of electrolysis
equipment;
      3.   continuing instruction in martial or performing arts, or in
organized athletic activities;
      4.   hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics, or medical offices;
      5.   barber shops or beauty parlors and salons which offer massages to
the scalp, the face, the neck or shoulders only;
      6.   adult photography studios whose principal business does not include
the taking of photographs of specified human anatomical areas; and
      7.   a masseuse licensed by the State of Michigan and not engaged in
massaging “specified anatomical areas ” or engaged in “specified sexual
activities ” as described in this section.
   b.   Adult book or supply store: An establishment having ten percent (10%)
or more of all usable interior, retail, wholesale, or warehouse  space devoted
to the distribution, display, or storage of books, magazines, and other
periodicals and/or photographs, drawings, slides, films, video tapes, recording
tapes, and/or novelty items which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual
activities ” or “specified anatomical areas ” (as defined herein), or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such
material.
   c.   Cabaret: An establishment where live entertainment is provided,
presented, permitted or performed, which performances are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on or relationship to “specified sexual activities
” or “specified anatomical areas ” (as defined herein) for observation by or
participation of patrons therein. Also, an establishment which features any of
the following: topless dancers and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers,
strippers, male and/or female impersonators or similar entertainers, topless
and/or bottomless waiters, waitresses and/or employees.
   d.   Adult motion picture theater or adult live stage performing theater: An
enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons wherein still or motion
pictures, video tapes or similar material is presented or viewed which is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to “specified sexual activities ” or “specified anatomical areas ”
(as defined herein) for observation by patrons therein. Such an establishment
is customarily not open to the public generally, but only to one or more
classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   e.   Adult model studio: Any place where models who display “specified
anatomical areas ” (as defined herein) are present to be observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons who
pay some form of consideration or gratuity. This definition shall not apply to
any accredited art school or similar educational institution.
   f.   Adult motel: A motel  wherein visual displays, graphic materials, or
activities are presented which depict, describe, or relate to “specified sexual
activities ” or “specified anatomical areas ” (as defined herein).
   g.   Adult motion picture arcade or mini motion picture theater: Any place
where motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time,
and where the images displayed depict, describe, or relate to “specified sexual
activities ” or “specified anatomical areas ” (as defined herein).
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   h.   Adult, nude, partially nude dancing: A business having as its principal
activity the live presentation of or display of nude, or partially nude, male
or female impersonator(s), dancer(s), entertainers(s), waiter(s) or waitress
(es), or employee(s) and which may  or may not feature the service of food or
beverage. For the purpose of this Ordinance, nude or partially nude shall  mean
having any or all of the “specified anatomical areas ” exposed (as defined
herein).
   i.   Massage parlor or massage establishment: A place where manipulated
massage or manipulated exercises are practiced for pay upon the human body by
anyone using mechanical, therapeutic, or bathing devices or techniques, other
than the following: a duly licensed physician, osteopath, or chiropractor; a
registered or practical nurse operating under a physician’s directions; or
registered physical or occupational therapists or speech pathologists who treat
patients referred by a licensed physician and operate only under such
physician’s direction. A massage establishment may  include, but is not limited
to, establishments commonly known as massage parlors, health spas, sauna baths,
turkish bathhouses, and steam baths. Massage establishments, as defined herein,
shall not include properly-licensed hospitals, medical clinics, or nursing
homes, or beauty salons or barber shops in which massages are administered only
to the scalp, the face, the neck or the shoulders.
   j.   Adult personal service business: A business having as a principal
activity a person  of one sex, providing personal services for a person  of the
other sex, or same sex, on an individual basis in a closed room  or a
partitioned open space . It includes but is not limited to, the following
activities and services: massage parlors, exotic rubs, modeling studios, body
painting studios, wrestling studios, individual theatrical performances. It
does not include activities performed by persons pursuant to, and in accordance
with, licenses issued to such persons by the State of Michigan.
   k.   Adult outdoor motion picture theater: A drive-in theater  used for
presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities ” or
“specified anatomical areas ” (as defined herein) for observation by patrons of
the theater . Such establishment is customarily not open to the public
generally, but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor
by reason of age.
   l.   Specified anatomical areas: Portions of the human body defined as
follows:
      1.   less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or female breast below the point immediately above the top of
the areola; and
      2.   human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   m.   Specified sexual activities: The explicit display of one or more of the
following:
      1.   human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
      2.   acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy;
      3.   fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or female breast;
Alley: Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to
abutting property , and not intended for general traffic circulation.
Alterations: Any change, addition, or modification in construction or type of
occupancy, or in the structural members of a building, such as walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may  be
referred to herein as “altered” or “reconstructed”.
Animal hospital: See Clinic, veterinary.
Apartment: See Dwelling, multiple-family.
Arcade: The use  of a building or a portion of a building for the location,
operation, and placement of six (6) or more mechanical amusement devices. For
the purposes of this definition, mechanical amusement devices shall  mean any
device, apparatus, mechanical equipment or machine operated as amusement for
required compensation. The term does not include vending machines used to
dispense foodstuffs, toys, or other products for use  and consumption.
Automobile: Unless specifically indicated otherwise, “automobile” shall  mean
any vehicle including, by way of example, cars, trucks, vans, motorcycles, and
the like.
Automobile or Vehicle Dealership: A building or premises  used primarily for
the sale of new and used automobiles and other motor vehicles to include
outside storage of vehicles.
Auto repair, major: An automotive repair establishment which may  conduct
activities defined herein as “minor repairs” and one or more of the following:
general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor
vehicles, collision service, such as body, frame, or fender straightening and
repair; overall painting and undercoating of automobiles, major overhauling of
engine requiring removal of cylinder-head or crank casepan, recapping or
retreading of tires, steam cleaning and similar activities.
Automobile service center (minor maintenance and repair): A building or
premises  used primarily to provide general maintenance on automobiles such as
oil changes and lubrication; servicing and repair of spark plugs, batteries,
pumps, belts, hoses, air filters, windshield wipers and distributors;
replacement of mufflers and exhaust systems, brakes and shock absorbers;
radiator cleaning and flushing; sale and installation of automobile accessories
such as tires, radios and air conditioners; wheel alignment, balancing and
undercoating; but excluding tire recapping or grooving or any major mechanical
repairs, collision work, or painting. An automobile service center may  also
sell gasoline, but is distinct from an automobile service station (i.e. gas
station without repair).
Automobile service (gasoline) station: An establishment which includes
buildings and premises  for the primary purpose of retail sales of gasoline. An
auto service station may  also include an area devoted to sales of automotive
items and convenience goods primarily sold to patrons purchasing gasoline.
Automobile or vehicle dealership: A building or premises  used primarily for
the sale of new and/or used automobiles and other motor vehicles to include
outside storage of vehicles.
Automobile wash: Any building or structure  or portion thereof either as a
principal or accessory use  containing facilities for washing motor vehicles
using production line methods with a conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device or
other mechanical washing devices; and shall  also include coin and attendant
operated drive-through , automatic self-serve, track mounted units and similar
high volume washing establishments, but shall not include hand washing
operations.
Basement: That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade ,
but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor
is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade  to the ceiling.
This definition shall not apply to earth-bermed or earth-sheltered homes. A
basement shall not be counted as a story .
Bedroom: A room  designed or used in whole or in part for sleeping purposes.
Bed-and-breakfast: A single family  dwelling which is owner  occupied  in which
overnight accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests for
compensation, often including provisions for a morning meal for overnight
guests.
Block: The property  abutting one side of a street  and lying between the two
nearest intersecting street s, (crossing or terminating) or between the nearest
such street  and railroad right-of-way , unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or
live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the
continuity of development , or corporate boundary lines of the municipality .
Board of Appeals: The Board of (Zoning) Appeals of the City of Grand Blanc.
Buildable area: The space remaining on a lot  after compliance with the minimum
required setbacks of the Ordinance.
Building: Any structure , either temporary or permanent, having a roof
supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or property  of any kind. A building shall  include
tents, awnings, semi-trailers, or vehicles situated on a parcel  and used for
the purposes of a building. A building shall not include such structures as
signs, fences or smokestacks, but shall include structures such as storage
tanks, coal bunkers, oil cracking towers, or similar structures.
Building envelope: The area of a lot  which is defined by the minimum setback
requirements within which building construction is permitted by the terms of
these Zoning Regulations.
Building height:  The ve rtical distance measured from the established grade
of the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs; to the deck line of
mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip
and gambrel roofs.
Building line: A line formed by parallel to the face of the building, and for
the purposes of this Ordinance, a minimum building line is the same as a front
setback  line.
Building, main or principal: A building, or where the context so indicates, a
group of buildings in which is conducted the main or principal use  of the lot
on which said building is situated.
Building and Zoning Administrator: The City Official(s) designated by the City
Council  to administer and enforce the City Zoning Ordinance of the City or his
or her designee.
Bulk: The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings and
structures and the location of same with respect to one another, including
standards for the height and area of buildings; the location of exterior walls
in relation to lot lines , streets, and other buildings; gross floor area of
buildings in relation to Lot Area ; open space ; and, the amount of lot area
required for each dwelling unit .
Caliper: The diameter measured at four and one-half (4.5) feet above the
natural grade  for existing trees; twelve (12) inches above the average
surrounding grade  for new trees over four (4) inches in caliper and six (6)
inches above the average surrounding grade  for trees less than four (4) inches
in caliper.
Care organization: A facility for the care of children under 18 years of age,
as licensed and regulated by the State  under Public Act 116 of 1973, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 722.111 through 722.128 and Public Act 218 of 1979 and the
associated rules promulgated by the State Department of Social Services. Such
organizations shall  be further defined as follows:
   a.   Child care center or Day care center: A facility other than a private
residence , receiving more than one (1) preschool or school age children for
group day care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, and where
the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child. It
includes a facility which provides care for not less than two (2) consecutive
weeks, regardless of the number  of hours of care per day.
(Amended 2-14-1996; Ord. 2211-02, passed 12-14-2022)
   The facility is generally described as a child care center, day care center,
day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, play group, or drop-
in center. “Child care center” or “day care center” does not include 1) a
Sunday school, a vacation bible school or a religious instructional class that
is conducted by a religious institution or a facility operated by a religious
organization where children are in attendance for not more than three (3) hours
per day for an indefinite period or not more than eight (8) hours per day for a
period not to exceed four (4) weeks during a twelve (12) month period; or 2) a
facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared for not
more than three (3) hours while persons responsible for such children are
attending religious services.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   b.   Family foster care or family home: A private home in which one (1) but
not more than four (4) minor children, who are not related to an adult member
of the household by blood, marriage, or adoption, are given care and
supervision for twenty-four (24) hours a day, for four (4) or more days a week,
for two (2) or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal
guardian.
   c.   Group foster care or family group home: A private home licensed by the
Michigan Department of Social Services in which more than four (4) but less
than seven (7) children, who are not related to an adult member of the
household by blood, marriage, or adoption, are provided care for twenty-four
(24) hours a day, for four (4) or more days a week, for two (2) or more
consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
   d.   Family day care home: A private home in which one (1) but less than
seven (7) minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of
less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal
guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family  by blood,
marriage, or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child
for more than (4) weeks during a calendar  year.
      Increased capacity: If authorized by the State , a family  day care home
may  be granted one (1) additional child (for a maximum of 7), and a group day
care home  may be granted up to two (2) additional children (for a maximum of
14).
(Ord. 2211-02, passed 12-14-2022)
   e.   Group day care home: A private home in which more than six (6) but not
more than twelve (12) children are given care and supervision for periods of
less than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian
except children related to an adult member of the family  by blood, marriage,
or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more
than four (4) weeks during a calendar  year.
Cemetery: Land  used or intended to be used for burial of the human dead
including columbariums, crematories, and mausoleums and dedicated for such
purposes.
Church (mosque or temple, etc.): Any structure  wherein persons regularly
assemble for religious activity.
City Council: The governing body of the City of Grand Blanc, Michigan.
Clinic, medical: A place for the care, diagnosis, and treatment of sick or
injured persons and those in need of medical or minor surgical attention. A
clinic may  incorporate laboratories and pharmacies, but shall not include
facilities for in-patient care or major surgery.
Clinic, veterinary: An institution which is licensed by the Michigan Department
of Health to provide for the care, diagnosis and treatment of animals,
including those in need of medical or surgical attention.
Club, private or fraternal organization and lodge halls: An organization of
persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, sciences,
literature, politics, or the like, but not operated for profit or to espouse
beliefs or further activity that is not in conformance with the Constitution of
the United States or any laws or ordinances. The facilities owned or used by
such organization may  be referred to as a “club” in these Zoning Regulations.
Commercial use: The use  of property  for retail sales or similar businesses
where goods or services are sold or provided directly to the consumer. As used
in these Zoning Regulations “commercial use” shall not include industrial,
manufacturing, or wholesale activities.
Commercial vehicle: Any vehicle possessing commercial license plates and which
falls into one or more of the categories listed below:
   a.   truck tractor;
   b.   semi trailer , which shall include flat beds, stake beds, roll-off
containers, tanker bodies, dump bodies and full or partial box-type enclosures;
   c.   vending trucks, such as ice cream, milk, bread, fruit or vending supply
trucks;
   d.   tow trucks;
   e.   commercial hauling trucks;
   f.   vehicle repair service trucks;
   g.   snow plowing trucks;
   h.   any vehicle with a commercial license plate having a gross vehicle
weight in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or a total length in excess of
twenty-two (22) feet.
Condominium: A condominium is a system of separate ownership of individual
units and/or multi-unit projects according to Public Act 59 of 1978, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 through 559.272, as amended. In addition to the interest
acquired in a particular unit, each unit owner  is also a tenant  in common in
the underlying fee and in the spaces and building parts used in common by all
the unit owners. For the purposes of these Zoning Regulations, condominium
terms shall  be defined as follows:
   a.   Condominium act: Shall mean Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§
559.101 through 559.272, as amended.
   b.   Condominium lot: That portion of the land  area of a site condominium
project  designed as the building envelope  and intended to function similar to
a platted subdivision lot  for purposes of determining minimum yard  setback
requirements and other requirements set forth in the Schedule of Regulations of
these Zoning Regulations. Setbacks for the building envelope  shall  be
measured beginning at a point perpendicular to the edge of the pavement of the
access road, private road , or public road. The setback  shall include a
distance of fifteen (15) feet from the edge of the pavement plus the required
setback  as stated in the Schedule of Regulations of this Ordinance.
   c.   Condominium subdivision plan: Drawings and information which show the
size, location, area, and boundaries of each condominium unit , building
locations, the nature, location, and approximate size of common elements, and
other information required by § 66 of Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §
559.166, as amended.
   d.   Condominium unit: That portion of the condominium  project designed and
intended for separate ownership and use , as described in the master deed  for
the condominium  project.
   e.   Common elements: Portions of the condominium  project other than the
condominium  units.
   f.   Contractible condominium: A condominium  project from which any portion
of the submitted land  or buildings may  be withdrawn pursuant to provisions in
the condominium  documents and in accordance with these Zoning Regulations and
the Condominium Act .
   g.   Conversion condominium: A condominium  project containing condominium
units some or all of which were occupied  before the establishment of the
condominium  project.
   h.   Convertible area: A unit or a portion of the common elements  of the
condominium  project referred to in the condominium  documents within which
additional condominium  units or general or limited common elements  may  be
created pursuant to provisions in the condominium  documents and in accordance
with these Zoning Regulations and the Condominium Act .
   i.   Expandable condominium: A condominium  project to which additional land
 may  be added pursuant to express provision in the condominium  documents and
in accordance with these Zoning Regulations and the Condominium Act .
   j.   General common elements: Common elements other than the limited common
elements, intended for the common use  of all co-owners.
   k.   Limited common elements: Portions of the common elements reserved in
the master deed  for the exclusive use  of less than all co-owners.
   l.   Master deed: The condominium  document recording the condominium
project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the
bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan .
   m.   Site condominium project: A condominium  project designed to function
in a similar manner, or as an alternative to a platted subdivision.
Congregate housing: See Housing for the elderly.
Contractor’s yard: A site on which a building  or construction contractor
stores equipment, tools, vehicles, building  materials, and other appurtenances
used in or associated with building  or construction. A contractor’s yard  may
include outdoor or indoor storage, or a combination of both.
Convalescent home: See Nursing Home.
Convenience store: A one-story , retail store that is designed and stocked to
sell primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to customers who
purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a “supermarket”).
Convenience stores are designed to attract a large volume of stop-and-go
traffic.
Curb cut (driveway): The entrance to or exit from a property  provided for
vehicular traffic to or from a public or private thoroughfare.
Cul-de-sac: See Street.
Deck: A platform, constructed of wood and attached to a house, which is
commonly used for outdoor leisure activities.
Density: The number  of dwelling units situated on or to be developed per net
or gross acre of land  excluding area devoted to public r.o.w. or easements.
For purposes of calculating maximum density, only twenty-five percent (25%) of
the acreage comprised of open water, land  within the 100 year floodplain
elevation, and/or wetlands protected by the Goemaere-Anderson Wetland
Protection Act, Public Act 203 of 1979, shall  be calculated toward the total
site acreage.
Detention basin: A man-made or natural water collector facility designed to
collect surface water in order to impede its flow and to release the water
gradually at a rate not greater than that prior to the development  of the
property , onto natural or man-made outlets.
Development: The construction of a new building or other structure  on a zoning
lot , the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot , or the use
of open land  for a new use .
District: A portion of the incorporated area of the municipality  within which
certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply
under the provisions of this Ordinance.
Drive-through: An establishment so developed that some portion of its retail or
service character is dependent upon providing a staging area and service window
specifically designed for serving motorists while in a motor vehicle with
carry-out and consumption or use  after the vehicle is removed from the
premises  (see also definitions for restaurants).
Dwelling unit: A building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one
(1) family  for residential purposes and having single cooking and bath
facilities for each. In no case shall  a travel trailer , motor home ,
automobile , tent or other portable building defined as a recreational vehicle
be considered a dwelling. In the case of mixed occupancy where a building is
occupied  in part as a dwelling unit , the part so occupied  shall be deemed a
dwelling unit  for the purposes of these Zoning Regulations.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
Dwelling, accessory apartment: A dwelling unit  that is accessory to and
typically contained within a conventional single-family  dwelling, and which is
occupied  by: (a) persons related to the occupant  of the principal residence
by blood, marriage or legal adoption, or (b) domestic servants or gratuitous
guests. An accessory apartment  commonly has its own kitchen, bath, living
area, sleeping area, and usually a separate entrance.
Dwelling, manufactured: A building or portion of a building designed for long-
term residential use  and characterized by all of the following:
   a.   The structure is produced in a factory in accordance with the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, as amended; and
   b.   The structure is designed to be transported to the site in a nearly
complete form, where it is placed on a foundation and connected to utilities;
and
   c.   The structure is designed to be used as either an independent building
or as a module to be combined with other elements to form a complete building
on the site.
   d.   A manufactured dwelling may be a mobile home , defined as a type of
manufactured housing structure , transportable in one (1) or more sections,
which is built upon a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or
without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems
contained in the structure . Recreational vehicles as described and regulated
herein shall not be considered “mobile homes”for the purposes of these Zoning
Regulations.
Dwelling, multiple-family: A building designed for and occupied  by three (3)
or more families living independently, with separate housekeeping, cooking, and
bathroom facilities for each. Examples of multiple-family dwellings units
include those commonly known as apartments, which are defined as follows:
   a.   Apartment: An apartment  is an attached dwelling unit  with party
walls, contained in a building with other apartment  units which are commonly
reached from a common stair landing or walkway. Apartments are typically rented
by the occupants. Apartment buildings often may  have a central heating system
and other central utility connections. Apartments typically do not have their
own yard  space. Apartments are also commonly known as garden apartments or
flats.
   b.   Efficiency unit: An efficiency unit is a type of multiple-family or
apartment  unit consisting of one (1) principal room , plus bathroom and
kitchen facilities, hallways, closets, and/or a dining alcove located directly
off the principal room .
   c.   Other: A building containing three (3) or more attached dwelling units
including units that are located one over the other.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
Dwelling, one-family or single-family: An independent, detached residential
dwelling designed for and used or held ready for use  by one (1) family  only.
Single-family dwellings are commonly the only principal use  on a parcel  or
lot .
Dwelling, two-family or duplex: A detached building, designed exclusively for
and occupied  by two (2) families living independently of each other, with
separate housekeeping, cooking, and bathroom facilities for each.
Dwelling unit: One or more rooms, along with bathroom and kitchen facilities,
designed as a self-contained unit for occupancy by one (1) family  for living,
cooking, and sleeping purposes.
Dwelling unit, single-family attached or townhouse: A townhouse  is an attached
single-family dwelling unit  with party walls, designed as part of a series of
three (3) or more dwellings, with its own front door which opens to the
outdoors at ground level, its own basement , and typically, with its own
utility connections and front and rear yards . Townhouses are sometimes known
as row houses.
Easement: A right-of-way  granted, but not dedicated, for limited use  of
private land  for a public or quasipublic purpose and within which the owner
of the property  shall not erect any permanent structures.
Engineer, City: The City Engineer is the person  or firm authorized to advise
the City Administration, City Council  and Planning Commission  on drainage,
grading, paving, storm water management and control, utilities, and other
related site engineering and civil engineering issues. The City Engineer may
be a consultant or an employee of the City.
Erected: Built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any
physical operations on the premises  which are required for construction,
excavation , fill, drainage, and the like, shall  be considered a part of
erection.
Essential services: The erection, construction, alteration  or maintenance by
public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface, or overhead
gas, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution system,
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires,
water towers, lift stations, iron removal facilities, wells, water mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes,
traffic signals, hydrants and similar equipment in connection herewith, but not
including buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service
by such utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety or
welfare. Essential services shall not include storage yards , cellular
telephone towers, commercial reception towers, air quality monitoring stations,
propane sales, school bus parking yards , electrical towers, sales or business
offices, or commercial buildings or activities or other similar uses.
Excavation: Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and
ground care.
Facade: The exterior wall of a building e xposed to public view.
Family: means either of the following:
   a.   A domestic family, that is, one or more persons living together and
related by the bonds of consanguinity, marriage, or adoption, together with
servants of the principal occupants and not more than one additional unrelated
person , with all of such individuals being domiciled together as a single,
domestic, housekeeping unit in a dwelling.
   b.   The functional equivalent of the domestic family, that is, persons
living together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a permanent and
distinct character and is the functional equivalent of a domestic family with a
demonstrable and recognizable bond which constitutes the functional equivalent
of the bonds which render the domestic family a cohesive unit. All persons of
the functional equivalent of the domestic family must be cooking and otherwise
operating as a single housekeeping unit. This definition shall not include any
society, club , fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, organization or group
where the common living arrangement and/or the basis for the establishment of
the functional equivalency of the domestic family is likely or contemplated to
exist for a limited or temporary duration. There shall be a rebuttable
presumption enforceable by the Building and Zoning Administrator in the first
instance that the number of persons who may reside as a functional equivalent
family shall be limited to six (6). Such presumption may be rebutted by
application for a special land use based upon the applicable standards in this
Ordinance.
Fence: A structure  of definite height and location constructed of wood,
masonry, stone, wire, metal, or any other material or combination of materials
serving as a physical barrier, marker, or enclosure, but excluding low solid
masonry walls (see also
Sec. 315).
Filling: The depositing or dumping of any matter onto or into the ground,
except as part of common household gardening or ground care.
Floor area, residential: For the purpose of computing the minimum allowable
floor area in a residential dwelling unit , the sum of the horizontal areas of
each story  of the building shall  be measured from the exterior faces of the
exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two (2) dwellings.
The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished
attics, attached garages, breezeways, and enclosed and unenclosed porches.
Floor, ground: That building portion which is partly below grade , but so
located that the vertical distance from the average grade  to the ceiling is
greater than the vertical distance from the average grade  to the floor. A
ground floor shall  be counted as a story .
Fraternal organization: See Club.
Garage, private: An accessory building  or portion of a main building  designed
or used solely for the storage of motor-driven vehicles, boats , and similar
vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is
accessory.
Garage, service: Any premises  used for the storage or care of motor-driven
vehicles, or where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, or
kept for renumeration, hire or sale.
Garden center: An establishment with retail sales of trees, fruits, vegetables,
shrubbery, plants, landscaping  supplies, lawn furniture, playground equipment
and other home garden supplies and equipment.
Gasoline service station: A place for the dispensing, sale, or offering for
sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles, together with the sale
of minor accessories and services for motor vehicles, but not including major
automobile  repair.
Grade: The ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the
number  of stories and the height of buildings. The building grade  shall  be
the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished
grade  is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade  shall be
determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the
building.
Greenbelt: A strip of land  of specified width and location reserved for the
planting  of shrubs and/or trees, along with similar plant materials, all of
which serve as an obscuring screen  or buffer strip.
Group home: See Care Organization.
Gym or gymnasium: A room  or building equipped for gymnastics, exercise or
sport.
Hazardous uses: All uses which involve the storage, sale, manufacture, or
processing of materials which are dangerous and combustible and are likely to
burn immediately, and from which either poisonous fumes or explosions are to be
anticipated in the event of fire. These uses include all high hazard uses
listed in the most recent edition of the Building Code adopted by the City.
Height of building: See Building Height.
Highway: See Street.
Home occupation: An occupation, trades, craft, profession or hobby conducted
within a dwelling where such use  is clearly incidental to the principal use
of the dwelling as a residence . Standards for permitted home occupations are
provided in Section
502.
Hospital: A facility offering 24-hour emergency, inpatient and outpatient care
and services for observation, diagnosis and active treatment of patients under
the care and supervision of physicians and professional medical staff. The term
“hospital” shall  also include medical clinics or hospitals offering care in
special fields such as eye, cardiac care, ear, nose, throat, pediatric,
orthopedic, skin, cancer, burn centers, neo-natal care, children’s hospitals
and ophthalmology centers.
Hotel: A building or part of a building, with a common entrance or entrances,
in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for transient
occupancy, and in which one or more of the following services are offered: maid
service, furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial or desk service, and
bellboy service. A hotel may  include a restaurant  or cocktail lounge, public
banquet halls, ballrooms, or meeting rooms.
Housing for the elderly: Housing constructed for the exclusive use  of an
individual fifty-five (55) years of age or older, or for a couple where at
least one (1) of the individuals is over the age of fifty-five (55). Housing
for the elderly may  include the following:
   a.   Senior apartments: Multiple-family dwelling units occupied  by persons
55 years of age or older.
   b.   Elderly housing complex: A building or group of buildings containing
dwellings where the occupancy is restricted to persons 60 years of age or older
or couples where either the husband or wife is 60 years of age or older.
   c.   Congregate housing: A type of semi-independent housing facility for
more than twenty (20) adults containing congregate kitchen, dining, and living
areas, but with separate sleeping rooms. Such facilities typically provide
special support services, such as transportation and limited medical care.
   d.   Dependent housing facilities (nursing homes): Facilities which are
designed for older persons who need a wide range of health and support
services, including personal nursing care.
Impervious surface: A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
Indoor recreation center: An establishment which provides indoor exercise
facilities and/or indoor court sports facilities, and which may  include
spectator seating in conjunction with the sports facilities. For the purposes
of these Zoning Regulations, a bowling establishment shall  be considered a
type of indoor recreation center.
Industry, heavy: A use  engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of
materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials, or a use
engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive
materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve
hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
Industry, light: A use  engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from
previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage,
sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial
processing.
Ingress and egress: As used in these Zoning Regulations, “ingress and egress”
generally is used in reference to a driveway which allows vehicles to enter or
leave a parcel  of property , or to a sidewalk  which allows pedestrians to
enter or leave a parcel  of property , a building, or another location.
Junk: Any motor vehicles, machinery, appliances, products or merchandise with
parts missing, or other scrap materials that are damaged, deteriorated,  or are
in a condition which prevents their use  for the purpose for which the product
was manufactured.
Junk yard: An area where waste, used or second-hand materials are bought and
sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled including, but
not limited to: scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and
bottles. A “Junk Yard” includes automobile  wrecking yards  and includes any
open area of more than two hundred (200) square feet for storage, keeping or
abandonment of junk .
Kennel: Any lot  or premises  on which three (3) or more dogs, cats, or other
domestic animals six (6) months or older are kept, either permanently or
temporarily, either for sale, breeding, boarding, or training subject to the
regulations set forth herein regulating private and commercial kennels.
Laboratory: An establishment devoted to research and experimental studies,
including testing and analyzing, but not including manufacturing of any nature.
Landfill: A tract of land  that is used to collect and dispose of “solid waste”
as defined and regulated in Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.101
through 324.90106. See M.C.L.A. § 324.11506, as amended.
Landscaping: The treatment of the ground surface with live plant materials such
as, but not limited to, grass , ground cover , trees, shrubs, vines, and other
live plant material. In addition, a landscape design may  include other
decorative man-made materials, such as wood chips, crushed stone, boulders, or
mulch . Structural features such as fountains, pools, statues, and benches
shall  also be considered a part of landscaping, but only if provided in
combination with live plant material. Artificial plant materials shall not be
counted toward meeting the requirements for landscaping. Various landscaping
related terms are defined as follows:
   a.   Berm: A continuous, raised earthen mound comprised of non-toxic
materials with a flattened top and sloped sides, capable of supporting live
landscaping  materials, and with a height and width that complies with the
requirements of these Zoning Regulations.
   b.   Grass: Any of a family  of plants with narrow leaves normally grown as
permanent lawns in Genesee County, Michigan.
   c.   Greenbelt: A strip of land  of definite width and location reserved for
the planting  of a combination of shrubs, trees, and ground cover  to serve as
an obscuring screen  or buffer for noise or visual enhancement, in accordance
with the requirements of these Zoning Regulations.
   d.   Ground cover: Low-growing plants that form a dense, extensive growth
after one complete growing season, and tend to prevent weeds and soil erosion.
   e.   Hedge: A row of closely planted shrubs or low-growing trees which
commonly form a continuous visual screen , boundary, or fence .
   f.   Hydro-Seeding: A method of planting grass  where a mixture of the seed,
water, and mulch  is mechanically sprayed over the surface of the ground.
   g.   Interior or parking lot landscaping : A landscaped area located in the
interior of a site or parking lot in such a manner as to improve the safety of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic, guide traffic movement and improve the
appearance of the site.
   h.   Mulch: A layer of wood chips, dry leaves, straw, hay, plastic, or other
materials placed on the surface of the soil around plants to retain moisture,
prevent weeds from growing, hold the soil in place, or aid plant growth.
   i.   Nurse grass: Any of a variety of rapidly-growing annual or perennial
rye grass es used to quickly establish ground cover  to prevent dust or soil
erosion.
   j.   Planting: A young tree , vine or shrub  that would be placed on or in
the ground.
   k.   Screen or screening: A wall, wood fencing, or combination of plantings
of sufficient height, length, and opacity to form a visual barrier. If the
screen  is composed of non-living material, such material shall  be compatible
with materials used in construction of the main building , but in no case shall
include wire fencing.
   l.   Shrub: A self-supporting, deciduous or evergreen woody plant, normally
branched near the base, bushy, and less than fifteen (15) feet in height.
   m.   Sod: An area of grass -covered surface soil held together by matted
roots.
   n.   Tree: A self-supporting woody, deciduous or evergreen plant with a
well-defined central trunk or stem which normally grows to a mature height of
fifteen (15) feet or more in Genesee County, Michigan.
      1.   Deciduous Tree: A variety of tree that has foliage that is shed at
the end of the growing season.
      2.   Evergreen Tree: A variety of tree that has foliage that persists and
remains green throughout the year.
   o.   Ornamental tree: A deciduous tree which is typically grown because of
its shape, flowering characteristics, or other attractive features, and which
grows to a mature height of twenty-five (25) feet or less.
Loading space: An off-street space  on the same lot  with a building, or group
of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle  while loading
and unloading merchandise or materials.
Lot: A parcel  of land  occupied , or intended to be occupied , by a main
building  or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for
the principal use  and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards  and
open spaces as are required under the provisions of this Ordinance. A lot may
or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. A lot shall
have frontage on a dedicated road or, if permitted by the regulations set forth
herein, on an approved private road . A lot may consist of:
   a.   A single Lot of Record .
   b.   A portion of a Lot of Record .
   c.   A combination of complete Lots of Record, or portion thereof.
   d.   A condominium lot .
   e.   A piece of land described by metes and bounds.
Lot Area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines  of the lot exclusive
of any abutting public street  right-of-way  or private road  easements, or the
area of any lake. The net lot area shall  be used in determining compliance
with Minimum Lot Area standards.
Lot, contiguous: Lots adjoining each other.
Lot, corner: A lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the
intersection of two streets is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
A lot abutting upon a curved street  or streets shall  be considered a corner
lot  for the purposes of this Ordinance if the arc is of less radius than one
hundred fifty (150) feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two (2) points
where the lot lines  meet the curve or the straight street line  extended, form
an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Lot coverage: The part or percent of the lot occupied  by a building including
accessory buildings.
Lot depth: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines ,
measured along the median between the side lot lines .
Lot, flag: A lot which is located behind other parcels or lots fronting on a
public road, but which has a narrow extension to provide access to the public
road.
Lot, interior: Any lot other than a corner lot .
Lot lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein:
   a.   Front lot line: In the case of an interior lot , is the that line
separating said lot from the street . In the case of a through or corner lot ,
is that line separating said lot from either street .
   b.   Rear lot line: That lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case
of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line for purposes of measuring
setbacks shall  be along all lines on the opposite side of the lot from the
front lot line as determined by the Building and Zoning Administrator .
   c.   Side lot line: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot
line. A lot line separating the “side” of a structure  from a street  is a
front lot line (i.e. corner lots have two front lot lines). A side lot line
separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line.
Lot, through: Any interior lot  having frontage on two (2), more or less,
parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot . In the case of a row of
double frontage lots, all yards  of said lots adjacent to streets shall  be
considered frontage, and front yard  setbacks shall be provided as required.
Lot of Record: A parcel  of land , the dimensions of which are shown on a
document or map on file with the County  Register of Deeds or in common use  by
Municipal or County  Officials, and which actually exists as so shown, or any
part of such parcel  held in a record ownership separate from that of the
remainder thereof.
Lot width: The horizontal straight line distance between the side lot lines ,
measured between the two (2) points where the front setback  line intersects
the side lot lines .
Lot, zoning: A single tract of land , located within a single block , which at
the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner  or
developer  as  a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under
single ownership or control.
A zoning lot  shall satisfy this Ordinance with respect to area, size,
dimensions, and frontage as required in the district in which the zoning lot is
located. A zoning lot , therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record as
filed with the County Register of Deeds, but may include one (1) or more lots
of record.
Manufactured home: A dwelling unit  which is designed for long-term residential
use  and is wholly or substantially constructed at an off-site location.
Master plan: The Comprehensive Community Plan adopted by the Planning
Commission  including graphic and written proposals indicating the general
location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings, and all physical
development  of the municipality , and includes any unit or part of such plan,
and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
Mechanical amusement device: Any machine or device, which operates as a game,
entertainment, contest of skill, or amusement of any kind, and which has the
following characteristics:
   a.   The device may be identified as a video, electronic or mechanical
device.
   b.   The device may be operated and/or initiated upon the insertion of a
coin, token, ticket, slug, plate, disc, key, or through the payment of a price.
   c.   The device and the playing thereof offers no direct or automatic payoff
or the return of money, goods, or services.
   d.   This definition does not apply to the following:
      1.   a vending machine which does not incorporate gaming or amusement
features;
      2.   musical devices or coin operated radios; or
      3.   television sets in private quarters.
Mezzanine: An intermediate floor in any story  occupying not to exceed one-
third (1/3) of the floor area of such story .
Mini-warehouse: A building or group of buildings, each of which contains
several individual storage units, each with a separate door and lock and which
can be leased on an individual basis. Mini-warehouses are typically contained
within a fenced, controlled-access compound.
Mobile home: A structure , transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is
built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit , with or without
permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and including
the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in
the structure . Mobile home does not include a trailer coach (recreational
vehicle ).
Mobile home sales: A person , other than a manufacturer, engaged in the
business of buying, selling, exchanging, leasing, or renting mobile homes.
Mobile home park: A parcel  or tract of land , under the control of a person ,
upon which three (3) or more mobile homes are located on a continual non-
recreational basis and including all appurtenances that are incidental to the
occupancy of a mobile home.
Modular home: A premanufactured unit assembled of materials or products
intended to comprise all or part of a building or structure  and is assembled
at other than the final location of the unit of the building or structures by a
repetitive process under circumstances intended to insure uniformity of quality
and material content.
Mortuary or funeral home: An establishment where the dead are prepared for
burial or cremation and where wakes or funerals may  be held.
Motel: A building or group of buildings occupied  as a more or less temporary
abiding place for individuals who are lodged with or without meals in rooms
consisting of a minimum of a bedroom  and bath, occupied  for hire, in which
provision is not usually made for cooking within the rooms, and which provides
customary motel  services such as maid service, linen service, telephone and/or
desk service, and the use  of furniture. Motels typically provide exterior
entrances and on-site parking for each unit. A motel  may  also include a
conference room  or banquet facility, an attached dining room, and/or an
unattached standard restaurant .
Natural features: Natural features shall  include soils, wetlands, floodplain,
water bodies and channels, topography, trees and other types of vegetative
cover, and geologic formations.
Nonconforming use and building: A use  and/or a building, lawfully existing at
the time of adoption of this Ordinance or any subsequent amendment hereto,
which does not conform to the use , height, bulk , placement, or yard
provisions of the zoning district  in which it is situated (see
Sec. 2601).
Nursery, plant materials: A space, building or structure , or combination
thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail
sale on the premises , including products used for gardening or landscaping .
The definition of nursery within the meaning of this Ordinance does not include
any space, building or structure  used for the sale of fruits, vegetables or
Christmas trees.
Nuisance factors: An offensive, annoying, unpleasant, or obnoxious thing or
practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating
invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use  across a property
line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of
an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as, but not
limited to: (a) noise, (b) dust, (c) smoke, (d) odor, (e) glare, (f) fumes, (g)
flashes, (h) illumination (i) vibration, (j) shock waves, (k) heat, (l)
electronic or atomic radiation, (m) objectionable effluent, (n) noise of
congregation of people, particularly at night, (o) passenger traffic, (p)
invasion of non-abutting street  frontage by traffic.
Nursing home (convalescent or rest home): A home for the care of the aged,
infirm, or those suffering from bodily disorders, wherein two (2) or more
persons are housed or lodged and furnished with nursing care.
Occupancy, change of: The term “change of occupancy” or “change of use” shall
mean a discontinuance of an existing use  and the substitution of a use  of a
similar or different kind or class, or, the expansion of a use .
Occupied: Used in any manner at the time in question.
Office: A building or portion of a building wherein services are performed
involving predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical operations.
Offset: The distance between the centerlines of driveways or streets across the
street  from one another.
Off-street loading space: A facility or space which permits the standing,
loading, or unloading of trucks and other vehicles other than on or directly
from a public right-of-way .
On-street loading space: A location within the public street  right-of-way
which has been approved by the City for the standing, loading or unloading of
trucks, vans or other vehicles.
Off-street parking lot: A facility providing vehicular parking spaces along
with adequate drives and aisles, for maneuvering, so as to provide access for
entrance and exit for the parking of more than three (3) vehicles.
On-street parking spaces: Spaces designated and signed for public parking
within the public street  right-of-way .
Open air business uses: Business and commercial uses conducted solely outside
of any building. Unless otherwise specified herein, open air business shall
include: retail sales of garden supplies and equipment, (including, but not
limited to: trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil, trellises, lawn
furniture, and Christmas trees) and outdoor sales, display or storage of
materials, goods, structures and vehicles sold on the premises .
(Amended 2-14-1996)
Open-Air Market, temporary: A temporary commercial establishment which offers
for sale locally produced fresh fruits and vegetables and other locally
produced goods on a non-permanent basis. Temporary open-air markets operate no
more than five (5) consecutive days unless a resolution by City Council  allows
for an extended period of operation. The codified ordinance for the City of
Grand Blanc contains regulations pertaining to these markets.
(Amended 6-14-2006)
Open space: Required open space shall  be on the same lot with the principal
use  and shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except for
living plant material, recreational facilities, permitted signs, sidewalks,
bikepaths, and necessary drives and utility lines, unless as otherwise provided
in this Ordinance. Where open space is required, no more than fifty percent
(50%) of the required area shall be comprised of lakes, ponds, regulated
wetlands or floodplain.
Outdoor storage: The keeping, outside of an enclosed building, of any goods,
junk , material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than 24
hours.
Outlot: A parcel  of land  which is designated as an “outlot” on the recorded
plat, and which is usually not intended to be used for the same purposes as
other lots in the plat.
Parcel: A continuous area, tract, or acreage of land  that has not been divided
or subdivided according to the provisions of the Subdivision Control Act, being
Public Act 288 of 1967, formally titled the Land Division Act and also
popularly known as the Plat Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293, and has
frontage on a public street .
Parking space: An area of definite length and width, said area shall  be
exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be
fully accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles.
Performance guarantee: A financial guarantee to ensure that all improvements,
facilities, or work required by this ordinance will be completed in compliance
with the ordinance, regulations and the approved plans and specifications of a
development .
Person: An individual, trustee, executor, fiduciary, corporation, firm,
partnership, association, organization, or other legal entity acting as a unit.
Personal fitness center: A facility which provides indoor exercise facilities,
such as exercise machines and weight-lifting equipment, usually in a structured
physical activity program supervised by professional physical fitness
instructors. As defined herein, “personal fitness center” shall not include
court sports facilities or spectator seating for sports events. A personal
fitness center may  or may not be enclosed within a gym .
Pervious surface: A surface that permits full or partial absorption of storm
water.
Pet: A domesticated dog, cat, bird, gerbil, hamster, guinea pig, turtle, fish,
rabbit, or other similar animal that is commonly available and customarily kept
for pleasure or companionship.
Pool or billiard hall: An establishment wherein the substantial or significant
portion of all useable floor area is devoted to the use  of pool or billiard
tables.
Planner, City: The City Planner is the person  or firm designated by the
Planning Commission  to advise the City Council , City Planning Commission ,
and City staff on planning, zoning, land  use, housing, and other related
planning and development  issues.
Planning Commission: The City of Grand Blanc Planning Commission.
Principal use: The main use  to which the premises  are devoted and the
principal purpose for which the premises  exist. In cases where there is more
than one use , the use  comprising the greatest floor area shall  generally be
considered the Principal Use, except in cases where a use  comprising a
secondary amount of floor area is considered to have greater impact in terms of
traffic generated, noise levels, disruption of views and similar impacts.
Property lines: The lines bounding a lot; the lot lines .
Public utility: A public corporation, franchise, municipal department, board or
commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under Federal, State  or
Municipal regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal,
telephone service (excluding cellular phone facilities), cable television
services, telegraph, transportation, or water.
Reasonable access: An access management term defined as ensuring a motorist can
enter or exit a parcel  in an uncomplicated manner that will not significantly
prevent their visiting an establishment. Reasonable access may  not always be
the most direct access, but may involve use  of a shared driveway or service
drive .
Reception antenna facility: An exterior apparatus that is capable of receiving
communication for radio or television purposes including satellite reception
antennas but excluding facilities considered to be essential public service
facilities or those preempted from township regulation by applicable state ,
FCC or other federal laws or regulations.
Recreation land: Any publicly or privately owned lot or parcel  that is
utilized for recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, camping,
swimming, picnicking, hiking, nature study, hunting, boating, and fishing.
Recreational vehicle: “Recreational Vehicles” shall  include the following:
   a.   Travel trailer: A portable vehicle on a chassis, which is designed to
be used as a temporary dwelling during travel, recreational, and vacation uses,
and which may  be identified as a “travel trailer” by the manufacturer. Travel
trailers generally include self-contained sanitary, water, and electrical
facilities.
   b.   Pickup camper: A structure  designed to be mounted on a pickup or truck
chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use  as a temporary
dwelling during the process of travel, recreational, and vacation uses.
   c.   Motor home: A recreational vehicle  intended for temporary human
habitation, sleeping, and/or eating, mounted upon a chassis with wheels and
capable of being moved from place to place under its own power. Motor homes
generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities.
   d.   Folding tent trailer: A folding structure , mounted on wheels and
designed for travel and vacation use .
   e.   Boats and boat trailers: “Boats” and “boat trailers” shall  include
boats, floats, rafts, canoes, plus the normal equipment to transport them on
the highway.
   f.   Other recreational equipment: Other recreational equipment includes
snowmobiles, jet skis, all terrain or special terrain vehicles, utility
trailers, plus the normal equipment used to transport them on the highway.
Recognizable and substantial benefit: A clear benefit, both to the ultimate
users of the property  in question and to the community, which would reasonably
be expected to accrue, taking into consideration the reasonably foreseeable
detriments of the proposed development  and uses. Such benefits may  include:
long-term protection or preservation of natural resources and natural features
, historical features, or architectural features; or, elimination of or
reduction in the degree of nonconformity in a nonconforming use  or structure .
Recycling center: A facility at which used material is separated and processed
prior to shipment to others who will use  the materials to manufacture new
products. This use is distinct from a junkyard or a salvage yard .
Recycling collection station: A facility for the collection and temporary
storage of recoverable resources, prior to shipment to a recycling center  for
processing.
Restaurant: A restaurant is any establishment whose principal business is the
sale of food and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and
whose method of operation is characteristic of a carry-out, drive-in, drive-
through , fast food, standard restaurant, or bar/lounge, or combination
thereof, as defined below:
   a.   Restaurant, carry-out: A carry-out restaurant is a business
establishment whose method of operation involves sale of food, beverages, and/
or frozen desserts in disposable or edible containers or wrappers in a ready-
to-consume state for consumption primarily off the premises .
   b.   Restaurant, drive-in: A drive-in restaurant is a business establishment
whose method of operation involves delivery of prepared food so as to allow its
consumption in a motor vehicle or elsewhere on the premises , but outside of an
enclosed building.
   c.   Restaurant, drive-through: A drive-through  restaurant is a business
establishment whose method of operation involves the delivery of the prepared
food to the customer in a motor vehicle, typically through a drive-through
window, for consumption off of the premises . Any restaurant with a drive-
through  operation, whether the principal or accessory use , shall  be defined
as a drive-through  restaurant.
   d.   Restaurant, open-front: An establishment that sells food or beverages
through a window to serve pedestrians not requiring the patron to enter the
structure . Any restaurant with an open front window shall  meet the ordinance
standards for open-front windows whether the use  is principal or accessory.
   e.   Restaurant, sit-down: A standard restaurant is a business establishment
whose method of operation involves either:
      1.   the delivery of prepared food by waiters and waitresses to customers
seated at tables within a completely enclosed building; or
      2.   the prepared food is acquired by customers at a cafeteria line and
is subsequently consumed by the customers at tables within a completely
enclosed building.
   f.   Bar/lounge/tavern : A bar or lounge is a type of restaurant  which is
operated primarily for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages, although the sale
of prepared food or snacks may  also be permitted. If a bar or lounge is part
of a larger dining facility, it shall  be defined as that part of the structure
so designated or operated.
Retention basin: A pond, pool, or basin used for the permanent storage of storm
water runoff.
Right-of-way: The strip of land  over which an easement  exists to allow
facilities such as streets, roads, highways, and power lines to be built.
Room: For the purpose of determining lot area  requirements and density  in a
multiple-family district , a room is a living room, dining room or bedroom ,
equal to at least eighty (80) square feet in area. A room shall not include the
area in kitchen, sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways
and storage. Plans presented showing one (1), two (2), or three (3) bedroom
units and including a “den”, “library”, or other extra room shall  count such
extra room as a bedroom  for the purpose of computing density .
Seasonal or special event: An occurrence or noteworthy happening of seasonal,
civic, or religious importance, which is organized and sponsored by the City of
Grand Blanc or by a non-profit Grand Blanc community group, congregation,
organization, club  or society, and which offers a distinctive service to the
community, such as public entertainment, community education, civic
celebration, or cultural or community enrichment. Special events typically run
for a short period of time (less than two (2) weeks) and are unlike the
customary or usual activities generally associated with the property  where the
special event is to be located.
Service drive: Any private road  that is generally parallel to and adjacent to
an arterial road  and that is designed to provide access to abutting properties
so that these properties are somewhat sheltered from the effects of the through
traffic on the arterial road  and so that the flow of traffic on the arterial
road  is not impeded by direct driveway access from a large number  of abutting
properties.
Semi-trailer: A trailer, which may  be enclosed or not enclosed, having wheels
generally only at the rear, and supported in front by a truck tractor or towing
vehicle.
Service truck: A pick-up truck or van that is used in conjunction with a repair
or maintenance business, such as a plumbing, electrical, or carpentry business.
Setback: Is the distance required to obtain the minimum required distance
between the front, side or rear lot lines  and the building line  or parking
lot. Setbacks from a public street  or private road  shall  be measured from
the right-of-way  line or easement . Setbacks shall remain as open space  as
defined herein, unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance. (Refer to the
Schedule of Regulations,
Article XX , for minimum setbacks.)
Shopping center: A grouping of retail businesses and service uses on a single
site with common parking facilities.
Shoreline: The line between upland and bottomland which persists through
excessive changes in water levels, below which the presence and action of the
water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land  is marked
distinctly from the upland and is apparent in the soil, the configuration of
the soil surface and the vegetation.
Sign: The use of any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs, or trademarks
by which anything is made known such as are used to show an individual, firm,
profession, or business, and are visible to the general public.
Site plan: A plan showing all salient features of a proposed development  so
that it may  be evaluated in order to determine whether or not it meets the
provisions of this Ordinance.
Special land use: Any land  use  which requires approval by the City Council
according to the standards listed in this Ordinance, and as authorized in the
City or Village Zoning Act .
Stable, commercial: A facility for the rearing and housing of horses, mules,
ponies or for riding and training academies.
Stable, private: An accessory building  incidental to an existing residential
use , that shelters horses for the exclusive use  of the occupants of the
premises  and their guests, without remuneration, hire or sale.
Street: Any public or private thoroughfare or right-of-way , other than a
public or private alley, dedicated to or designed for travel and access to any
land, lot or parcel , whether designated as a road, avenue, highway, boulevard,
drive lane, place, court, or any similar designation. Various types of roads
are defined as follows:
   a.   Private road: Any road which is to be privately maintained and has not
been accepted for maintenance by the City, Genesee County, the State of
Michigan or the federal government, but which meets the requirements of these
Zoning Regulations or has been approved as a private road by the City under any
prior ordinance.
   b.   Public street: Any road or portion of a road which has been dedicated
to and accepted for maintenance by the City, Genesee County, State of Michigan
or the federal government.
   c.   Arterial road: A road which carries high volumes of traffic and serves
as an avenue for circulation of traffic onto, out of, or around the City. An
arterial road may  also be a major thoroughfare.
   d.   Collector street: A road whose principal function is to carry traffic
between minor and local roads and arterial roads but may  also provide direct
access to abutting properties.
   e.   Cul-de-sac: A road that terminates in a vehicular turnaround.
   f.   Local or minor street: A road whose principal function is to provide
access to abutting properties and is designed to be used or is used to connect
minor and local roads with collector or arterial roads.
Story: That part of a building, except a mezzanine  as defined herein, included
between the surface of one (1) floor and the surface of the next floor, or if
there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. A basement  shall not be
counted as a story.
Story, half: An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an area of at
least two hundred (200) square feet with a clear height of seven feet six
inches (7’6”). For the purposes of this Ordinance, the usable floor area is
only that area having at least four (4) feet clear height between floor and
ceiling.
Street line (right-of-way  line): The dividing line between the street and a
lot.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected , the use  of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground. Structures include, but are not limited to, principal and accessory
buildings, towers, decks, fences, privacy screens, walls, antennae, swimming
pools, signs, gas or liquid storage facility, and a mobile home . Driveway
access drives, sidewalks, street  directional or street name sign , and
landscape improvements are not considered a structure  in regards to
restrictions on placement within setback  areas.
Structural addition: Any alteration  that changes the location of the exterior
walls or area of a building.
Subdivision plat: The division of a tract of land  for the purpose of sale or
building development , in accordance with the Subdivision Control Act, Public
Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293, formally titled the
Land Division Act and popularly known as the Plat Act and the Subdivision
Control Act, as amended, and the Grand Blanc Subdivision Control Regulations.
Substance abuse treatment facility: Any establishment used for the dispensing,
on an in-patient or outpatient basis, of compounds or prescription medicines
directly to persons having drug or alcohol abuse problems. A generally
recognized pharmacy or licensed hospital  dispensing prescription medicines
shall not be considered a substance abuse treatment facility.
Substantial improvement: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a
structure , the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the
market value of the structure  either, (1) before the improvement or repair is
started, or (2) if the structure  has been damaged and is being restored before
the damage occurred. Substantial improvement occurs when the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not the alteration  affects the external dimensions of
the structure . The term does not however include any project for improvement
of a structure  to comply with existing state  or local health, sanitary or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions of a structure  listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
Swimming pool: Shall mean any permanent, non-portable structure  or container
located either above or below grade  designed to hold water to a depth of
greater than twenty-four (24) inches and with a surface area greater than two
hundred fifty (250) square feet, intended for swimming or bathing. A swimming
pool shall  be considered an accessory structure  for purposes of computing lot
coverage .
Temporary building: A building which is not permanently affixed to the property
, and is permitted to exist for a specific reason for a specific period of
time. Construction of temporary buildings shall  be subject to the requirements
listed in the City Building Code, as amended.
Temporary uses and seasonal sales: Uses intended for a limited duration within
any zoning district . A temporary use  shall not be interpreted to be a
continuance of a nonconforming use . Temporary uses and special seasonal  sales
events may  include carnivals, circuses, farmers markets, art fairs, craft
shows, sidewalk  sales, antique sales, Christmas tree  sales, flower sales and
similar events (see also “Seasonal or Special Event”).
(Amended 2-14-1996)
Theater: An enclosed building used for presenting performances or motion
pictures which are observed by paying patrons from seats situated within the
building.
Topographical map: A map showing existing physical characteristics, with
contour lines at sufficient intervals to permit determination of proposed
grades and drainage.
Townhouse: A residential structure , or group of structures, each of which
contains three (3) or more attached one family  dwelling units with individual
rear yards  and or front yards  designed as an integral part of each one family
 dwelling unit .
Toxic or hazardous waste: Waste or a combination of waste and other discarded
material (including but not limited to solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained
gaseous material) which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may  cause or significantly contribute
to the following if improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or
otherwise managed:
   a.   an increase in mortality, or
   b.   an increase in serious irreversible illness, or
   c.   serious incapacitating, but reversible illness, or
   d.   substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment.
Transition zone: A transition zone generally refers to a zoning district , an
arrangement of lots or land  uses, a landscaped area, or similar means of
providing a buffer between land  uses or districts.
Truck storage: An area used for the temporary storage of private trucks or
trucks for hire.
Truck terminal: A structure  to which goods, except raw or unprocessed
agricultural products, natural minerals, or other resources, are delivered for:
   a.   Immediate distribution to other parts of the City.
   b.   Amalgamation for delivery in larger units to other intrastate or
interstate destinations.
   c.   Distribution or amalgamation involving transfer to other modes of
transportation.
Urgent medical care center: A  free-standing  medical clinic  which offers
emergency type care.
Use: The principal purpose for which land  or a building is arranged, designed
or intended or for which land  or a building is or may  be occupied .
Utility trailer: A small trailer that is designed to be pulled by an automobile
, van, or pick-up truck.
Variance: A modification of the literal provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
granted when enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance would cause undue hardship
owing to circumstances unique to the individual property  on which the variance
is granted.
Veterinary hospital: A facility which provides diagnosis, treatment, surgery
and other veterinary care for domestic animals, horses and livestock.
Wall, obscuring: A structure  of definite height and location to serve as an
obscuring screen  in carrying out the requirements of this Ordinance. A wall
shall  be a solid durable structure  of masonry or concrete in contrast to a
fence  which may  be constructed of wood.
Waste receptacle: Any accessory exterior container used for the temporary
storage of rubbish, pending collection, having capacity of at least one cubic
yard . Recycling stations and exterior compactors shall  be considered to be
waste receptacles.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
Wetland (regulated): Land regulated by the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources as a wetland. Such land  is characterized by the presence of water at
a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal
circumstances does support, wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly
referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh, and which is any of the following: (1)
contiguous to an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream; (2) not contiguous
to the Great Lakes, an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream; and more than
five (5) acres in size; (3) determined by the MDNR that the protection of the
area is essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the state
from pollution, impairment, or destruction.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
Warehouse: A building used primarily for storage of goods and materials.
Wholesale sales: The sales of goods generally in large quantities and primarily
to customers engaged in the business of reselling the goods.
Yards: The open spaces on the same lot with a main building  unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this
Ordinance, and as defined herein:
   a.   Front yard: An open space  extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the nearest point of the main building .
   b.   Rear yard: An open space  extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and
the nearest point of the main building . In the case of a corner lot , the rear
yard may  be opposite either street  frontage.
   c.   Side yard: An open space  between a main building  and the side lot
line, extending from the front yard  to the rear yard , the width of which is
the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the
nearest point of the main building .
Zoning Act: The City or Village Zoning Act.
ARTICLE III: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Sec. 300   Introduction
Sec. 301   Withholding of Approval
Sec. 302   Voting Place
Sec. 303   Lot Area
Sec. 304   Principal Building, Structure or Use
Sec. 305   Single Family Dwelling Design Standards
Sec. 306   Regulations on Use of Building for Dwelling
Sec. 307   Parking, Storage and Repair of Vehicles
Sec. 308   Recreational Vehicle Parking and Storage
Sec. 309   Determination of “Similar Uses”
Sec. 310   Prohibited Uses
Sec. 311   Essential Public Services
Sec. 312   Accessory Buildings
Sec. 313   Swimming Pools
Sec. 314   Waste Receptacles
Sec. 315   Fences
Sec. 316   Reception Antennas
Sec. 317   Accessory Use and Building Parking
Sec. 318   Natural Features Preservation: Woodlands
Sec. 319   Natural Features Preservation: Wetlands
Sec. 320   Natural Features Preservation: Grading, Removal and Filling of Land
Sec. 321   Minimum Frontage on Public Street
Sec. 322   Calculation of (Buildable) Lot Area
Sec. 323   Exterior Lighting
Sec. 324   Entrance Features
Sec. 325   Building Grades
Sec. 326   Excavation or Holes
Sec. 327   Buildings to be Moved
Sec. 328   Requirements for Impact Assessment
Sec. 329   Minimum Contents of Traffic Impact Study
Sec. 330   Clear Vision Zone
Sec. 331   Access Through Yards
Sec. 332   Temporary Uses and Seasonal or Special Events Sales
Sec. 333   Maintenance of Commonly Owned Private Facilities
Sec. 334   Review, Construction and Maintenance of Wireless Communication
Facilities
Sec. 335   Temporary Refuse and Storage Containers
Sec. 336   Solar Panels
SECTION 300   INTRODUCTION.
The standards and regulations listed in this Article shall apply to all uses,
buildings and structures within all zoning districts unless otherwise
specifically addressed.
SECTION 301   WITHHOLDING OF APPROVAL.
The Planning Commission , Board of Zoning Appeals or City Council  may withhold
granting of approval of any use , special land use , site plan , Planned Unit
Development Plan, variance or other approval required by this Ordinance pending
approvals which may be required by State , County or Federal agencies or
departments.
SECTION 302   VOTING PLACE.
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed as to interfere with the
temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a City,
school or other public election.
SECTION 303   LOT AREA.
Any lot existing and of record on the effective date of this Ordinance may be
used for any principal use permitted other than Special Land Use s for which
special lot area requirements are specified in this Ordinance, permitted in the
district in which such lot is located whether or not such lot complies with the
lot area and width requirements of this Ordinance. Such use may be made
provided that all requirements other than lot area and width prescribed in this
Ordinance are complied with, and provided that not more than one (1) dwelling
unit  shall occupy any lot except in conformance with the provisions of this
Ordinance for required lot area for each dwelling unit .
SECTION 304   PRINCIPAL BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE.
No lot may contain more than one (1) principal building , structure or use
except: groups of multiple family dwellings under the same ownership,
condominium developments, manufactured housing parks, unified shopping centers,
an auto dealership, an office complex, a multi-building industrial use , an
approved wireless communication facility or a Planned Unit Development.
(As amended June 10, 1998)
SECTION 305   SINGLE family DWELLING DESIGN STANDARDS.
   a.   Intent: This section is intended to establish regulations for the
construction of new single family  dwellings, whether mobile homes,
manufactured  homes, modular homes or site (“stick”) built homes, located
outside a mobile home park  in addition to HUD standards or the City Building
Code, as appropriate. The standards herein are intended to prevent grossly
dissimilar dwellings which would adversely affect the value of dwellings in the
surrounding area, adversely affect the desirability of an area to existing or
prospective homeowners, impair the stability of the environment, prevent the
most appropriate use  of real estate  and lessen the opportunity to realize the
development  pattern envisioned in the Grand Blanc Community Master Plan .
These regulations are based on the finding that the cohesiveness and character
of the City’s neighborhoods are significant factors in the City’s quality of
life, contribute to the distinct character in the various neighborhoods and
help retain property values. These regulations further ensure new housing units
are harmonious with the general character of the adjacent houses and the City
overall and ensure a stable housing stock. While some level of diversity is
acceptable, these regulations are intended to ensure the design variation of
new homes is similar to the level of variation in existing homes in the
immediate area, or surrounding neighborhoods with similar densities for new
residential projects. The standards shall not be construed to prohibit
innovative design concepts involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique
land contour, or relief from the common or standard designed home.
   b.   Applicability: The regulations of this section shall  apply to all new
single family  home construction. Major home expansions where the homeowner is
expanding the footprint of the new home by forty percent (40%) shall comply
with subsections 305(d)(11), 305(d)(12), and 305(d)(13), in addition to
required building codes, to ensure the resulting home continues to maintain the
character of the neighborhood. The standards shall not apply to minor home
expansions, interior remodeling, or to residences outside of the single family
zoning districts.
   c.   Approval: Compliance with these regulations shall  be determined by the
Building and Zoning Administrator  at the time the building permit is reviewed
and shall be based on the standards of subsection ‘d’ below.
   d.   Standards:
      1.   Code compliance: Each such dwelling unit  shall  comply with all
pertinent building and fire codes. In the case of a mobile home , all
construction and all plumbing, electrical apparatus and insulation within and
connected to said mobile home  shall be of a type and quality conforming to the
“Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards” as promulgated by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development, being 24 C.F.R. 3280, as
amended. Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof
snow load and strength requirements. Where there are conflicting applicable
regulations, the more stringent shall apply.
      2.   Building permit: All construction required herein shall  be
commenced only after a building permit has been obtained in accordance with the
City Building Code and other building regulations.
      3.   Certification: If the dwelling unit  is a mobile home , the mobile
home  must either be (i) new and certified by the manufacturer and/or
appropriate inspection agency as meeting the Mobile Home Construction and
Safety Standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, as
amended, or any similar successor or replacement standards which may  be
promulgated, or (ii) used and certified by the manufacturer and/or appropriate
inspection agency as meeting the standards referenced in Subsection (1) above,
and found, on inspection by the Building and Zoning Administrator  or their
designee, to be in excellent condition and safe and fit for residential
occupancy.
      4.   Dimensional Standards: Each such dwelling unit  shall  comply with
the minimum standards listed in
Article XX  for the Zoning District in which it is located, including minimum
lot area , minimum lot width , minimum floor area, required setbacks and
maximum building height . Homes constructed within an existing neighborhood,
also called fill-in housing, are subject to the regulations of subsection ‘8’
and ‘9’ below.
      5.   Foundation: Each dwelling unit  shall  be firmly attached to a
permanent basement  or crawl space foundation constructed on the site in
accordance with the City Building Code and shall have a wall of the same
perimeter dimensions of the dwelling and constructed of such materials and type
as required in the applicable building code for single-family dwellings. If
said dwelling is a mobile home , the dwelling shall be securely anchored to the
foundation to prevent displacement during windstorms.
      6.   Undercarriage: In the event that such dwelling unit  shall  be a
mobile home , the wheels, tongue, hitch assembly and other towing appurtenances
shall be removed before attachment to its permanent foundation. The foundation
or skirting shall fully enclose the towing mechanism, undercarriage and
chassis.
      7.   Storage area: Each such dwelling unit  shall  contain a storage area
equal to ten percent (10%) of the square footage of the dwelling or one hundred
(100) square feet, whichever shall be less. This storage area shall consist of
a basement , attic or attached garage , or in a separate detached accessory
structure  that complies with the standards of this Section regarding accessory
buildings and structures. The intent of these standards is to limit the extent
of outdoor storage .
      8.   Roof: The roof shall  have a minimum 4:12 pitch and with a drainage
system that will collect and concentrate the discharge of storm water or snow
away from the sides of the dwelling. The roof shall have wood shake, asphalt,
or other acceptable shingles. A roof overhang of not less than six (6) inches
on all sides shall be provided, or alternatively with window sills or roof
drainage systems concentrating roof drainage at collection points along the
sides of the dwelling.
      9.   Exterior Doors: A minimum of two (2) exterior doors shall  be
provided with the second one being in either the rear or the side of the
dwelling. All dwelling units shall be oriented toward the public right-of-way
such that the facade  that faces the street  contains a door, windows, and
other architectural features customary to the front facade  of a residence .
      10.   Width: The width across any front, side or rear elevation shall  be
a minimum of twenty (20) feet and comply in all respects with the City Building
Code (BOCA).
      11.   Building Mass: In-fill housing development  shall  consider the
gross floor area and lot coverage  of surrounding homes to ensure
compatibility. The gross floor area and lot coverage  of the proposed dwelling
shall be at least ninety percent (90%) and no more than one hundred and thirty-
five percent (135%) of the average square footage of constructed single family
dwellings within five hundred (500) feet of the subject dwelling unit , with
measurements made from the edge of the street .
      12.   Front Yard Setback: In-fill housing development  shall  maintain a
consistent front building line  along the street . The front yard  setback  of
the proposed dwelling shall be no less than ninety percent (90%) and no more
than one hundred and thirty-five percent (135%) of the average established
front yard  setback  of other single family  dwelling unit  within five hundred
(500) feet of the subject dwelling unit , with measurements from the edge of
the street .
      13.   Architectural Compatibility: Building appearance for all new single
family  dwelling unit  construction shall  be aesthetically compatible in
design and appearance with other residences in similar zoning districts in the
surrounding area. For new single family  neighborhood development  (in the form
of a new subdivision plat  or new site condominium project ), the surrounding
area is defined as the nearest existing neighborhoods with similar densities.
For in-fill housing development  where there is one or a few isolated sites
being developed within the existing neighborhood (in the form of an existing
lot of record  or recent land  division), surrounding area shall be defined as
within five hundred (500) feet of the subject dwelling unit ; with measurements
made from the edge of the lot in each direction, including the opposite side of
the street . The determination shall be made by the Building and Zoning
Administrator  and in considering similarity and compatibility with the
surrounding area, the following features must be considered in order to meet
this requirement. If the Building and Zoning Administrator  cannot reach a
determination on architectural compatibility, the applicant shall be forwarded
to the Planning Commission  for review and final action.
         a)   Exterior building material used on the proposed dwelling
         b)   Roof style
         c)   The design and position of
         d)   Front entry design (presence of porches, front door location,
etc.)
         e)   Garage style and design
   e.   Appeal: An applicant may  appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals within
a period of fifteen (15) days from the receipt of notice of said Building and
Zoning Administrator ’s, or Planning Commission  as applicable, decision.
   f.   Sewage disposal and water supply: Each such dwelling unit  shall  be
connected to a public sewer and water supply.
   g.   Exceptions: The foregoing standards shall not apply to a mobile home
located in a licensed mobile home park  except to the extent required by state
or federal law  or otherwise specifically required in this ordinance and
pertaining to such parks. Single family  homes which do not conform to the
standards of this section shall not be used for dwelling purposes within the
City unless located within a mobile home park  or a mobile home  subdivision
district  for such uses, or unless used as a temporary residence  as otherwise
provided in this Ordinance.
SECTION 306   REGULATIONS ON USE OF BUILDING FOR DWELLING.
   a.   The use of any portion of the cellar (more than one-half the room is
below grade ) of a partially completed building, detached garage or accessory
building for sleeping purposes in any zoning district is prohibited.
   b.   Dwellings are not permitted in the office , commercial or industrial
districts except for legal nonconforming dwelling existing at the time the
Zoning Ordinance was adopted, a caretaker’s quarters in a funeral home or
veterinary clinic , upper story residential in the Central Business District
which meets applicable standards of this Ordinance and the City Building Code,
or housing used exclusively by security or custodial personnel and approved by
the Board of Zoning Appeals. The use of trailers and recreational vehicles for
housing such security and custodial personnel is prohibited.
SECTION 307   PARKING, STORAGE AND REPAIR OF VEHICLES.
The following standards shall apply to any storage or repair of vehicles within
any zoning district :
   a.   All vehicles parked or being worked on in a front yard  shall be
licensed and operable.
   b.   Repair, restoration and maintenance procedures on vehicles in any
residential zoning district  may be permitted in the front yard , only when all
such work is conducted entirely within the interior of the vehicle (i.e. minor
“under the hood” work is permitted, but major repair, outdoor storage of parts,
tools and body work is prohibited). Major repair work is permitted only on lots
containing uses approved for automotive repair.
   c.   Automobiles, trucks and commercial vehicles parked on any lot must be
parked on a driveway, approved parking lot or within street  right-of-way where
parking is permitted.
Areas. Areas outside of those approved parking areas shall be lawn or living
plant material.
(As amended June 10, 1998)
   d.   Routine maintenance procedures (such as changing oil, fluids, belts or
spark plugs) on a residential lot shall only be permitted on a licensed vehicle
that is owned by the owner or tenant of the principal dwelling. Such
maintenance procedures shall be permitted only on an approved paved surface for
a maximum of five (5) consecutive days and a maximum five (5) days during any
single month. Procedures which require the vehicle to be immobile or inoperable
in excess of five (5) consecutive days shall be carried out within an enclosed
building or off the premises .
   e.   Inoperable vehicles and vehicle parts shall be stored inside an
enclosed building.
   f.   Parking   of wreckers is prohibited in any zoning district except on a
lot where the principal use involves approved automotive service or repair.
   g.   Parking   of commercial vehicles over one (1) ton within public street
 right-of-way is prohibited.
   h.   Parking   of commercial vehicles over one (1) ton anywhere in a
residential district is prohibited.
   i.   It shall be unlawful for the owner , tenant or lessee of any lot to
permit the open storage or outdoor parking of semi-tractor trucks and/or semi-
trailers, bulldozers, earth carriers, cranes or any other similar equipment or
machinery, unless the storage or sales of such vehicles is an approved use for
the principal building on the site or unless the vehicles are temporarily
parked while in use for approved construction on the property .
SECTION 308   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING AND STORAGE.
The temporary outdoor parking or storage of a recreational vehicle  shall be
permitted in the front yard on lands not approved for such use for up to forty-
eight hours provided such vehicle is located on a hard surface (including
asphalt, concrete or gravel) and not within the right-of-way . However, the
Building and Zoning Administrator  may issue a permit allowing such temporary
outdoor parking or storage of a recreational vehicle for a period not exceeding
two (2) consecutive weeks. No more than two (2) temporary permits may be issued
for a single property in any given calendar year.
Recreational vehicles may also be stored within the confines of the rear yard
or side yard when behind the front building line of the principal building ;
and shall further provide a side yard  setback of not less than three (3) feet
and a rear yard  setback of not less than ten (10) feet.
All recreational vehicles parked or stored outdoors shall be legally operable
and licensed, and shall not be connected to any sanitary facilities. At any
given time, not more than one (1) recreational vehicle shall be stored or
parked outdoors on a residential property . For the purpose of this section, a
single trailer storing more than one (1) recreational vehicle shall count one
(1) such vehicle. For example, a single trailer containing two (2) snowmobiles
shall constitute one (1) recreational vehicle .
(Amended 8-12-2009)
SECTION 309   DETERMINATION OF “SIMILAR USES”.
In recognition that every potential use cannot be addressed in this Zoning
Ordinance, each district includes the phrase “Uses of the same nature or class
as uses listed in this district as either a Principal Use Permitted or a
Special Land Use, but not listed elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, as
determined by the Planning Commission based on the standards of Section 309” at
the end of the list of Special Land Use s. The Planning Commission  shall  make
a determination of “Uses of the same nature and class...” according to the
following:
   a.   A finding the proposed use is not listed as a principal use permitted
or Special Land Use in any zoning district .
   b.   If the use is not addressed in the Zoning Ordinance, the Planning
Commission  shall select the use listed in the Zoning Ordinance which most
closely resembles the proposed use using criteria such as potential impact on
property values, traffic generated, aesthetics, noise, vibration, dust, smoke,
odor, glare and other objectionable impacts terms of health, safety and welfare
in the City. The Planning Commission  may determine that there is no similar
use and that the use should be prohibited (see
Section 310).
   c.   Once a similar use is determined, the proposed use shall comply with
any special conditions or Special Land Use Standard that apply to the similar
use.
   d.   The Planning Commission or applicant shall have the option to request
that the City Council consider an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance to
specifically address the use in question, rather than treating the proposed use
as a similar use.
   e.   The determination as to whether a proposed use is similar in nature and
class to other Principal Use Permitted or Special Land Use s within a district
should be considered as an expansion of the use regulations, not a variance
applying to a particular situation. Any use determined by the Planning
Commission to be a “use of the same nature or class as uses listed” shall
thereafter be included in the enumeration of the uses.
The Planning Commission determination of a “Similar Use” may be appealed to the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
SECTION 310   PROHIBITED USES.
Basis: Certain uses may  not be appropriate within the City of Grand Blanc
given the existing development  pattern, environmental condition and overall
character of the community. In accordance with the City or Village Zoning Act ,
a Zoning Ordinance or zoning decision can totally prohibit the establishment of
a requested land  use  within a City if there is not an appropriate location
within the community or the use is unlawful, even if there is a demonstrated
need for that land  use either in the City or surrounding area. In determining
there is no appropriate location for the requested use within the City, the
Planning Commission  shall  consider the following:
   a.   The land area required by the proposed use .
   b.   Existing environmental conditions and potential environmental hazards.
   c.   The potential impact on surrounding properties in terms of traffic,
noise, lighting, property valuation and views.
   d.   Demand and capacity of utilities and municipal services to support the
proposed use .
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   e.   Finding there is an alternative land  use for the property that will
provide the property  owner with a reasonable rate of return on investment.
The Planning Commission determination of a “Prohibited Use” may be appealed to
the Board of Zoning Appeals.
SECTION 311   ESSENTIAL PUBLIC SERVICES.
   a.   Essential services buildings and structures shall be permitted as
authorized under any franchise in effect within the City, subject to regulation
as provided in any law of the State of Michigan the list of uses within each
zoning district or in any other City Ordinance provided it is the intent of
this section to ensure conformity of all buildings, structures uses and storage
yards to the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance wherever such conformity
shall be practicable and not in conflict with the specific requirements of such
franchise, state legislation or City Ordinance. In the absence of such
conflict, the Zoning Ordinance shall prevail. Appeal from the application of
this Ordinance in regard to any essential service may be made to the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
   b.   Public and On-Site Utilities: Prior to issuance of a building permit
under the terms of this Ordinance, the applicant shall  obtain engineering
approval from the City.
SECTION 312   ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
All accessory buildings and structures permitted in this Zoning Ordinance shall
be subject to the following:
   a.   Relation to principal building: Accessory buildings, structures and
uses are permitted only in connection with, incidental to and on the same lot
with, a principal building , structure  or use  which is permitted in the
particular zoning district . No accessory building, structure or use  shall  be
constructed, occupied  or utilized unless the principal structure  to which it
is accessory is occupied  or utilized.
   b.   Maximum number: There shall  be a maximum of one (1) detached accessory
building .
   c.   Maximum size and coverage: Accessory buildings in residential districts
shall not exceed the ground floor area of a main building , and in no case be
larger than six hundred (600) sq. feet. The size of accessory buildings in non-
residential districts shall  be limited by the lot coverage  standard for the
zoning district .
   d.   Restrictions on placement: Accessory buildings shall not be erected  in
any right-of-way , easement , or required front yard . When an accessory
building  is located on a corner lot , the side lot line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, said
building shall not project beyond the front yard  setback  required on the lot
to the rear of such corner lot . In the case of attached residential dwelling
complexes, detached parking garages or carports may  be permitted in the non-
required front yard  provided the Planning Commission  approves the site plan ,
landscaping , elevation drawings and construction materials. In reviewing such
structures, the Planning Commission  shall  consider the impact of headlights
and views from nearby public streets and adjacent properties.
   e.   Required setbacks (attached): Where the accessory building , structure
or use  is structurally attached to a principal building , structure  or use
(e.g. a deck , garage  or breezeway), it shall  be subject to all the
regulations of this section applicable to principal buildings, structures and
uses.
   f.   Required setbacks (detached): Detached accessory buildings shall  be at
least ten (10) feet from any principal building  or other accessory building
or structure . In residential districts, accessory buildings and structures
shall provide side and rear yard  setbacks of not less than five (5) feet.
Accessory buildings in non-residential districts shall be subject to the side
and rear setback  requirements for principal buildings.
   g.   Maximum, height: The maximum building height  of any detached accessory
building  or structure  in any Single Family (R-1 through R-3 and RT), District
shall  be fourteen (14) feet, measured from the average height between the
eaves and the ridge. Accessory buildings in all other districts may  be
constructed to equal the permitted maximum height of structures in said
districts.
   h.   Drainage: The placement and design of any accessory building  or
structure  shall not adversely impact stormwater runoff. The Building and
Zoning Administrator  may  require a grading plan for review by the City
Engineer  to ensure compliance with this provision.
   i.   Restrictions on use : Accessory buildings shall not be occupied  for
dwelling purposes nor used for any business profession, trade or occupation
except as otherwise permitted by the Zoning Ordinance.
   j.   Permit required: Any accessory building  or structure  greater than two
hundred (200) square feet shall  require a building permit. All accessory
buildings and structures require a zoning compliance permit.
(Amended by Ordinance 256, passed 8-8-2001; Ord. 2208-01, passed 8-10-2022)
SECTION 313   SWIMMING POOLS.
   a.   Requirement for fence: Every person  owning land  on which there is
located a pool shall  erect and maintain thereon a fence  or enclosure approved
by the Building and Zoning Administrator  in conformance with the City Building
Code.
   b.   Restriction from front yard: Swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and similar
devices shall not be located in any front yard .
   c.   There shall be a minimum distance of not less than ten (10) feet
between the adjoining property line and the outside of the pool wall. The
required side yard setbacks of the zoning district (
Article XX) shall apply to side yards if greater than ten (10) feet.
   d.   There shall be a distance of not less than four (4) feet between the
outside edge of the pool wall and any building located on the same lot.
   e.   Surrounding walk: All public swimming pools shall  be surrounded by a
slip resistant walk at least four (4) feet wide.
   f.   Permits: Construction shall  be in accordance with the City Building
Code. Permits shall be applied for and issued from the City Building Department
prior to excavation  or construction of any swimming pool , spa, hot tub or
similar device requiring a fence  as noted above. The application shall be
accompanied by a complete set of plans and specifications. A final inspection
and approval from the City Building Department must be obtained prior to use
of the swimming pool .
SECTION 314   WASTE RECEPTACLES.
Receptacles, including waste receptacles, waste compactors, and recycling bins
shall be designed, constructed and maintained according to the standards of
this section. Waste Receptacle location and details of construction shall be
shown on site plans. A change in receptacle location or size shall require
modification to the enclosure, as warranted by this section.
   a.   Location: Waste receptacles shall  be located in the rear yard  or non-
required side yard , unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission  and
shall be as far as practical, and in no case be less than twenty (20) feet from
any residential district  and in such a way that they are not easily damaged by
the refuse device. The location and orientation of waste receptacle  and
enclosure shall minimize the potential for the waste receptacle  to be viewed
from public street  or adjacent residential districts.
   b.   Access: Waste receptacles shall  be easily accessed by refuse vehicles
without potential to damage the building or automobiles parked in designated
parking spaces.
   c.   Base Design: The receptacle base shall  be at least ten (10) feet by
six (6) feet, constructed of six (6) inches of reinforced concrete pavement.
The base shall extend six (6) feet beyond the waste receptacle  pad or gate to
support the front axle of a refuse vehicle.
   d.   Enclosure: Waste receptacles shall  meet the following standards:
      1.   Each waste receptacle  shall have an enclosing lid or cover.
      2.   Waste receptacles shall be enclosed on three (3) sides with a gate
on the fourth side. A gate shall not be required if the opening of the
enclosure is not visible from the public street or a residential district , as
determined by the Planning Commission . A gate must be maintained in operable
and sanitary condition.
      3.   The enclosure shall be a berm or constructed of brick, concrete or
decorative precast panel with brick effect or a wooden enclosure provided the
lumber is treated to prevent decay or is determined by the Building and Zoning
Administrator to be durable and suitable for outdoor use with a maximum height
of six (6) feet or at least one (1) foot higher than the receptacle, whichever
is higher, and spaced at least three (3) feet from the receptacle. Suggested
timber materials include Cedar, No. 2 Cedar rough sawn seasoned, Redwood, No. 2
Common Finish (S4S), Douglas Fir-larch or Southern Pine. Posts shall be set in
concrete forty-two (42) inches below grade . Posts shall be either 6 x 6 inch
pressure treated wood or three (3) inch diameter galvanized steel posts.
      4.   Bollards or similar protective devices may be installed at the
opening to prevent damage to the enclosure.
      5.   The enclosure shall be screened with five (5) foot high evergreens
planted a minimum of six (6) feet apart wherever the enclosure wall is visible
to a public street or residential district .
SECTION 315   FENCES.
Fences are permitted subject to the following regulations:
   a.   Permits: The erection, construction, or alteration  of any fence ,
privacy screening, or other structure  that acts as a barrier shall  require a
Zoning Compliance Permit. The Permit must be approved before the structure  is
erected , constructed or altered. The erection, construction, or alteration  of
any fence  shall conform with the remaining provisions of
Section 315.
(Amended by Ordinance 2102-01, passed 2-10-2021)
   b.   Location in front yards: Except as otherwise provided in this Section,
Fences of an ornamental nature may  be located in a front yard  of any lot of
record  up to a height of twenty-four (24) inches, provided adequate sight
distance is provided for corner lots as described in Section 330.
   c.   Location in other yards: Fences between two properties should be
located on the property  line. The Applicant shall  submit a signed statement,
from all adjoining property  owners on whose property  line the fence  would be
constructed, indicating that they do not object to the erection of the fence .
If it becomes impossible to obtain the written statement from the adjoining
property  owners, then the fence  shall  be located at least six (6) inches
inside the property  line and the fence  owner  is responsible for maintaining
the property  between the fence  and the property  line. On all lots of record,
fences which enclose property  and/or are within a required side or rear yard
shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, and shall not extend toward the front
of the lot nearer the front of the house or the required front yard , whichever
is greater.
   d.   Prohibitions: The following shall be prohibited:
      1.   Fences in public street rights-of-way.
      2.   Gates or fences across a residential driveway.
   e.   Measuring fence height: Fence height shall  be measured from the grade
(elevation) of the ground immediately below the location of the fence . The
grade  immediately below the location of the fence  may  not be modified in
order to achieve an increase in fence  height in excess of ten (10) percent
above that obtainable prior to the grade  modification. For purposes of this
section, the grade  associated with placement of a fence  shall be defined as:
      1.   Fence erected on site containing no building or structure -the grade
 shall be naturally existing grade without modification.
      2.   Fence erected on site containing principal building or structure -
the grade  shall be the finished grade existing at the fence site after
construction of the principal building or structure . For fence construction
purposes, said grade shall be subject to approval by the Building and Zoning
Administrator .
   f.   Location/height in industrial districts: Fences in I-1 or I-2 Districts
with a maximum height of six (6) feet may  be located in any yard provided such
fences shall  be located on parcels with a principal building  containing an
approved industrial use , the fence  is maintained in good condition and does
not constitute an unreasonable hazard or nuisance.
The Planning Commission  may allow gates across an industrial driveway,
provided the following conditions are met:
Such gates shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet.
Sufficient stacking space shallshall be provided such that vehicles accessing
the property will not overhang into the roadway or block a sidewalk . The City
may require a dedicated turn-around area outside of the right-of-way , if
deemed necessary to prevent traffic conflicts.
Emergency access through the gate shall be provided to the City’s satisfaction.
Such gates shall be located on parcels with a principal building containing an
approved industrial use , be maintained in good condition and not constitute an
unreasonable hazard or nuisance.
The owner  shall enter into an indemnification agreement with the City. The
agreement shall be prepared by the City Attorney for the purpose of holding the
City harmless for any damage caused to the gate by emergency vehicles or for
delays in responding to an emergency. The agreement shall also stipulate that
the owner is responsible for any damage caused to emergency vehicles by the
gate.
   g.   Wood fence standards: Wooden fences shall  be a maximum of six (6) feet
in height measured from the surrounding grade  at every point along the fence
line. Wood fences having one finished side shall have the exposed fence  posts
facing inward with the finished side of the fence  facing outward unless
otherwise approved by the Building and Zoning Administrator . There shall not
be more than two (2) inches separating the bottom of the face board and the
surface of the ground.
   h.   Chain link standards: No chain link or wire fence  shall  hereafter be
erected  in any required rear or side yard  area on any lot of record  in
excess of six (6) feet in height measured from the surrounding grade  at every
point along the fence  line. Welded wire fences are strictly prohibited unless
utilized in conjunction with an approved fencing operation.
   i.   Public fences: Fences which enclose public parks, public institutions,
playgrounds or other public areas, may  be a maximum eight (8) feet in height,
measured from the surrounding grade  at every point along the fence  line. Such
fence  shall  not obstruct vision to an extent greater than twenty-five (25%)
percent of the total fence  area.
   j.   Materials: Ornamental fences are of approved materials, of a design as
to be non-sight obscuring and of a fence  type listed below:
      a.   Post and rail
      b.   Split rail
      c.   Picket
      d.   Wrought iron
      e.   Other types of ornamental fences must be approved by the Planning
Commission prior to placement in a front yard area.
   k.   Restrictions on electrification: Fences shall not contain electric
current or charge of electricity.
   l.   Restriction on barbed wire, etc.: Barbed wire, spikes, nails or any
other sharp instruments of any kind are prohibited on top of or on the sides of
any fence .
   m.   Maintenance: All fences shall  be maintained in a good condition, in an
upright position and shall not constitute an unreasonable hazard. Any fence
which is not maintained, as determined by the Building and Zoning Administrator
, shall be removed or replaced (any required fence  shall be replaced).
   n.   Fence placed on retaining wall, berm , or similar feature: A fence , or
portion thereof, may  be erected  on a retaining wall, berm , or similar
feature provided the combined height of the retaining wall, berm , or such
feature and fence  shall not exceed the total allowable fence  height as
referenced under e. above, or as noted in the following paragraph.
   The Building and Zoning Administrator  may allow placement of a retaining
wall and fence , which, when combined, exceed the total allowable fence height
as referenced above. Said approval may occur when the Building and Zoning
Administrator determines that additional height is necessary to permit the
placement of a retaining wall of sufficient height to stabilize a natural bank
against which the retaining wall will be positioned. In granting said approval,
the Building and Zoning Administrator  shall determine that the additional
height is needed for said stabilization, as opposed to erecting an extended
base for purposes of gaining fence height. The combined height of the fence and
any portion of the retaining wall above the finished grade of the principal
structure shall not exceed the maximum fence height standards.
   o.   Fence placed on properties with significant grade change: Where the
finished grade  at the fence  line is two (2) or more feet above or below the
finished grade  line of the abutting lot or building the Building and Zoning
Administrator  may  allow the fence  to be increased in height up to a maximum
of nine (9) feet to ensure the intended screening and security benefits are
provided in a manner similar to a six (6) foot fence  located on a property
without significant topographic differences. The Building and Zoning
Administrator  may  require landscaping  or specific materials to mitigate the
aesthetic impacts of a taller fence .
(Amended 2005; amended Ordinance 1411-01, passed 12-10-2014; amended Ordinance
2102-01, passed 2-10-2021)
SECTION 316   RECEPTION ANTENNAS.
Radio or television antennas or towers, including satellite dish antennas and
transmission or reception antennas below three hundred (300) watts of output,
erected or installed in any zoning district  shall comply with the following
requirements. Traditional television and radio antennas, reception antennas
with a diameter of one (1) feet or less and short wave (HAM) radio antenna, are
exempted from these regulations when not exceeding a fifty (50) foot height
above mean grade or ten (10) feet above the roofline in a residential district
; or one hundred (100) feet above mean grade in other zoning districts based on
a finding that they do not impose potential negative safety, aesthetic and
welfare problems.
(As amended June 10, 1998)
Antennas and similar devices used for reception or broadcast of communications
transmissions shall be permitted subject to the following conditions and
requirements:
   a.   These regulations shall apply to:
      1.   Transmission antennas with a broadcast output of less than three
hundred (300) watts erected or installed in any zoning district .
      2.   Any television or radio antenna, including those used for short wave
(HAM) transmission, in a residential district  erected to a height greater than
fifty (50) feet above the grade or greater than ten (10) feet above the
established roofline on the lot where the antenna is located.
      3.   Any television or radio antenna, including those used for short wave
(HAM) transmission, in a nonresidential district  erected to a height greater
than one hundred (100) feet above the grade .
      4.   Satellite dish reception antennas with a diameter greater than one
(1) meter in a residential zoning district .
      5.   Satellite dish reception antennas with a diameter greater than two
(2) meters in a nonresidential zoning district .
      6.   In residential districts, all towers or other structures used for
the purpose of elevating an antenna more than one (1) meter above the surface
of the ground or, if the antenna is mounted on the roof of a building, more
than one (1) meter above the surface of the established roofline of the
building.
      7.   In nonresidential districts, all towers or other structures used for
the purpose of elevating an antenna more than two (2) meters above the surface
of the ground or, if the antenna is mounted on the roof of a building, more
than two (2) meters above the surface of the established roofline of the
building.
   b.   Not more than one (1) antenna shall be permitted per parcel or lot.
   c.   All antennas and antenna towers regulated by these provisions shall be
located only in a side or rear yard .
   d.   No part of an antenna or antenna tower shall be located in an easement
.
   e.   No portion of an antenna shall be located closer than six (6) feet,
measured on a horizontal plane, from any side or rear lot line.
   f.   Ground-mounted satellite dish antennas in a yard fronting on a public
street  shall be screened from view from such street by landscaping or a wall.
The applicant shall submit a sketch plan to the Building and Zoning
Administrator for approval. The sketch plan shall indicate the location and
height of the satellite dish and buildings, paved areas and other appropriate
site features within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed location. Ground-
mounted antennas shall be subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Maximum height permitted shall be fourteen (14) feet and seventeen
(17) feet if placed on a structure .
      2.   The antenna shall be obscured from the view of adjacent properties
by a screening wall or fence , evergreen plantings, or a combination of the
above.
   g.   The diameter of antennas and satellite dishes shall not exceed ten (10)
feet.
   h.   No advertising or identification display shall be placed on any portion
of an antenna or tower, including a satellite dish antenna.
   i.   Erection or movement of an antennae, tower or satellite dish shall
require a permit from the City Building and Zoning Administrator. Roof-mounted
antennas shall be subject to the following conditions:
      1.   For the purposes of this section, a reception antenna regulated by
this Section shall be considered to be a portion of the structure and must
comply with the maximum building height regulations in
Article XX.
      2.   All roof-mounted antennas must be anchored in an approved as
outlined in the City Building Code.
      3.   The antenna shall not be mounted on the front of the structure .
   j.   Towers and support structures.
      1.   Satellite dish reception antennas with a diameter greater than one
(1) meter in a residential zoning district .
      2.   Satellite dish reception antennas with a diameter greater than two
(2) meters in a commercial or industrial zoning district .
   k.   The Federal Communications Commission regulates and permits erection of
satellite dish antennas under certain terms and conditions. Other state and
federal requirements may be enacted that supersede the requirements of this
Ordinance. The regulations of this Ordinance are not intended to conflict with
state and federal regulations. In any instance where state or federal
regulations establish a regulatory base but permit higher standards to be
adopted under local regulations, the requirements of this Ordinance shall be
enforced.
   l.   Variances: The Zoning Board of Appeals  may grant a variance from these
standards upon determining compliance with the standards of this section would
not provide reasonably good reception, that the variance requested is the
minimum necessary to provide reasonably good reception and that adjacent
properties shall not be negatively impacted.
(effective Jan. 28, 1997)
SECTION 317   ACCESSORY USE AND BUILDING PARKING.
Each accessory use that may generate additional demand for parking shall
provide parking in addition to that required for the principal use . The
parking standards provided in
Article XXII shall be used as a guide to determine additional parking needed.
If no specific standard is provided, the Building and Zoning Administrator
shall determine the additional parking needed based on factors such as
increased occupancy potential, additional employees or patrons expected.
SECTION 318   NATURAL FEATURES PRESERVATION: WOODLANDS.
The standards of this section are intended to promote the preservation of
important woodlands and large mature trees which contribute to the character,
welfare and quality of life in Grand Blanc. These standards are intended to
prevent the unnecessarily removal of woodlands prior to, during and following
construction on a site. The standards of this section, in conjunction with the
standards for site plan review, are mechanisms to promote goals from the Grand
Blanc Master Plan .
   a.   Any property  owner or his or her representative proposing to clear
more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the trees of eight (8) inch caliper or
greater on a site, as determined by the Planning Commission , shall first
notify the City of the intent of such clearing and/or earth change and submit a
proposed sketch plan describing the sites features for review and approval by
the Planning Commission .
   b.   This section shall not prevent tree clearing for approved building
envelopes, swimming pools, decks, essential services , utility lines or
construction drives; nor shall this ordinance prohibit site alterations for
farming purposes. The Planning Commission  may waive the caliper standard for
select clearing of lower quality species including box elders, elms, poplars,
willows and cottonwoods.
SECTION 319   NATURAL FEATURES PRESERVATION: WETLANDS.
The City of Grand Blanc intends to promote compliance with the Goemaere-
Anderson Wetland Protection Act 203 of 1979, as amended. The City encourages
placement of buildings to protect Michigan Department of Natural Resources
regulated wetlands and non-regulated wetlands between two acres and five acres
in size. The City intends to ensure important wetlands are preserved, to
prevent the mistaken elimination of regulated wetlands and to promote the goals
of the Grand Blanc Community Master Plan .
   a.   Any disturbance of soils, removal of landmark trees or stumps, grading,
alteration of water flowing into or from an MDNR regulated wetland, or any
prohibited activity as listed in Section 5 of Public Act 203 of 1979, without a
permit from the MDNR, may result in a stop work order issued by the City and/or
require restoration of the wetland in accordance with MDNR standards.
   b.   Judicious effort shall be made through site plan design to preserve
non-MDNR regulated wetlands which exceed two (2) acres in size, particularly
those with standing water or considered to be important wildlife habitat.
   c.   Where stormwater is planned to drain into a wetland, a filtration strip
or other material shall be used to control runoff of sediment and the wetland.
Maintenance of these material shall be addressed in a deed or as a condition of
site plan approval.
   d.   Land  shall not be subdivided in a manner creating parcels or lots
which cannot be used in conformance with the requirements of this Section or
the MDNR regulations.
SECTION 320   NATURAL FEATURES PRESERVATION: GRADING, REMOVAL AND FILLING OF
LAND.
Any grading which changes site elevation by more than three (3) feet, or the
use of land for the excavation , removal, filling or depositing of any type of
earth material, topsoil, gravel, rock, garbage, rubbish or other wastes or by-
products, is not permitted in any zoning district except under a certificate
from, and under the supervision of the Building and Zoning Administrator in
accordance with a topographic plan, approved by the Building and Zoning
Administrator , submitted at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals fifty
(50) feet and shall show existing and proposed grades and topographic features
and such other data as may from time to time be required by the Building and
Zoning Administrator . Such certificate may be issued in appropriate cases upon
the filing with the application of a Performance or Surety Bond in an amount as
established by the Building and Zoning Administrator sufficient to rehabilitate
the property upon default of the operator or such other reasonable expenses.
The form of the bond shall be approved by the City Attorney. This regulation
does not apply to normal soil removal for basement or foundation work when a
building permit has previously been duly issued by the Building Department.
SECTION 321   MINIMUM FRONTAGE ON PUBLIC STREET.
No lot shall be used for any purpose permitted by this Ordinance unless said
lot has at least sixty (60) feet abutting a public street or otherwise provided
in this Ordinance. This shall not preclude use of existing lots of record which
have a frontage of less than sixty (60) feet unless nonconforming lots are
contiguous and under the same ownership in which case the lots shall be
combined. The intent of this Section is to ensure no new lots with less than
sixty (60) feet of frontage are created and that conformance be required where
reasonable.
SECTION 322   CALCULATION OF (BUILDABLE) LOT AREA.
In the calculation of areas required to maintain specific densities, open space
requirements and similar needs, no lot or parcel or portion of same shall be
used more than once in such calculation, nor shall adjacent outlots or other
open space be used in lieu of space contained within the stated boundaries of
the subject lot or parcel . In calculating density for residential
developments, fifty percent (50%) of state or federally regulated wetlands area
shall be included in computing gross density (e.g. 100 acres of wetland equals
fifty (50) acres for computing maximum density ). Lakes, ponds, overhead
utility easements, public street right-of-ways and private road easements are
excluded from area calculations for buildable lot area .
SECTION 323   EXTERIOR LIGHTING.
   a.   Shielding: Only non-glare, color corrected lighting shall  be
permitted. All outdoor lighting shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be
arranged to reflect light away from all adjacent residential districts. The
lighting source shall not be visible from adjoining properties.
   b.   Intensity: In parking lots, lighting shall  average one (1) foot candle
measured at the surface. No lighting may  extend beyond the property  line. A
lower intensity may  be required by the Planning Commission  where the adjacent
zoning district  is residential. The Building and Zoning Administrator  may
require a photometric plan (lighting grid) to determine the appropriateness of
proposed lighting layout and intensity.
   c.   Height of fixtures: The maximum height of light fixtures in parking
lots shall  be thirty (30) feet, measured from the parking lot surface to the
centerline of the lighting source. The Planning Commission  may  modify that
height standard in commercial and industrial districts based on consideration
of the type of fixture, the height of surrounding buildings, existence of
landscaping , the potential off-site impacts and the general character of the
surrounding uses. In no case shall the height of the lighting fixture exceed
the maximum height permitted for principal buildings in the zoning district .
   d.   Fixtures: Cut-off shoe box type fixtures shall  be required in any
parking lot adjacent to a residential district . Lighting fixtures shall be
mounted on milled steel or planed wooden poles. Lighting fixtures shall not be
attached to utility poles.
   e.   Building illumination: All lighting in non-residential districts or for
non-residential uses used for the external illumination shall  be placed and
shielded to prevent interference with the vision of motorists or nearby
residents.
   f.   Plan requirements: Parking lot and building lighting illumination shall
be illustrated and described on the site plan , including details showing the
type of fixture, height of poles and any proposed illumination of buildings,
signs or landscaping . Illumination of signs or buildings shall be directed to
prevent interference with motorists.
   g.   Wiring: No wiring shall  be exposed.
   h.   Restrictions: All illumination of signs and any outdoor feature shall
not be of a flashing, moving or intermittent type. Illumination of any outdoor
feature shall  be directed or shaded to not interfere with vision of motorists
or to adjacent property . Artificial light shall be maintained stationery and
constant in intensity and color.
SECTION 324   ENTRANCE FEATURES.
In all districts, so called entranceway structures including but not limited
to: walls, columns, and gates marking entrances to single-family subdivisions
or multiple housing projects, office complexes, shopping centers and industrial
parks may be permitted and may be located in a required yard , but not within a
public street  right-of-way , provided such entranceway structures do not
conflict with required sight distance. (See Section 330.)
SECTION 325   BUILDING GRADES.
   a.   Any building requiring yard space shall be located at such an elevation
that a sloping grade shall be maintained to cause the flow of water to run away
from the walls of the structures thereon. The balance of yard spaces shall be
graded and adequate drainage provided where necessary to deflect proper
drainage of surface waters from the said premises .
   b.   When a new building is constructed on a vacant lot between two existing
buildings or adjacent to an existing building, the existing established grade
 shall be used in determining the grade around the new building and the yard
around the new building shall be graded in such a manner as to meet existing
grades.
   c.   The final grade  shall be approved by the Building and Zoning
Administrator .
SECTION 326   EXCAVATION OR HOLES.
The construction, maintenance or existence within the City of any unprotected,
unbarricaded, open or dangerous excavations, holes, pits or wells, or any
excavations, holes or pits which constitute or are reasonably likely to
constitute a danger or menace to public health, safety or welfare, is hereby
prohibited; provided; however, this section shall not prevent any excavation
under a permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance or the City Building Code.
Where such excavations are properly protected and warning signs posted in such
a manner as may be required by the Building and Zoning Administrator .
SECTION 327   BUILDINGS TO BE MOVED.
Any building or structure which has been wholly or partially erected on any
premises within or outside the City of Grand Blanc shall not be moved to and/or
placed upon any premises in the City unless a building permit for such a
building or structure shall have been secured. Any such building or structure
 shall fully conform to all the provisions of this Ordinance in the same manner
as a new building or structure .
SECTION 328   REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPACT ASSESSMENT (see Section 2407).
For certain land uses that are considered to have a significant potential
impact on traffic, infrastructure, demands for public services and/or
significant impacts on surrounding properties due to scale, the applicant shall
be required to provide an impact assessment during the initial submittal for
either a rezoning or site plan approval. The cost of the impact assessment and
review by the City shall be borne by the applicant. The applicant may request a
meeting with City staff, consultants and key agency staff prior to developing
the Impact Assessment.
   The minimum contents of this impact assessment shall be:
   a.   Name(s) and address(es) of person (s) or firm(s) responsible for
preparation of the impact assessment and a brief statement of their
qualifications.
   b.   An area plan or aerial photograph illustrating the entire site and
nearby properties.
   c.   Overall site conditions: narrative and illustration describing adjacent
uses, zoning, public roadways, utilities, significant woodlands, trees over
eight inches (8”) caliper , soils types, 100 year floodplains, drainage ways
and general topography. The area described shall  be within one-quarter mile
for sites up to one hundred (100) acres, and one (1) mile radius for larger
sites. Aerial photographs are recommended to assist in describing the general
vicinity.
   d.   Wetlands: Documentation by a qualified wetland specialist shall  be
required wherever the City determines there is a potential state  or federally
regulated wetland which may  be impacted by the proposed project.
   e.   Conceptual site plan  illustrating very general layout of proposed uses
upon which preliminary impact analysis is based, and any proposed phasing.
   f.   Land use impacts: Description of the types of proposed uses and other
man made facilities, including any project phasing, and an indication of how
the proposed use (s) conforms or conflicts with existing and Master Planned
development  patterns. A description shall  be provided of any increases in
light, noise or air pollution which could negatively impact adjacent
properties, particularly associated with smoke or truck routing.
   g.   Environmental impacts: Description of any general impacts expected to
wildlife areas, lakes, streams, ponds and regulated wetlands. Conceptual
mitigation or replacement measures under consideration shall  be described. The
study shall also describe general measures to control soil erosion and
sedimentation during and after construction.
   h.   Impact on public facilities and services: Describe the number  of
expected employees, visitors or residents and the anticipated impact on police
and fire protection. In particular, describe the relationship of the use  to
municipal fire stations and the need for any new facilities or equipment.
Letters from the appropriate agencies should be provided.
   i.   Utility impacts: Describe proposed water and sanitary sewer facilities,
including any improvements or off-site extensions needed to serve the long
range development  on the site. For sites served with sanitary sewer and public
water, general calculations for sewage flows and water demands shall  be
provided in comparison with sewer line capacity.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   j.   Drainage: Describe conceptual plans to control drainage and any
significant changes from existing drainage patterns. If wetlands are to be used
as stormwater basins, methods to control fertilizers and filter runoff shall
be identified. Correspondence from the Genesee County Drain Commissioner shall
be attached indicating their concerns and suggestions.
   k.   Storage and handling of waste and hazardous materials: Methods of on-
and off-site disposal of solid waste shall  be identified. The information
shall describe the type of hazardous substances expected to be used, stored or
disposed of on the site; general location within the site; and method of
containment. Documentation of compliance with federal and state  requirements,
and a Pollution Incident Prevention Plan (PIPP) shall be submitted, as
appropriate.
   l.   Traffic impacts: A traffic study in accordance with
Section 329 below shall  be included in the Impact Assessment unless determined
to not be necessary by the Building and Zoning Administrator , because the use
will generate less than five hundred (500) one-way vehicle trips daily or less
than fifty (50) peak hour directional trips.
SECTION 329   MINIMUM CONTENTS OF TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY.
Where a traffic impact study is required or requested by the Planning
Commission or City Council , including when a component in an overall Impact
Study, the applicant shall bear the cost for preparation and evaluation of a
study prepared by a traffic engineer with experience preparing traffic impact
studies in Michigan during the preceding three (3) years to address the
following:
   a.   Existing conditions including existing daily and peak hour traffic on
adjacent street (s), a description of any sight distance limitations along the
site’s right-of-way frontage and accident histories within five hundred (500)
feet of the site and for any intersection which will experience a traffic
volume increase of at least five percent (5%) during the day or during a peak
hour due to the proposed project.
Where existing traffic counts are more than two (2) years old, new counts
should be taken. Traffic counts shall be taken on a Tuesday, Wednesday or
Thursday of non-holiday weeks. Additional counts (i.e. on a Saturday for a
proposed commercial development ) may also be required in some cases. The
following times/situations should also be avoided where possible so that the
traffic count data would represent a typical day: construction detours in the
area, summer days for a site near a school, etc. The firm performing the impact
study must make every effort to complete traffic counts during average or
higher than average volume conditions (i.e. regarding weather or seasonal
variations) for the area under study.
   b.   Forecasted trip generation of the proposed use for the a.m. and p.m.
peak hour and average daily traffic generated. The forecasts shall be based on
the data and procedures outlined in the most recent edition of the Institute of
Traffic Engineers Trip Generation Manual. The applicant may  use other commonly
accepted sources of data or supplement the standard data with data from similar
projects in Michigan.
   c.   For requests for a zoning change when such request represents a
departure from the land  use proposed in the City Master Plan , the study
should contrast the traffic impacts of typical uses permitted in the requested
zoning district with uses permitted in the current zoning district. The
Planning Commission  shall determine typical uses to be considered.
   d.   Projected traffic generated shall be distributed (inbound v. outbound,
left turn v. right turn) onto the existing street network to project turning
movements at major site access points and nearby intersections or expressway
interchange ramps. Rationale for the distribution shall be provided. If any
streets are proposed for realignment or vacation, the study shall forecast the
changes in traffic conditions along affected streets.
   e.   Capacity analysis at the proposed access points along public streets
using the procedures outlined in the most recent edition of the Highway
Capacity Manual published by the Transportation Research Board. Pre- and post-
construction capacity analyses shall also be performed at all street
intersections or expressway ramps where the expected traffic will comprise at
least five percent (5%) of the existing intersection capacity and/or for
roadway sections and intersections experiencing congestion or a relatively high
accident rate, as determined by the City.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   f.   The City may require a “gap study” to analyze the frequency and
duration of gaps in the flow of through traffic to accommodate turning
movements.
   g.   Analysis of any mitigation measures warranted by the anticipated
traffic impacts. Where appropriate, documentation shall be provided from the
appropriate road agency regarding time schedule for improvements and method of
funding.
   h.   A map and description of the location and design of proposed access
(driveway or new street intersection), including any sight distance
limitations, dimensions from adjacent driveways and intersections within two
hundred fifty (250) feet, other data to demonstrate that the design and number
of driveways proposed is the fewest necessary, and the driveway(s) will provide
safe and efficient traffic operation and be in accordance with the standards of
this ordinance.
   i.   An analysis of the potential need for bypass lanes or deceleration
tapers/lanes, including attachment of any correspondence by the Genesee County
Road Commission or the Michigan Department of Transportation, as appropriate.
   j.   Resume and qualification of the preparer.
SECTION 330   CLEAR VISION ZONE.
There shall be a clear vision zone at all corners of intersecting streets and/
or private roads, consisting of a triangular area defined by the point of
intersection of the right-of-way lines and the two points extended along such
lines a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the point of intersection, and
within which area no obstruction to vision, excluding existing topography,
shall be permitted from a height of two (2) feet to eight (8) feet above
centerline elevation of abutting streets, except not more than two (2) trees
with trunks of not more than thirty (30) inches in diameter each, and clear of
any branches for such heights may be located within such area. A greater clear
vision area may be reviewed where necessary in view of anticipated traffic
volumes, traffic speeds, geographic or topographic conditions or based on a
traffic engineering analysis using the standards of the American Association of
State and Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO).
SECTION 331   ACCESS THROUGH YARDS.
For the purpose of this Ordinance, access drives may be placed in the required
front or side yards so as to provide access to rear yards or accessory or
attached structures. These drives shall not be considered as structural
violations in front and side yards . Further, any walk, terrace or other
pavement servicing a like function, and not in excess of nine (9) inches above
the grade upon which placed, shall for the purpose of this Ordinance not be
considered to be a structure , and shall be permitted in any required yard .
SECTION 332   TEMPORARY USES AND SEASONAL OR SPECIAL EVENTS SALES (amended 2-
14-1996).
Temporary uses , temporary sales and seasonal or special events may be allowed
in any nonresidential district upon issuance of a permit, when providing the
following submittal information and meeting the standards of this Section.
   a.   Submittal information: the applicant shall  submit the following to the
Building and Zoning Administrator
      1.   An application form and required fee, established by the City
Council . The amount of the permit fee may vary depending upon the type of
event. The application should also describe procedures to be used for traffic/
parking management, waste disposal, security and similar measures to minimize
any negative impacts.
      2.   A written description of the proposed use or event, and the start
and end dates.
      3.   If the petitioner is not the owner of the property , the petitioner
shall provide written permission of the owner of the property to allow such an
event.
      4.   Information establishing a reasonable liability insurance coverage
is carried, to the satisfaction of the City.
      5.   A plot plan (to scale) illustrating property lines , adjacent uses
and zoning districts, existing and proposed buildings and structures,
boundaries of proposed sales/activity areas, any proposed lighting, calculation
of required parking based on the standards of
Article XXII, layout and materials for parking areas, proposed traffic
circulation, location of fire hydrants, location and size of any proposed
signs, and any other information deemed to be necessary by the Building and
Zoning Administrator .
      6.   The proprietor of the temporary use or seasonal event shall deposit
a performance guarantee or escrow, in an amount and form acceptable to the
Building and Zoning Administrator , prior to the issuance of a permit. The
performance guarantee shall be used by the City to pay the cost of returning
the property to its state prior to commencement of the event or refunded to the
proprietor upon compliance with the requirements of this and any other
applicable ordinances.
   b.   Standards and Procedures for Review: The review of proposed temporary
uses , temporary sales and seasonal  events shall be by the Building and Zoning
Administrator . The proposed use  or event shall not be approved unless all of
the following standards are met:
      1.   All required information has been submitted.
      2.   The proposed temporary use or event will be on a lot with a
permitted principal building or, if on a vacant lot, meets the minimum required
setback for buildings in the zoning district (
Article XX).
      3.   The proposed use , layout, hours of operation and site improvements,
such as fencing, are designed to help ensure compatibility with surrounding
land uses.
      4.   Adequate off-street parking and circulation will be provided. Where
Article XXII does not require required parking for the proposed use , at least
one parking space  shall be provided for each eight hundred (800) square feet
of gross lot area used for the activity. The Building and Zoning Administrator
 may require sufficient parking to accommodate the use based on reference
sources and experiences of the City of other communities.
      5.   Adequate provisions have been made for trash disposal, sewage
disposal and security.
      6.   All applicable City Building Codes and Ordinances will be met.
   c.   Operational standards
      1.   The length of a temporary use or sales event shall not exceed seven
(7) days during a season, except that sales of Christmas trees are permitted
for up to forty-five (45) days. Uses and events which are to occur on a regular
schedule (such as every weekend) or over a period of longer than seven (7) days
shall be permitted only in commercially zoned districts, based upon a decision
by the Board of Zoning Appeals that the use or event will comply with the
intent and standards of this Section. Such a request must be made known at the
time of application.
      2.   All equipment, materials, goods, poles, wires, lighting, signs and
other items associated with the temporary uses and seasonal events shall be
removed from the premises within five (5) days of the end of the event.
Following the five (5) day period, the City shall use the escrow fee to clear
such items from the property .
      3.   The City Building and Zoning Administrator  shall immediately cease
operations of any temporary use or seasonal event which does not conform to
these standards.
      4.   Appeals of the decision of the Zoning Administrator or Planning
Commission  shall be made to the Board of Appeals .
   d.   Exemptions: Garage sales for individual homeowners on their property
are exempt from the regulations of this Section.
SECTION 333   MAINTENANCE OF COMMONLY OWNED PRIVATE FACILITIES.
The Planning Commission or City Council , as appropriate, may require documents
suitable to the City Attorney to insure the quality, construction, maintenance
and replacement of commonly owned private facilities and land whether improved
or unimproved. These facilities may include, but are not limited to detention
ponds, retention basins, lighting, open space , wetlands, signs, landscaping ,
fences, screen walls, drains, trails and sidewalks to which more than two
owners of lots or condominiums have rights of use or access or enjoyment; or
which are owned in common by an association of owners. Prior to approving such
commonly owned private facilities, the Planning Commission or City Council
 shall approve legal documents which assure the continuing maintenance, and
periodic replacement of any commonly-owned private facilities.
SECTION 334   REVIEW, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF WIRELESS COMMUNICATION
FACILITIES.
The regulations of this Section are intended to conform with federal laws and
administrative rules that authorize and govern facilities needed to operate
wireless communication systems, but to reasonably regulate the location and
design of such facilities to retain the integrity of neighborhoods and the
character, property values and aesthetic quality of the city. Given the
dramatic increase in the number of wireless communication facilities requested
as a result of the new technology and the Federal Telecommunications Act of
1996, being Pub. Law No. 104-104 (see § 1(a), 110 Stat. 56), it is the policy
of the city that all users should co-locate on Attached Wireless Communication
Facilities and Wireless Communication Support Structures in the interest of
achieving the purposes and intent of this section. In addition, in recognition
of the city’s concern that technological advances may render such visually
obtrusive towers unnecessary in the future, there are requirements to remove
unused or unnecessary facilities in a timely manner.
   a.   Definitions. The following definitions shall  apply in the
interpretation of this Section:
      1.   Wireless Communication Facilities. All structures and accessory
facilities relating to the use  of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose
of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may  include, but shall not be
limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices and exchanges,
microwave relay towers, telephone transmission equipment building and
commercial mobile radio service facilities. This definition does not include
“reception antenna” for an individual lot as otherwise defined and regulated in
this zoning ordinance, or governmental facilities subject to state  or federal
law  or regulations which preempt municipal regulatory authority.
      2.   Attached Wireless Communication Facilities. Wireless communication
facilities affixed to existing structures, such as existing buildings, towers,
water tanks, or utility poles.
      3.   Wireless Communication Support Structures. Structures erected  or
modified to support wireless communication antennas. Support structures within
this definition include, but shall not be limited to, monopoles, lattice
towers, light poles, wood poles and guyed towers, or other structures which
appear to be something other than a mere support structure .
      4.   Colocation. Location by two (2) or more wireless communication
providers of wireless communication facilities on a common structure , tower,
or building, to reduce the overall number  of structures required to support
wireless communication antennas within the city.
   b.   Zoning Districts and Approval Process for Various Types of Situations
Type/Location of Wireless Communication Districts Permitted Approval Procedure
Facility
Type/Location of Wireless Communication Facility                             Districts   Approval
                                                                             Permitted   Procedure
1. Attached to existing structures:
                                                                             All non-
- Attached to an existing conforming structure that will not be materially   single      Building
altered or changed in appearance                                             family      permit
                                                                             residential
                                                                             districts
                                                                                         Building
                                                                                         permit,
- Attached to an existing utility pole within a public right-of-way that                 provided a
will not be modified or materially alter the pole or impair sight lines or   All         letter of
compromise safety                                                            districts   acceptance is
                                                                                         provided by
                                                                                         the utility
                                                                                         company
- Co-location upon an attached wireless communication facility previously    All         Building
approved for such colocation where the height is not increased by more than  districts   permit
20 feet or 10%
- Co-location upon an attached wireless communication facility previously                Site Plan
approved for such colocation where the height is increased by more than 20   All         approval by
feet or 10%                                                                  districts   the Planning
                                                                                         Commission
2. Located on a municipally owned site:
                                                                                         Administrative
                                                                                         Sketch Plan
- Attached to an existing structure                                          All         approval by
                                                                             districts   the Building
                                                                                         and Zoning
                                                                                         Administrator
                                                                                         Site Plan
- Monopole up to 150 feet in height1                                         All         approval by
                                                                             districts   the Planning
                                                                                         Commission
3. Located on a site owned by another governmental entity, religious institution, public school, or
non-residential land use in a residential zoning district
                                                                                         Special Land
                                                                             All         Use required
- Monopole up to 100 feet in height1                                         districts   in accordance
                                                                                         with Article
                                                                                         XXI.
4. New facility not addressed above:
                                                                             B-2, B-3,   Permitted use,
                                                                             R-P, I-1,   Site Plan
- Monopole up to 120 feet tall1                                              I-          approval by
                                                                             2 Districts the Planning
                                                                                         Commission
                                                                                         Permitted use,
                                                                             R-P, I-     Site Plan
- Monopole 120—150 feet tall1                                              1 and I-    approval by
                                                                             2 Districts the Planning
                                                                                         Commission
                                                                                         Special Land
                                                                             B-2, B-     Use required
                                                                            3 Districts in accordance
                                                                                         with Article
                                                                                         XXI.
                                                                                         Special Land
- Monopole 150—200 feet tall, or lattice tower when it can be demonstrated I-1 and I-  Use required
that a monopole is not feasible                                              2 Districts in accordance
                                                                                         with Article
                                                                                         XXI.
1.   Height may be increased twenty (20) feet where determined necessary to provide future colocation.
 
   c.   Application Requirements. The following information shall  be provided
with the sketch plan, as required above.
      1.   Prior to issuing a building permit, a signed certification by a
State of Michigan licensed professional engineer shall be provided to the City
with regard to the manner in which the proposed structure will fall (i.e. “all
zone”), and that the setback area provided shall accommodate the structure
should it fall or break.
      2.   A description of performance guarantee , in a manner acceptable to
the City Attorney, to be posted at the time of receiving a building permit for
the facility to ensure removal of the facility when it has been abandoned or is
no longer needed, as provided in paragraph e below.
      In this regard, the security shall , at the election of the city
attorney, be in the form of: (1) cash; (2) security bond; (3) letter of credit;
or, (4) an agreement in a form approved by the City Attorney and recordable at
the office of the Register of Deeds, establishing a promise of the applicant
and owner of the property to remove the facility in a timely manner as required
under this section of the ordinance, with the further provision that the
applicant and owner shall be responsible for the payment of any costs or
attorneys fees incurred by the city in securing removal.
      3.   A map that illustrates existing and known proposed wireless
communication facilities within the city and township, which are relevant in
terms of potential co-location or to demonstrate the need for the proposed
facility. If and to the extent the information in question is on file with the
city, the applicant shall be required only to update as needed. Any such
information which is trade secret and/or other confidential commercial
information which, if released would result in commercial disadvantage to the
applicant, may be submitted with a request for confidentiality in connection
with the development of governmental policy, M.C.L.A. § 15.243(l)(f). This
ordinance shall serve as the promise to maintain confidentiality to the extent
permitted by law . The request for confidentiality must be prominently stated
in order to bring it to the attention of the community.
      4.   For all new facilities, in recognition of the city’s policy to
promote co-location, a written agreement in a format approved by the City
Attorney, transferable to all assessors and assigns, that the operator shall
make space available on the facility for co-location.
      5.   The name, address and phone number of the person to contact for
engineering, maintenance and other notice purposes. This information shall be
continuously updated during all times the facility is on the premises .
   d.   Design Standards Applicable to All Facilities. In addition to the
Criteria of Site Plan Review listed in
Section 2405, all wireless communication facilities shall  be constructed and
maintained in accordance with the following standards:
      1.   Facilities shall be located and designed to be harmonious with the
surrounding areas. The City encourages unique design of the structure to either
diminish the visual impact or to create an architectural feature that will
contribute to or enhance community character.
      2.   A permit for the construction and use of a new wireless
communication facility shall not be granted until the applicant demonstrates a
feasible co-location is not available for the coverage area and capacity needs.
      3.   All new and modified wireless communication facilities shall be
designed and constructed to accommodate co-location.
      4.   Landscaping  shall be provided to screen the structure base,
accessory buildings and enclosure from adjacent properties and public rights-
of-way.
      5.   Elevations of the accessory buildings shall be provided. All
accessory buildings shall be constructed of brick, provided the City may waive
this requirement a building located in an I-1 or I-2 District that is not
visible from a public right-of-way or nonindustrial zoning district.
      6.   Fencing shall be provided for protection of the support structure
and security from children and other persons who may otherwise access
facilities.
      7.   Any nonconforming situations on the site, such as outdoor storage ,
signs, inadequate landscaping , unpaved parking, lack of a sidewalk , improper
lighting or similar conditions shall be brought into conformance prior to the
erection of the wireless communication facility. If existing buildings or
structures are not in conformance with the current zoning standards,
improvements shall be made to decrease the nonconformity or additional
landscaping shall be provided to reduce the impact of the nonconformity and the
wireless facility.
      8.   The operator shall comply with applicable federal and state
standards relative to the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions.
      9.   The applicant shall demonstrate that the requested height of the new
or modified support structure and antenna shall be the minimum height be
necessary for reasonable communication by the applicant, including additional
height to accommodate future co-location where appropriate.
      10.   Minimum required setbacks for new facility or support structure .
         (a)   From any residential district - the height of the structure ,
provided the engineering information required in c, 1 is provided. The person
or body with authority to approve the facility may decrease this setback to
that provided in (c) below upon a finding that no residential use exists or is
expected on the adjacent site.
         (b)   From any existing or proposed rights-of-way or other publicly
traveled roads or non-motorized improved pathways - half the height of the
structure , plus ten (10) feet, provided the engineering information required
in c, 1 is provided; otherwise the setback  shall be the height of the
facility.
         (c)   From non-residential district - one half the height of the
structure , provided the engineering information required in c, 1 above
demonstrates such setback is adequate.
      11.   Accessory buildings shall be a maximum of fourteen (14) feet high
and shall be setback in accordance with the requirements for principal
buildings in that zoning district .
      12.   There shall be unobstructed access to the support structure , for
operation, maintenance, repair and inspection purposes, which may be provided
through or over an easement . This access shall have a width and location
determined by such factors as: the location of adjacent thoroughfares and
traffic and circulation within the site; utilities needed to service the tower
and any attendant facilities; the location of buildings and parking facilities;
proximity to residential districts and minimizing disturbance to the natural
landscape; and the type of equipment which will need to access the site.
      13.   Where an attached wireless communication facility is proposed on
the roof of a building if the equipment enclosure is proposed as a roof
appliance or penthouse on the building, it shall be designed, constructed and
maintained to be architecturally compatible with the principal building . The
equipment enclosure may be located within the principal building or may be an
accessory building .
      14.   The support system shall be constructed in accordance with all
applicable building codes and shall include the submission of a soils report
from a geotechnical engineer, licensed in the State of Michigan. This soils
report shall include soil borings and statements confirming the suitability of
soil conditions for the proposed use .
      15.   The requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal
Communication Commission, and Michigan Aeronautics Commission shall be noted.
Furthermore, the applicant shall provide the City with evidence of compliance
with the requirements of Bishop International Airport. If approval or
authorization is needed from the Joint Airport Zoning Board or another airport
authority, such approval or authorization shall be provided to the City in
writing prior to consideration of the application submittal.
      16.   A maintenance plan, and any applicable maintenance agreement, shall
be presented and approved as part of the site plan for the proposed facility.
Such plan shall be designed to ensure the long term, continuous maintenance to
a reasonably prudent standard.
      17.   Towers shall be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual
obtrusiveness or be constructed of galvanized steel.
      18.   Towers shall not be lit, unless required by the Federal Aviation
Administration or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the
lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
      19.   No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
   e.   Removal. As a condition of every approval of a wireless communication
facility, adequate provision shall  be made for removal of the facility by
users and owners upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events:
      1.   When the facility has not been used for one hundred eighty (180)
days or more. For purposes of this section, the removal of antennas or other
equipment from the facility, or the cessation of operations (transmission and/
or reception of radio signals) shall be considered as the beginning of a period
of nonuse.
      2.   The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as set
forth in paragraph (1) above, may be applied and limited to portions of a
facility.
      3.   Upon the occurrence of one or more of the events requiring removal,
specified in paragraph (1) above, the property  owner or persons who had used
the facility shall immediately apply or secure the application for any required
demolition or removal permits, and immediately proceed with and complete the
demolition/removal, restoring the premises to an acceptable condition as
reasonably determined by the Building and Zoning Administrator .
      4.   If the required removal of a facility or a portion thereof has not
been lawfully completed within sixty (60) days of the applicable deadline, and
after at least thirty (30) days written notice, the City may remove or secure
the removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with its actual cost
and reasonable administrative charge to be drawn or collected and/or enforced
from or under the security posted at the time application was made for
establishing the facility.
   f.   Nonconforming facilities and penalties for not permitting collocation.
If a party who owns or otherwise controls a wireless communication facility
shall  fail or refuse to alter a structure  to accommodate a proposed and
otherwise feasible co-location, such facility shall thereupon and thereafter be
deemed to be a nonconforming structure  and use , and shall not be altered,
expanded or extended in any respect. In addition, if a party refuses to allow
co-location in accordance with the intent of this Section, and this action
results in construction of a new tower, the city may  refuse to approve a new
wireless communication support structure  from that party for a period of up to
five (5) years. Such a party may  seek and obtain a variance  from the Zoning
Board of Appeals  if and to the limited extent the applicant demonstrates
entitlement to variance  relief which, in this context, shall mean a
demonstration that enforcement of the five (5) year prohibition would
unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent wireless
communication services, or that such enforcement would have the effect of
prohibiting the provision of personal wireless communication services.
   g.   Variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals  may  consider a variance  from
the standards of this Section, based upon a finding that one or more of the
following factors exist:
      1.   Location. The applicant has demonstrated that a location within a
district  in accordance with the standards of this Section can not reasonably
meet the coverage or capacity needs of the applicant.
      2.   No Co-location. The applicant has demonstrated that a feasible co-
location is not available for the coverage area and capacity needs because
existing structures can not support the facility, that co-location would result
in unreasonable interference, or that reasonable financial terms are not
available for co-location.
      3.   Tower Setback. The applicant has provided engineering information
documenting that the tower is self-collapsing and that the setback  area
provided shall  accommodate the structure  should it fall or break and provide
a reasonable buffer in the event the structure  fails.
      4.   Height. The height requested is due to signal interference due to
topography, tall buildings, masses of trees, or other obstructions, or would
reduce the number  of towers to the benefit of the City.
      5.   Mitigation. The applicant has proposed means to mitigate any
negative impacts through provision for future co-location, if found to be
appropriate by the City, and special design of the facility and site.
      6.   Design. The wireless communication and accessory facilities shall
be designed to be compatible with the existing character of the proposed site,
neighborhood and general area such as a steeple, bell tower, or similar form.
(Amended Ordinance 1407-01, passed 8-13-2014)
SECTION 335   TEMPORARY REFUSE AND STORAGE CONTAINERS.
The use of temporary refuse and storage containers (not already governed by a
valid building permit) may be allowed in residential zoning districts subject
to the following regulations:
   a.   Number: No more than one (1) such container may  be used per property
at any given time.
   b.   Location: Such containers shall  be placed on a hard surface or in a
non-required side or rear yard  of an occupied  lot and shall not be located in
an easement  or right-of-way .
   c.   Duration: The maximum duration for use  of such containers shall  be
twenty-one (21) days. A given property  shall be allowed use of not more than
two (2) such containers in any given calendar  year.
   d.   Approval: Use of such containers shall  require approval from the
Building and Zoning Official (or his/her designee) prior to delivery of such
container to the subject property .
   e.   Maintenance: Such containers shall  be used and maintained in a manner
that does not disturb the public health, safety or welfare.
   f.   Exceptions/Modifications: Use of such containers for a period of no
more than forty-eight (48) hours shall not require City approval. Furthermore,
use  of such containers for a period exceeding that allowed above may  be
granted by the Planning Commission . The Commission may require safeguards
including, but not limited to, setbacks, screening and off-street parking  in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   g.   Violations: Non-compliance with any of the above regulations shall  be
considered violation of the City Zoning Ordinance Section 1101 Permitted Uses.
(Amended Ordinance 1411-02, passed 12-10-2014)
SECTION 336   SOLAR PANELS.
Solar panels shall be allowed in all zoning districts attached to either
permitted principal or accessory buildings subject to the following
regulations:
   a.   Attached to building. Where attached to a building, the solar panels
shall be subject to the same regulations as the building in terms of height
and setbacks . Solar panels may be attached to the roof or a building wall, but
not both.
      1.   Roof-mounted panels shall include solar panels integrated as the
surface layer of the roof structure with no additional apparent change in
relief or projection (the preferred installation), or separate flush-mounted
solar panels attached to the roof surface.
         (a)   Solar panels integrated as the surface layer of the roof
structure, as well as separate flush-mounted solar panels may be located on any
part of the roof.
         (b)   Separate flush-mounted solar panels shall be parallel with the
roofline, and shall not project more than 12 inches above the roof.
         (c)   Separate flush-mounted solar panels installed on a building or
structure with a sloped roof surface shall not project vertically above the
peak of the roof to which it is attached.
         (d)   Solar panels mounted on a flat roof shall not be subject to the
standards of paragraph (b) above. However, they shall not project vertically
higher than the height of the parapet wall surrounding the roof or shall be
screened by an architectural feature.
      2.   Flush-mounted solar panels on the building wall may only be attached
to one side or rear building facade and shall not face a street.
   b.   Glare. Solar panels shall be placed and arranged such that reflected
solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto adjacent buildings,
properties  or roadways.
   c.   Building permit. Solar energy systems shall conform to applicable
industry standards. A building permit shall be obtained in accordance with the
Building and Electrical Codes.
(Ordinance 2412-01, passed 1-8-2025)
ARTICLE IV: ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
Section
Sec. 400   Districts Established
Sec. 401   District Boundaries
Sec. 402   District Boundaries Interpreted
Sec. 403   Zoning of Annexed Areas
Sec. 404   Zoning of Vacated Areas
Sec. 405   District Requirements
SECTION 400   DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the City of Grand Blanc is hereby divided
into the following districts:
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
R-1  Single-Family Residential District
R-2  Single-Family Residential District
R-3  Single-Family Attached Residential District
RT   Two-Family Residential District
LDMF Low Density  Multiple Family Residential District
HDMF High Density  Multiple Family Residential District
MHP  Mobile Home Park  District
NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
OS-1 Office Service District
B-1  Neighborhood Business District
B-2  Community Business District
B-3  General Business District
R-P  Research Park District
I-1  Light Industrial District
I-2  General Industrial District
P-1  Vehicular Parking District
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
CBD  Central Business District Overlay Zone
PUD  Planned Unit Development District
 
SECTION 401   DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the Zoning
Map, City of Grand Blanc Zoning Ordinance, which accompanies this Ordinance,
and which map with all notations, references, and other information shown
thereon shall be as much a part of this Ordinance as if fully described herein.
SECTION 402   DISTRICT BOUNDARIES INTERPRETED.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
   a.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys, shall be construed to follow such center line.
   b.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
 shall be construed as following such lot lines .
   c.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be
construed as following City limits.
   d.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
be the midway between the main tracks.
   e.   Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to
follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall be
construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as
approximately following the center line of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or
other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines.
   f.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the
official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
   g.   Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances
not covered by the above, the Board of Appeals  shall interpret the district
boundaries.
   h.   Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be indicated on the
Zoning Map by patterns which, for the sake of map clarity, do not cover public
right-of-ways, it is intended that such district boundaries do extend to the
center of any public right-of-way .
SECTION 403   ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS.
Whenever any area is annexed to the City of Grand Blanc land that is zoned
previous to annexation shall be classified as being in whichever district of
this Ordinance most closely conforms with the zoning that existed prior to
annexation and the Council shall approve same by resolution.
SECTION 404   ZONING OF VACATED AREAS.
Whenever any street , alley or other public way, within the City of Grand Blanc
shall be vacated, such street , alley , or other public way or portion thereof,
shall automatically be classified in the same Zone District as the property to
which it attaches. Ownership of vacated rights-of-way shall be by adjacent
property  owner to site unless other arrangements are specified by the City.
SECTION 405   DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.
All buildings and uses in any District  shall be subject to the provisions of
Article XX - Schedule of Regulations and
Article III - General Provisions.
ARTICLE V: R-1 THROUGH R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Section
Sec. 500   Intent
Sec. 501   Permitted Uses
Sec. 502   Accessory Home Occupations
Sec. 503   Special Land Use s
Sec. 504   Required Conditions
Sec. 505   Additional Site Development Standards
SECTION 500   INTENT.
The R-1 and R-2 Single-Family Residential Districts are intended to provide for
low-density , one-family detached dwellings and other facilities which serve
the residents in the district . The R-3 Single-Family Residential District is
intended to provide for low density , single family detached or attached
dwelling units to serve as a buffer between more restrictive detached single
family districts and less restrictive uses and arterials.
SECTION 501   PERMITTED USES.
In the R-1 and R-2 Single-Family Residential Districts, no building or land
 shall be used or erected , except for one (1) or more of the following
specified uses unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
   a.   Single-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
Section 305. Single-family subdivisions and site condominium projects must also
comply with the City’s Subdivision Control Ordinance.
   b.   Single-family attached dwelling units in the R-3 District only (maximum
four units attached per building).
   c.   Publicly owned libraries, parks, parkways, recreational facilities,
court buildings, post offices, community centers, civic centers and municipal
buildings, provided the building architecture and materials are consistent with
the materials used at the Grand Blanc City Hall.
   d.   Cemeteries which lawfully occupied  land at the time of adoption of
this Ordinance.
   e.   Private pools as an accessory use within the rear yard only, and not
located in an easement (refer to
Section 313).
   f.   Family day care homes and family foster care homes subject to the
following provisions:
      1.   Such uses shall be duly licensed by the State Department of Social
Services.
      2.   Buildings and lots so used shall conform to all state and local code
requirements.
      3.   A minimum of thirty-five (35) square feet of indoor play area shall
be provided for each child. Indoor play area shall be computed exclusive of
hallways, bathrooms, reception and office areas, kitchens, storage areas and
closets, basements, except those which are finished and have dual means of
egress, and areas used exclusively for rest or sleep.
      4.   A minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of outdoor play
area for each child. The total outdoor play area shall have a total minimum
area of not less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. All
adjacent outdoor play areas shall be fenced and screened in accordance with
Section 2310.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   g.   Adult foster care homes and adult foster care small group homes with up
to six (6) adults.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   h.   Essential public services not including storage yards , when operating
requirements necessitate their location within the district to serve the
immediate vicinity.
   i.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures, customarily incident to any
of the above-permitted uses defined in Article II and regulated in Sections
312 through
317.
SECTION 502   ACCESSORY HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   a.   Permitted Home Occupations: The following are permitted home
occupations provided they meet all of the standards listed in item b. below:
      1.   Dressmaking, sewing and tailoring.
      2.   Painting, sculpturing or writing.
      3.   Telephone answering or telemarketing.
      4.   Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving, and lapidary work.
      5.   Tutoring, limited to four students at a time.
      6.   Computer program development.
      7.   Salesperson’s office or home office of a professional person that
meets all conditions of b, no sales or director/customer are permitted on
premise.
      8.   Repair of clocks, instruments or other small appliances which do not
create a nuisance due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odor or results in
electrical interference.
   b.   Required Conditions: Home occupations shall  comply with all of the
following standards:
      1.   Home occupation  shall be based on an annual permit for such home
occupation , and fees are to be set by resolution of the City Council .
      2.   There shall be no visible change to the outside appearance of the
dwelling.
      3.   Traffic, parking, sewage or water use shall not be noticeably
different from impacts associated with a typical home in the neighborhood.
      4.   The use shall not generate noise, vibration, glare, fumes, toxic
substance, odors or electrical interference, at levels greater than normally
associated with a single family home.
      5.   Outside storage or display is prohibited.
      6.   Signs are not permitted except address numbers.
      7.   The home occupation shall not become a nuisance.
      8.   Only an occupant of the dwelling may be employed or involved in the
home occupation .
      9.   The home occupation  shall occupy a maximum of ten (10) percent of
the usable floor area of the dwelling. Garages, whether attached or detached,
shall not be used for any home occupation .
      10.   All delivery of goods and visits by patrons and activity shall
occur between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
   c.   Prohibited home occupations: The following are prohibited as home
occupations:
      1.   Private clubs.
      2.   Repair shops which may create a nuisance due to noise, vibration,
glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference.
      3.   Restaurants.
      4.   Stables or kennels.
      5.   Tourist homes.
      6.   Repair, maintenance, painting and storage of automobiles, machinery,
trucks, boats , recreational vehicles and similar items.
   d.   Any proposed home occupation that is neither specifically permitted
above, nor specifically prohibited above, shall be considered a Special Land
Use and be granted or denied upon consideration of the “Required Conditions”
contained in item b. above and the standards specified in Section 2102.
   e.   Home occupation permits shall be limited to the applicant who legally
resides in the residence .
SECTION 503   SPECIAL LAND USES.
The following uses shall be permitted upon review by the Planning Commission
and approval by the City Council , in accordance with the general standards for
all Special Land Use s listed in
Section 2102, and the standards for the specific use listed in
Section 2110.
   a.   Accessory apartments within permitted single family homes.
   b.   Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto.
   c.   Public, parochial and private elementary schools.
   d.   Group day care homes and group foster care homes.
   e.   Adult foster care small group homes with seven (7) to twelve (12)
residents and adult foster care large group homes .
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   f.   Bed-and-breakfast inns.
   g.   Cemeteries.
   h.   Essential public service buildings and uses (without storage yards )
when operating requirements necessitate their location within the district to
serve the immediate vicinity.
   i.   Private noncommercial recreational areas, institutional or community
recreation centers, nonprofit swimming pool clubs.
   j.   Golf courses without driving ranges.
   k.   Uses of the same nature or class as the majority of the uses listed in
this district as either a Principal Use Permitted or a Special Land Use , but
not listed elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, as determined by the City
Council , following a Planning Commission public hearing and recommendation.
The determination shall be based on the standards of Section 309. Any use not
listed and not found to be “similar” is prohibited in this zoning district .
   l.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to an
approved Special Land Use Permit; however, a separate Special Land Use Permit
shall be required for any use or storage of hazardous materials and any fuel
storage tanks.
SECTION 504   REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
In the case of attached residential dwelling developments, all site plans shall
be submitted and approved in accordance with
Article XXIV, prior to issuance of a building permit.
   a.   Dedication of Streets: All streets constructed within a development  in
the R-3 One-Family Residential District shall  be dedicated to the City of
Grand Blanc, and shall conform to the standards required for said City streets.
   b.   Access to Major Thoroughfare or Collector Street: For all attached
residential dwelling uses in the R-3 Zoning District, a primary access to the
overall project shall  be provided to an existing or planned arterial or
collector street , without traveling through a single-family detached
residential area. Individual driveways for buildings shall not be permitted
along arterial or collector streets. Variances may  be granted if the Board of
Zoning Appeals finds that there are special circumstances which indicate that
there will be a substantial improvement in traffic safety and/or development
design by granting such exceptions.
   c.   Common Wall: The attaching of single-family dwelling units shall  be
permitted in the R-3 District when said dwelling units are attached through a
common party wall, which does not have over fifty (50) percent of its area in
common wall with an abutting dwelling wall, by means of an architectural wall
detail which does not form interior room  space, or through a common party wall
in only the garage  portion of the adjacent structures, there being no common
party wall relationship permitted through any other portion of the residential
unit.
   d.   Maximum Number of Attached Units: The maximum number  of dwelling units
attached in an R-3 District in the above manner shall not exceed four (4),
except that upon application to the Board of Zoning Appeals, authorization may
be granted for more than four (4) dwelling units.
SECTION 505   ADDITIONAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
No plat or site plan  shall be approved creating lots or parcels in accordance
with the requirements given for the Single-Family Residential District unless
served by public water and sanitary sewer facilities. All Permitted and Special
Land Use s shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
including those listed below as a reference guide.
a. Article II:    Definitions
                  General Provisions for Standards on a variety of items such
                  as: calculation of buildable lot, regulations for single
b. Article III:   family dwellings; illegal dwellings; accessory uses,
                  temporary buildings and structures; parking and repair of
                  vehicles; swimming pools; fences; reception antennae;
                  limitations on clearing and grading site, etc.
c. Article XX:    Schedule of Regulations (minimum lot area , lot width ,
                  setbacks, max. height, etc.).
d. Article XXII:  Parking, parking area landscaping and loading/unloading
                  standards.
e. Article XXIII: Landscaping Standards
f. Article XXIV:  Site Plan Review Standards
g. Ordinance 116: Sign Ordinance (
                  Chapter 1480)
h. Ordinance 220: Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
i. Ordinance 215: Subdivision Control Ordinance
 
ARTICLE VI: R-T TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Section
Sec. 600   Intent
Sec. 601   Permitted Uses
Sec. 602   Special Land Use s
Sec. 603   Additional Site Development Standards
SECTION 600   INTENT.
The R-T Two-Family Residential District is intended to provide a more intensive
residential use of the land with new construction or conversion of existing
structures between adjacent residential and commercial, office , thoroughfares
or other uses. This district also recognizes the existence of older residential
areas of the City where larger houses have been or can be converted from
single-family to two-family residences in order to extend the economic life of
these structures and allow the owners to justify the expenditures for repairs
and modernizations. This district also allows the construction of new two-
family residences where slightly greater densities are permitted. Multiple
housing and activity centers for the elderly are allowed in this district as
Special Land Use s.
SECTION 601   PERMITTED USES.
In a R-T Two-Family Residential District, no building or land  shall be used or
erected , except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless
otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
   a.   All uses permitted and as regulated in the One-Family Residential
Districts. The standards of the Schedule of Regulations applicable to the R-
1 One-Family Residential District, shall apply as minimum standards when one-
family detached dwellings are erected .
   b.   Two-family dwellings.
   c.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures incidental to any of the above
permitted uses as defined in
Article II and described in Sections
312 through
317.
SECTION 602   SPECIAL LAND USES.
The following uses may be permitted, upon review and approval by the City
Council , in accordance with the general standards for all special land uses
listed in
Section 2102, and the standards for the specific use listed in
Section 2110.
   a.   Housing for the Elderly , retirement villages, etc.
   b.   Activity center buildings specifically for the elderly when on a
minimum size of two (2) acres.
   c.   Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto.
   d.   Group day care homes and group foster care homes.
   e.   Adult foster care small group homes with seven (7) to twelve (12)
residents and adult foster care large group homes .
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   f.   Bed-and-breakfast inns.
   g.   Essential public service buildings and uses without storage yards when
operating requirements necessitate their location within the district to serve
the immediate vicinity.
   h.   Uses of the same nature or class as the majority of the uses listed in
this district as either a Principal Permitted Use or a Special Land Use , but
not listed elsewhere in this zoning ordinance, as determined by the City
Council , following a Planning Commission public hearing and recommendation.
The determination shall be based on the standards of
Section 309. Any use not listed and not found to be “similar” is prohibited in
this zoning district .
   i.   Accessory uses buildings and structures incidental to any of the above
permitted uses as defined in
Article II and described in Sections
312 through
317 without requiring an additional Special Land Use permit.
   j.   Child care center or day care center .
SECTION 603   ADDITIONAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
No plat or site plan  shall be approved unless served by public water and
sanitary sewer facilities. All Permitted and Special Land Use s shall comply
with all applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance including those listed
below as a reference guide.
a. Article II:    Definitions
                  General Provisions for Standards on a variety of items such
                  as: calculation of buildable lot, regulations for single
b. Article III:   family dwellings; illegal dwellings; accessory uses;
                  temporary buildings and structures; parking and repair of
                  vehicles; swimming pools; fences; reception antennae;
                  limitations on clearing and grading site, etc.
c. Article XX:    Schedule of Regulations (minimum lot area , lot width ,
                  setbacks, max. height, etc.).
d. Article XXII:  Parking, parking area landscaping and loading/unloading and
                  standards.
e. Article XXIII: Landscaping Standards
f. Article XXIV:  Site Plan Review Standards
g. Ordinance 116  Sign Ordinance (
                  Chapter 1480)
h. Ordinance 220  Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
i. Ordinance 215  Subdivision Control Ordinance
 
ARTICLE VII: MH MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICTS
Section
Sec. 700   Intent
Sec. 701   Principal Permitted Uses
Sec. 702   Mobile Home Park Required Conditions Standards
SECTION 700   INTENT.
The MH Mobile Home Park Districts are intended to provide sites for Mobile Home
Park s which are characterized by a relatively high density , transient
structures which are replaced periodically and dwelling units which are
permitted by State  law to exist without conforming to local codes and
ordinances applicable to all other dwelling units. Because the Mobile Home Park
further possesses site characteristics similar to multiple-family residential
development and because they typically develop with private streets and utility
systems, thereby creating an interruption in the continuity of the local
streets and utility systems, they are not compatible when located in an
otherwise single-family area. Therefore, in this Ordinance, Mobile Home Park s
are intended to be located so as to provide a transition of use between
extensive nonresidential districts, i.e. I-1 Light Industrial and I-2 General
Industrial and Multiple-Family Residential Districts.
SECTION 701   PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
In an MH Mobile Home Park District, no building, structure or land  shall be
used or erected , and no building or structure shall be erected except for one
(1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this
Ordinance:
   a.   Mobile Home Park s, which conform to the requirements of
Section 702 of this Ordinance.
   b.   Multiple-family dwellings as permitted and as regulated in the LDMF and
HDMF Multiple Family Residential Districts.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
SECTION 702   MOBILE HOME PARK REQUIRED CONDITIONS STANDARDS.
   a.   Mobile Home Park s shall be subject to the review and approval of the
site plan in accordance with
Article XXIV. Such review of the site plan is required in order to minimize the
possibility of adverse effects upon adjacent property ; and furthermore, to
find proper relationships in the development features as they relate to traffic
safety, service roads, driveways, parking areas, accessory buildings and uses,
and open space .
   b.   The mobile home park  shall be developed with sites averaging 5,500
square feet per mobile home unit. This 5,500 square feet for any one site may
be reduced by twenty (20%) percent provided that the individual site shall be
equal to at least 4,400 square feet. For each square foot of land gained
through the reduction of a site below 5,500 square feet, at least an equal
amount of land shall be dedicated as open space , but in no case shall the open
and distance requirements be less than that required by the Mobile Home
Commission.
   c.   Each mobile home site shall have a front yard  setback of twenty (20)
feet.
   Each mobile home  shall be in compliance with the following minimum
distances:
      1.   Twenty (20) feet from any part of attached structure of another
mobile home which is used for living purposes.
      2.   Ten (10) feet from an on-site parking space of an adjacent mobile
home site.
      3.   Ten (10) feet from an attached or detached structure or accessory of
an adjacent mobile home which is not used for living purposes.
      4.   Fifty (50) feet from a permanent building.
      5.   One hundred (100) feet from a recreation field.
      6.   Any park or structure that belongs to a mobile home  shall be set
back the following minimum distances:
         a)   Twenty (20) feet from the edge of an internal road and seven and
one-half (7 1/2) feet from a parking bay.
         b)   Seven (7) feet from a common pedestrian walkway.
         c)   Ten (10) feet from a natural or man-made lake, object, or
walkway.
   e.   Setbacks from property boundary lines:
      1.   Mobile homes, permanent buildings and facilities and other
structures shall not be located closer than twenty (20) feet from the property
boundary line of the mobile home park s or mobile home condominiums.
      2.   If mobile homes, permanent buildings and facilities, and other
structures abut a public right-of-way , they shall not be located closer than
fifty (50) feet from the boundary line, except that if the boundary line runs
through the center of the public road, the fifty (50) feet shall be measured
from the road right-of-way line.
   f.   service drive requirements:
      1.   The service drives shall be hard surfaced.
      2.   The service drive  shall have access to a public thoroughfare or
shall be connected to a public thoroughfare by a permanent easement which shall
be recorded prior to approval by the State . Sole access by an alley is
prohibited.
      3.   A dead-end road shall terminate with an adequate turning area. A
blunt-end road is prohibited.
      4.   An adequate safe-sight distance shall be provided at intersections.
      5.   An offset at an intersection or an intersection of more than two (2)
streets is prohibited.
      6.   All roads shall be clearly marked with appropriate traffic signs,
subject to the provisions of the Mobile Home Commission Rules.
      7.   A road sign  shall be named and so identified by street  signs
located at all road intersections.
      8.   A name of an internal road shall be approved by the City.
      9.   The alignment and gradient of a service drive  shall be adopted to
the topography and shall be graded for its full width to drain surface water.
When grading roads in length the finish grade of the street shall not be
greater than eight (8%) percent and not less than four-tenths (0.4%) of the
length. Short lengths with a maximum grade of twelve (12%) percent may be
permitted, provided traffic safety is assured.
      10.   A service drive  shall be constructed of materials suitable for
subgrades and hard surface in compliance with the standards of the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, adopted herein by
reference. The park developer may  use other suitable materials of equal
quality, if approved by the Mobile Home Commission.
      11.   Curbing may be installed on service drives. If curbing is used, it
shall be constructed as follows:
         a)   Curbing shall be concrete with the exception of the integral
valley curb and gutter (gravity drains), which may be either concrete or
asphalt.
         b)   If integral valley curbing and gutter or mountable curb and
gutter is used, the height of the curb measured from the gutter line shall be
between three (3) and five (5) inches.
         c)   Crosswalks shall conform to Public Act 8 of 1973, being M.C.L.A.
§ 125.1361.
      12.   Service drives width shall be as follows:
         a)   Two-way traffic with no parking - minimum 21 feet.
         b)   Two-way traffic with parallel parking one side - minimum 31 feet.
         c)   Two-way traffic with parallel parking two sides - minimum 41
feet.
      13.   The City Engineer  shall review ingress and egress of the service
drives.
   g.   A park electrical system shall , at a minimum, be designed, installed,
operated, and maintained in compliance with the Manufactured Housing
Commission, Act 96 of 1987, as amended and NFPA 70, National Electrical Code
with Michigan Amendments 2008 Edition, as amended, and pursuant to the
construction, installation and safety standards of the servicing public service
company. In addition, the following shall be complied with:
      1.   Primary and secondary distribution lines shall be installed
underground.
      2.   The system shall be designed to provide adequate service pursuant to
applicable codes and the manufacturer’s standard for the appliance or
appliances to be served.
      3.   A mobile home site shall have installed an approved individual
weatherproof meter. A park master meter shall not be used.
      4.   A mobile home site shall have installed an approved easily
accessible electrical systems circuit breaker or fuse system located at the
pedestal, which shall be installed by a licensed electrician. The circuit
breaker or fuse system shall be covered.
   h.   All mobile home Park developments shall further comply with Public Act
96 of 1987, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.2301 et seq.
ARTICLE VIII: LDMF AND HDMF MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Section
Sec. 800   Intent
Sec. 801   Permitted Uses
Sec. 802   Special Land Use s
Sec. 803   Additional Site Development Standards
SECTION 800   INTENT.
The Multiple-Family Residential Districts, LDMF and HDMF, are intended to
provide rental or individually owned multiple-family dwelling units, and
related. These districts will generally serve as a transitional zone between
the nonresidential districts and lower density Single-Family Districts. The
Multiple-Family Districts are provided to serve the limited needs for the
apartment units in a medium density , single-family community. The City
includes two multiple family zoning districts: Low Density Multiple Family
(maximum 6 units per acre) and Medium Density Multiple-Family Residential
(maximum 12 units per acre).
SECTION 801   PERMITTED USES.
In the LDMF or MDMF districts, no building or land  shall be used or erected ,
except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise
provided in this Ordinance:
   a.   Single-Family homes, subject to area and dimensional requirements for
the R-3 zoning district .
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   b.   Two-Family homes, subject to area and dimensional requirements for the
R-T zoning district .
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   c.   Multiple-family dwellings provided that a minimum of one hundred (100)
square feet of open recreational space shall be provided for each apartment
 dwelling unit . Said open space shall be developed with appropriate
recreational facilities and play equipment. The location, shape, and
development plan for recreational area shall be shown on the site plan with
access only onto an arterial or collector street .
   d.   Multiple housing for the elderly .
   e.   Activity center building specifically for the elderly.
   f.   Publicly owned libraries, parks, parkways, recreational facilities,
court buildings, post offices, community centers, civic centers and municipal
buildings, provided the building architecture and materials are consistent with
the materials used at the Grand Blanc City Hall.
   g.   Family day care homes and family foster care homes when meeting the
standards listed in
Section 501(f).
   h.   Child care centers and day care centers subject to the following
provisions:
(Amended 2-14-1996)
      1.   Such uses shall be duly licensed by the State Department of Social
Services.
      2.   Buildings and lots so used shall conform to all state and local code
requirements.
      3.   A minimum of fifty (50) square feet of indoor play area shall be
provided for each child. Indoor play area shall be computed exclusive of
hallways, bathrooms, reception and office areas, kitchens, storage areas and
closets, basements, except those which are finished and have dual means of
egress, and areas used exclusively for rest or sleep.
      4.   A minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of outdoor play
area for each child. The total outdoor play area shall have a total minimum
area of not less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. It shall be
fenced and screened in accordance with
Section 2310.
   i.   Adult (foster care) home and adult foster care small group home s and
adult day care .
   j.   Essential public services not including storage yards when operating
requirements necessitate their location within the district to serve the
immediate vicinity.
   k.   Accessory uses, buildings and structure s customarily incidental to any
of the above uses as defined in
Article II and described in Sections
312 through
317, such as leasing offices, community buildings and recreation facilities.
SECTION 802   SPECIAL LAND USES.
The following uses may be permitted, upon review and approval by the City
Council , in accordance with the general standards for all Special Land Uses
listed in
Section 2102, and the standards for the specific use listed in
Section 2110.
   a.   Adult foster care large group homes .
   b.   Adult congregate care facilities.
   c.   All Special Land Uses listed for the Single and Two-Family Residential
Districts which are not already listed as a Permitted Use in this district .
   d.   Uses of the same nature or class as the majority of the uses listed in
this district as either a Principal Use Permitted or a Special Land Use , but
not listed elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, as determined by the City
Council , following a Planning Commission public hearing and recommendation.
The determination shall be based on the standards of
Section 309. Any use not listed and not found to be “similar” is prohibited in
this zoning district .
   e.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to an
approved Special Land Use Permit are permitted without a separate Special Land
Use Permit.
SECTION 803   ADDITIONAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
No site plan  shall be approved unless the site is served by public water and
sanitary sewer facilities. All Permitted and Special Land Uses shall comply
with all applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance including those listed
below as a reference guide.
a. Article II:    Definitions
                  General Provisions for Standards on a variety of items such
                  as: calculation of buildable lot, regulations for single
b. Article III:   family dwellings; illegal dwellings; accessory uses;
                  temporary buildings and structures; parking and repair of
                  vehicles; swimming pools; fences; reception antennae;
                  limitations on clearing and grading site, etc.
c. Article XX:    Schedule of Regulations (minimum lot area , lot width ,
                  setbacks, max. height, etc.).
d. Article XXII:  Parking, parking area landscaping and loading/unloading and
                  standards.
e. Article XXIII: Landscaping Standards
f. Article XXIV:  Site Plan Review Standards
g. Ordinance 116  Sign Ordinance (
                  Chapter 1480)
h. Ordinance 220  Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
i. Ordinance 215  Subdivision Control Ordinance
 
ARTICLE IX: OS-1 OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICT
Section
Sec. 900   Intent
Sec. 901   Permitted Uses
Sec. 902   Special Land Uses
Sec. 903   Required Conditions
Sec. 904   Additional Site Development Standards
SECTION 900   INTENT.
The OS-1 Office Service District is intended to accommodate uses such as
offices, banks, and personal services. Office-Service Districts generally serve
as a transitional area between residential and commercial districts or to
buffer residential neighborhoods from arterial roadways.
SECTION 901   PERMITTED USES.
In an OS-1 Office Service District, no building or land  shall be used or
erected , except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless
otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
   a.   Offices for uses including administrative, professional, real estate ,
legal, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic, drafting and sales.
   b.   Offices of physicians, dentists, optometrists, chiropractors,
psychiatrists, psychologists and similar or allied professionals, including
medical clinics, urgent medical care centers and accessory pharmacies.
   c.   Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and similar uses
with or without drive-through facilities and 24 hour ready tellers.
   d.   Personal service establishments, performing on-site services, including
barber shops, beauty shops, and health salons.
   e.   Publicly owned libraries, parks, parkways, recreational facilities,
court buildings, post offices, community centers, civic centers and municipal
buildings, provided the building architecture and materials are consistent with
the materials used at the Grand Blanc City Hall.
   f.   Churches, places of worship, and related facilities.
   g.   Colleges, universities and similar institutions of higher learning.
   h.   Accessory essential public services and structures, excluding buildings
and storage yards .
   i.   Accessory and uses buildings and structures customarily incidental to
the above uses, as defined in
Article II and meeting the standards of Sections
312 through
317.
   j.   Child care centers and day care centers when meeting the standards
listed in
Section 801(h).
(Amended 2-14-1996)
SECTION 902   SPECIAL LAND USES.
The following uses may be permitted, upon review and approval by the City
Council , in accordance with the general standards for all Special Land Uses
listed in Section
2102, and any standards for the specific use listed in
Section 2110.
   a.   Essential public service buildings, not including storage yards , such
as telephone exchange buildings, transformer stations, substations, or gas
regulator stations.
   b.   Substance abuse treatment facilities.
   c.   General and specialty hospitals and urgent medical care centers.
   d.   Nursing and convalescent homes .
   e.   Uses of the same nature or class as the majority of the uses listed in
this district as either a Principal Use Permitted or a Special Land Use , but
not listed elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, as determined by the City
Council , following a Planning Commission public hearing and recommendation.
The determination shall be based on the standards of
Section 309. Any use not listed and not found to be “similar” is prohibited in
this zoning district .
   f.   Funeral homes or mortuary establishments.
   g.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to an
approved Special Land Use Permit are permitted without a separate Special Land
Use Permit; however, a separate Special Land Use Permit shall be required for
any use or storage of hazardous materials and any fuel storage tanks.
SECTION 903   REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   a.   No interior display shall be visible from the exterior of the building.
   b.   The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited.
   c.   Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or materials, beyond that
normally incident to the above-permitted uses, shall be prohibited.
SECTION 904   ADDITIONAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
All Permitted and Special Land Uses shall comply with all applicable provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance including those listed below as a reference guide.
a. Article II:    Definitions
                  General Provisions for Standards on a variety of items such
b. Article III:   as: temporary uses and events; parking and repair of
                  vehicles; fences; reception antennae; limitations on clearing
                  and grading site, etc.
c. Article XX:    Schedule of Regulations (minimum lot area , lot width ,
                  setbacks, max. height, etc.).
d. Article XXII:  Parking, parking area landscaping and loading/unloading and
                  standards.
e. Article XXIII: Landscaping Standards
f. Article XXIV:  Site Plan Review Standards
g. Ordinance 116  Sign Ordinance (
                  Chapter 1480)
h. Ordinance 220  Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
i. Ordinance 215  Subdivision Control Ordinance
 
ARTICLE X: CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
(Amended 7-20-2013)
Section
Sec. 1000   Intent
Sec. 1001   Permitted and Special Land Uses
Sec. 1002   Required Conditions
Sec. 1003   Additional Site Development Standards
SECTION 1000   INTENT.
The intent of the Central Business District (CBD) is to retain and create a
vibrant, attractive and cohesive center for the Grand Blanc community with a
variety of quality places to work, live shop, learn, recreate and be
entertained. This district is intended to recognize and support the Grand Blanc
central business district as both the prime retail center in the city and the
centerpiece of the greater Grand Blanc community.
These special regulations are intended to assist with the implementation of
goals and objectives contained in the Grand Blanc Downtown Strategic Vision
Plan. Among those goals are to eliminate single use zoning and promote
development of a compact, walkable, mixed-use district , consisting of a
variety of retail, entertainment, office , service, residential, cultural,
recreation and municipal uses. To provide for the desired traditional downtown
environment and accommodate the wide variety of permitted uses, this district
includes specific design standards for site layout, setback continuity,
building design, pedestrian amenities, parking arrangement, vehicular
circulation and coordination of site features between adjoining sites. One
intent of this district is that buildings be placed close to the street , with
parking in the side, or preferably, rear yard . Permitted uses shall be
designed and arranged to minimize any adverse impact on street capacity or
public services, and contribute to the overall image and function of the
district . A mixture of uses within a building, such as retail on the ground
floor and office on upper floors is permitted. It is the further intent of this
district to prohibit automotive related services and non-retail uses which tend
to disrupt the continuity of the retail frontage, as well as certain uses that
have been deemed contrary to this section. Such prohibited uses include adult
regulated uses and establishments that primarily sell tobacco and vape
products.
(Amended 2-14-1996; Ord. 2412-02, passed 1-8-2025)
SECTION 1001   PERMITTED AND SPECIAL LAND USES.
Permitted and Special Land Use  shall be in accordance with the following:
   a.   All uses shall meet the standards for the CBD listed below in
Section 1002 and as set forth in
Article XX, Schedule of Regulations.
   b.   All uses permitted by the underlying zoning district (as designated on
the zoning map) shall be permitted for that lot within the CBD. (For example,
if the underlying zoning district is B-2, the uses permitted in B-2 are
permitted for that lot).
   c.   Any building having commercial or office  use on the first floor may
contain residential uses on upper floors. Ground floor residential units are
also allowed as follows:
      1.   When located behind a non-residential use ;
      2.   When fronting a roadway other than Saginaw Road;
      3.   When the unit is used as a live/work space; or
      4.   When occupying no more than thirty percent (30%) of the building’s
frontage along Saginaw Road.
(Ord. 2208-02, passed 8-10-2022)
   d.   Multi-family buildings may be permitted as Special Land Uses on lots
that do not front along Saginaw or Grand Blanc Road.
   e.   Any use with a drive-through facility shall be regulated as a Special
Land Use . Due to high traffic generation, restaurants with drive-through
service shall be restricted to lots with frontage along Saginaw Road.
   f.   All uses regulated as Special Land Uses in d or e above or in the
underlying zoning district  shall require conformance with the appropriate
standards of Article XXI, Special Land Uses.
   g.   All businesses, facilities and uses, including private and public
facilities, which use , store or generate hazardous substances and polluting
materials in quantities greater than twenty-five (25) gallons or two hundred
twenty (220) pounds per month shall require Special Land Use Review.
   h.   Open-Air Market, temporary .
   i.   Outdoor cafes.
(Amended Ordinance 2105-02, passed 5-12-2021; Ord. 2511-02, passed 12-10-2025)
SECTION 1002   REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   a.   All business establishments shall be retail, entertainment or service
establishments dealing directly with customers. All goods produced on the
premises shall be sold as retail on premises where produced.
   b.   All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking or
loading , shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, provided
that public plazas, sidewalk sales and open air markets may be permitted as an
accessory use upon approval as a special land use .
   c.   Exterior walls facing public rights-of-way, customer parking areas and
adjoining property that is zoned or used for residential purposes shall have a
finished appearance, using the same materials as used on the front facade of
the building. Wherever possible, meter boxes, waste receptacles and mechanical
equipment should not be located in the front yard or on a side of the building
when visible from public views or when facing property zoned or used as
residential.
   d.   Ornamental lighting consistent with the established lighting system in
the Central Business District shall be provided along public street frontages.
Except for ornamental fixtures, all lighting shall be downward directed sharp
cut-off fixtures. Site, building and parking lot lighting shall be at a scale
appropriate for the downtown and to prevent glare off-site. Light spill-over
along a front lot line, which is otherwise prohibited by
Section 323, may be allowed by the Planning Commission Commission provided a
determination is made that is primarily due to existing lighting within the
public right-of-way .
(Amended July 2013)
   e.   Parking shall be located in the side or rear yards , not in the front
yard ; however, parking in one front yard shall be permitted for corner lots. A
street wall or continuous hedge row shall be provided to screen view of off-
street parking lots and provide a buffer between the site and the public street
. Segments of front lot lines , not occupied by a building wall or hedge ,
shall have a street wall or architectural feature. Street walls shall be a
minimum two and one-half (2.5) feet in height and constructed of brick with a
limestone cap or decorative stone or black wrought iron fence with stone or
brick columns. The street wall shall be constructed along the front lot line,
provided the Planning Commission  may allow the street wall to be setback from
the front lot line to provide for landscaping , to accommodate underground
utilities and to comply with clear vision zone requirements at intersections.
Openings in the street wall may be permitted for vehicular and pedestrian
access to the site, and where open space or landscape plazas are provided.
   f.   All garage doors, loading or service areas and waste receptacles shall
be located in the rear yard of the lot and screened from view of any public
street , adjacent residential zoning district or public property . The
screening shall consist of a wall to match the building, landscaping or a
combination, as appropriate.
   g.   The number of access points shall be the minimum to provide reasonable
access . Access points shall be designed and located to minimize conflicts with
traffic operations along the street and be placed as far from intersections as
practical. The Planning Commission  may require the applicant to provide a
traffic impact study prepared by a qualified traffic engineer to evaluate
traffic circulation and access concerns.
   h.   Parking shall be provided for all uses in accordance with the
requirements of Article 22 except that the Planning Commission  may reduce the
amount of on site parking required in the CBD by up to fifty percent (50%) in
the following instances:
(Amended 8-19-2008)
      1.   The parking requirement may be satisfied through shared parking with
an adjacent use . All uses must be located within three hundred (300) feet of
the shared parking with a copy of an executed shared parking agreement must be
provided to the City. Where uses with different peak hour parking demands, such
as a restaurant and office share the same parking lot, the total cumulative
parking requirement for all uses may reduce by up to fifty percent (50%).
      2.   A mixed-use development that has uses with different peak hour
parking demands, such as a restaurant in an office building, may reduce the
total cumulative parking requirement for all uses by up to fifty percent (50%).
      3.   Up to fifty percent (50%) of the parking requirement may be
satisfied by public parking. This may include on-street parking that is located
along the lot’s frontage and public off-street parking lot s that are located
within five hundred (500) feet of the site.
      4.   The parking requirement may be reduced by up to fifty percent (50%)
where the applicant can demonstrate, based on supporting documentation provided
by the applicant, the parking need for that particular use is less than
required by this Ordinance or valet service to a satellite parking lot will be
provided.
      5.   Total parking requirements shall not be reduced by more than fifty
percent (50%) even where a site satisfies more than one (1) of the above
criteria.
   i.   Architectural standards: All new buildings, additions and significant
exterior changes or renovations shall  be found to be architecturally
compatible with the intent of the Central Business District. In making such a
determination, the following will be considered:
      1.   A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the exterior finish material of
all building facades visible from the public street , parking lot or adjacent
residentially zoned land , exclusive of window areas, shall consist of the
following: brick, cut stone, field stone, cast stone or dimensional wood with
an opaque stain. Exterior Insulation and Finishing Systems (EIFS) materials
shall not be the primary building material. The remaining maximum twenty (20)
percent of the facade  may utilize other materials for architectural detailing
such as fiberglass reinforced concrete, polymer plastic (fypon) or EIFS. The
Planning Commission  may permit other materials for facades not visible from a
public street that are adequately screened from adjoining land uses.
      2.   Roof design shall be consistent with the overall architecture of the
building. Single story buildings shall be designed with pitched roofs or a
decorative cornice or parapet at least forty-two (42) inches high to screen
roof-top mechanical equipment. Such buildings shall provide a height of not
less than twenty-four (24) feet to the eave line for a pitched roof or to the
top line of the cornice or parapet for a flat roof.
(Amended by Ordinance 1908-01, passed 8-14-2019)
      3.   Blank walls shall not face a public street . Walls facing a public
street  shall include windows and architectural features customarily found on
the front facade of a building, such as awnings, cornice work, edge detailing
or other decorative finish materials. A usable public building entrance shall
be provided at the front of the building. Wall massing shall be broken up with
vertical pilasters or other architectural elements to reduce scale.
      4.   Colors shall be consistent with the majority of the established
buildings. Stark or bold colors, white and similar “non-traditional” downtown
colors are not permitted.
      5.   Facades may be supplemented by awnings which shall be straight sheds
or made of an opaque material; translucent awnings shall not be permitted along
the front building line .
      6.   Sites shall be designed at a pedestrian scale with relationship to
the street and sidewalk . Convenient and safe pedestrian access shall be
provided between the public sidewalk and the building entrance. Bicycle racks
should be provided for uses expected to attract bicyclists, such as fast food
restaurants, ice cream parlors and convenience food stores.
      7.   Rear or side entrances should be provided where parking is on the
side or rear of the building.
      8.   Building height may be increased to a maximum of fifty (50) feet for
a mixed use building with retail in the first floor and office and/or
residential use on the floors above the first floor. Parking structures
incorporated into the design of a mixed use building may also warrant the
aforementioned increase in building height .
(Amended 8-9-2006)
      9.   Building design, facades and materials shall be consistent with any
architectural guidelines published by the City or adopted by the Planning
Commission .
   j.   For buildings proposed for expansion or renovation that existed prior
to the effective date of this ordinance, the Planning Commission  shall
determine the extent of compliance based on the existing building and site
arrangement, the extent of the changes proposed and the site design elements
found to be most in need of modification.
SECTION 1003   ADDITIONAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
All Permitted and Special Land Uses shall comply with all applicable provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance including those listed below as a reference guide.
a. Article II:    Definitions
                  General Provisions for Standards on a variety of items such
b. Article III:   as: temporary uses and events; parking and repair of
                  vehicles; fences; reception antennae; limitations on clearing
                  and grading site, etc.
c. Article XX:    Schedule of Regulations (minimum lot area , lot width ,
                  setbacks, max. height, etc.).
d. Article XXII:  Parking, parking area landscaping and loading/unloading and
                  standards.
e. Article XXIII: Landscaping Standards
f. Article XXIV:  Site Plan Review Standards
g. Ordinance 116  Sign Ordinance (
                  Chapter 1480)
h. Ordinance 220  Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
i. Ordinance 215  Subdivision Control Ordinance
 
ARTICLE XI: B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Section
Sec. 1100   Intent
Sec. 1101   Permitted Uses
Sec. 1102   Special Land Uses
Sec. 1103   Required Conditions
Sec. 1104   Additional Site Development Standards
SECTION 1100   INTENT.
The B-1 Neighborhood Business District, is established to meet the shopping and
service needs of persons in nearby residential areas.
SECTION 1101   PERMITTED USES.
In a B-1 Neighborhood Business District, no building or land  shall be used or
erected , except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless
otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
   a.   Any use permitted in the OS-1 District, subject to the regulations
applicable in the following Sections of the Article.
   b.   Establishments supplying commodities on the premises , such as but not
limited to: florists, dry goods, clothing, hardware, restaurants and
establishments with baked goods including carry-out (consumption on the
premises is permitted in shopping centers provided there are no more than sixty
(60) seats).
(Amended 4-20-2011)
   c.   Personal service establishments performing services on the premises ,
including, but not limited to: repair shops, tailor shops, beauty parlors or
barber shops.
   d.   Dry cleaning establishments, or pick-up stations, dealing directly with
the consumer and not using or storing hazardous materials.
   e.   Business establishments which perform services on the premises , such
as, but not limited to: banks and their drive-through facilities, loan
companies, insurance offices and real estate offices.
   f.   Professional medical offices of physicians, dentists, optometrists,
medical care centers and similar professions.
   g.   Shopping centers with any of the above uses up to fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet of gross floor area.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   h.   Child care or day care centers when meeting the standards listed in
Section 801(h).
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   i.   Banks and financial institutions with up to three (3) drive-through
lanes.
   j.   Churches and other religious institutions and related facilities.
   k.   Accessory essential public services and structures, excluding buildings
and storage yards .
   l.   Publicly owned libraries, parks, parkways, recreational facilities,
court buildings, post offices, community centers, and civic centers and
municipal buildings, provided the building architecture and materials are
consistent with the materials used at the Grand Blanc City Hall.
   m.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incident to the
above uses as defined in
Article II and meeting the standards of Section
312 through
317.
   n.   Banquet rooms and halls.
(Ord. 2208-03, passed 8-10-2022)
All of the above listed businesses, facilities and uses, including private and
public facilities, which use , store or generate hazardous substances and
polluting materials in quantities greater than twenty-five (25) gallons or two
hundred twenty (220) pounds per month shall require Special Land Use Review.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
SECTION 1102   SPECIAL LAND USES.
The following uses may be permitted, upon review and approval by the City
Council , in accordance with the general standards for all Special Land Uses
listed in
Section 2102, and the standards for the specific use listed in
Section 2110.
   a.   Convenience stores.
   b.   Shopping centers with a gross floor area of fifteen thousand one
(15,001) to forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet.
   c.   Essential public service buildings; telephone exchange buildings;
substations, and pumping stations, but without storage yards .
   d.   Expansion of an apartment unit within existing buildings in the B-
l District may be permitted, subject to meeting the following standards:
      1.   Two (2) means of access shall be provided to the residential
apartment unit. The primary access shall not be through the existing business
establishment.
      2.   A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces  shall be required
for the apartment unit in addition to the minimum required parking spaces for
the principal business use .
      3.   Minimum floor area requirements for the residential apartment unit
shall be the same as those required for units in the LDMF and HDMF residential
districts. There shall be no more than one (1) residential apartment per
building.
      4.   The residential apartment  use shall not detract or otherwise
negatively impact adjacent development or detract from the business of the
principal permitted use .
   e.   Banks and financial institutions with more than three (3) drive-through
lanes.
   f.   Uses of the same nature or class as the majority of the uses listed in
this district as either a Principal Permitted Use or a Special Land Use , but
not listed elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, as determined by the City
Council , following a Planning Commission public hearing and recommendation.
The determination shall be based on the standards of
Section 309. Any use not listed and not found to be “similar” is prohibited in
this zoning district .
   g.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to an
approved Special Land Use Permit as permitted with the approved Special Land
Use permit.
   h.   Outdoor cafes.
   i.   Restaurants with more than sixty (60) seats.
All of the above listed businesses, facilities and uses, including private and
public facilities, which use , store or generate hazardous substances and
polluting materials in quantities greater than twenty-five (25) gallons or two
hundred twenty (220) pounds per month shall require Special Land Use Review.
(Amended by Ordinance 1411-03, passed 12-10-2014)
SECTION 1103   REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   a.   All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments
dealing directly with customers. All goods produced on the premises shall be
sold at retail on premises where produced.
   b.   All business, servicing, or processing, except for off-street parking
or loading , shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
SECTION 1104   ADDITIONAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
All Permitted and Special Land Uses shall comply with all applicable provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance including those listed below as a reference guide.
a. Article II:    Definitions
                  General Provisions for Standards on a variety of items such
b. Article III:   as: calculation of buildable lot, temporary uses and seasonal
                  events; parking and repair of vehicles; fences; reception
                  antennae; limitations on clearing and grading site, etc.
c. Article XX:    Schedule of Regulations (minimum lot area , lot width ,
                  setbacks, max. height, etc.).
d. Article XXII:  Parking, parking area landscaping and loading/unloading and
                  standards.
e. Article XXIII: Landscaping Standards
f. Article XXIV:  Site Plan Review Standards
g. Ordinance 116  Sign Ordinance (
                  Chapter 1480)
h. Ordinance 220  Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
i. Ordinance 215  Subdivision Control Ordinance
 
ARTICLE XII: B-2 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Section
Sec. 1200   Intent
Sec. 1201   Permitted Uses
Sec. 1202   Special Land Uses
Sec. 1203   Required Conditions
Sec. 1204   Additional Site Development Standards
SECTION 1200   INTENT.
The B-2 Community Business District is designed to provide retail businesses
and services to supply the needs of the larger community. The B-2 district is
generally characterized by an integrated or planned cluster of establishments
served by a common parking area and large volumes of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.
SECTION 1201   PERMITTED USES.
In a B-2 Community Business District, no building or land  shall be used or
erected , except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless
otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
   a.   Any retail business or service establishment permitted in the B-
1 District and shopping centers with up to 30,000 square feet of gross floor
area, subject to the regulations applicable in this Article.
   b.   Convenience stores.
   c.   Retail businesses supplying merchandise on the premises in an enclosed
building up to thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of gross floor area.
   d.   Service establishments of an office , showroom or workshop nature of an
electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, baker, painter, upholsterer, radio
or home appliance repair, photographic reproduction, and similar service
establishments that require a retail adjunct.
   e.   Private clubs, fraternal organizations, and lodge halls.
   f.   Restaurants or other places serving food or beverage, excluding drive-
ins or drive-thru restaurants.
   g.   Business schools and colleges operated for profit.
   h.   Accessory essential public services and structures, excluding buildings
and storage yards .
   i.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incident to the
above uses as defined in
Article II and meeting the standards of Section
312 through
317.
   j.   Outdoor cafes.
   k.   Laundromats.
   l.   Licensed body art facilities.
All of the above listed businesses, facilities, and uses, including private and
public facilities, which use , store or generate hazardous substances and
polluting materials in quantities greater than twenty-five (25) gallons or two
hundred twenty (220) pounds per month shall require Special Land Use Review.
(Amended 2-14-1996; Ord. 2412-04, passed 1-8-2025)
SECTION 1202   SPECIAL LAND USES.
The following uses may be permitted, upon review and approval by the City
Council , in accordance with the general standards for all Special Land Uses
listed in
Section 2102, and the standards for the specific use listed in
Section 2110.
   a.   Commercial outdoor sales and open-air business uses when developed in
planned relationship with the B-2 District.
   b.   Indoor commercial recreation such as bowling alleys, billiard halls,
archery ranges, tennis courts, skating rinks, and arcades.
   c.   Funeral homes.
   d.   Mechanical amusement device centers and arcades as a principal or
accessory use if there are more than four (4) such devices.
   e.   Shopping centers of over 30,000 gross square feet of floor area.
   f.   Automobile service (gasoline) stations when developed as part of a
larger planned shopping center with shared access and similar architecture.
   g.   Essential public service building and storage yards .
   h.   Accessory commercial outdoor sales and storage.
   i.   Restaurants with drive-through or drive-in facilities.
   j.   Uses of the same nature or class as the majority of the uses listed in
this district as either a Principal Use Permitted or a Special Land Use , but
not listed elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, as determined by the City
Council , following a Planning Commission public hearing and recommendation.
The determination shall be based on the standards of
Section 309. Any use not listed and not found to be “similar” is prohibited in
this zoning district .
   k.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to an
approved Special Land Use Permit as permitted with the approved Special Land
Use permit.
All of the above listed businesses, facilities, and uses, including private and
public facilities, which use , store or generate hazardous substances and
polluting materials in quantities greater than twenty-five (25) gallons or two
hundred twenty (220) pounds per month shall require Special Land Use Review.
(Amended by Ordinance 2105-02, passed 5-12-2021)
SECTION 1203   REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   a.   All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments
dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be
sold at retail on the premises where produced.
   b.   All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking or
loading , and those open air uses indicated subject to a Special Land Use
Permit shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
SECTION 1204   ADDITIONAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
a. Article II:    Definitions
                  General Provisions for Standards on a variety of items such
b. Article III:   as: temporary uses and events; parking and repair of
                  vehicles; fences; reception antennae; limitations on clearing
                  and grading site, etc.
c. Article XX:    Schedule of Regulations (minimum lot area , lot width ,
                  setbacks, max. height, etc.).
d. Article XXII:  Parking, parking area landscaping and loading/unloading and
                  standards.
e. Article XXIII: Landscaping Standards
f. Article XXIV:  Site Plan Review Standards
g. Ordinance 116  Sign Ordinance (
                  Chapter 1480)
h. Ordinance 220  Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
i. Ordinance 215  Subdivision Control Ordinance
 
ARTICLE XIII: B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS
(Amended 3-12-2008)
Section
Sec. 1300   Intent
Sec. 1301   Permitted Uses
Sec. 1302   Special Land Uses
Sec. 1303   Additional Site Development Standards
SECTION 1300   INTENT.
The B-3 General Business District is designed to provide for more intense and
diversified business establishments which may be incompatible in the
Neighborhood Business District or the Community Business District.
SECTION 1301   PERMITTED USES.
In a B-3 General Business District, no building or land  shall be used or
erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless
otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
   a.   Any retail business or service establishment permitted in B-1 and B-
2 Districts as Permitted Uses up to sixty thousand (60,000) square feet of
gross floor area.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   b.   Bus passenger stations.
   c.   Mechanical amusement device centers and arcades.
   d.   Shopping centers of up to sixty thousand (60,000) square feet of gross
floor area.
   e.   Essential public services and essential public service buildings.
   f.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to the
above uses, as defined in
Article II and meeting the standards of Sections
312 through
317.
   g.   Outdoor cafes.
(Amended 3-12-2008)
All of the above listed businesses, facilities, and uses, including private and
public facilities, which use , store or generate hazardous substances and
polluting materials in quantities greater than twenty-five (25) gallons or two
hundred twenty (220) pounds per month shall require Special Land Use Review.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
SECTION 1302   SPECIAL LAND USES.
The following uses may be permitted upon review and approval by the City
Council , in accordance with the general standards for all Special Land Uses
listed in
Section 2102, and the standards for the specific use listed in
Section 2110.
   a.   Automobile washes (automatic or self-service).
   b.   Automobile or vehicle dealership .
   c.   Automobile service center (oil change, muffler shops, minor repair,
etc. - see definition).
   d.   Automobile service (gasoline) stations and gasoline sales as an
accessory use .
   e.   Adult regulated uses .
   f.   Banks and similar financial institutions with more than three (3)
drive-through lanes.
   g.   Commercial outdoor sales and open air businesses as a principal or
accessory use .
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   h.   Essential public service storage yards .
   i.   General and specialty hospitals.
   j.   Kennels (commercial) without outdoor pens.
   k.   Motels, hotels and related facilities.
   l.   Recreation: commercial indoor and outdoor establishments (such as
bowling alleys, ice arenas, etc.) golf courses, country clubs and par three
golf courses.
   m.   Recreation: golf driving ranges and miniature golf courses.
   n.   Recreation: private recreational clubs.
   o.   Restaurants with drive-through or drive-in facilities.
   p.   Shopping centers over 60,000 square feet of gross floor area.
   q.   Theaters, concert halls and play houses.
   r.   Urgent medical care centers.
   s.   Veterinary clinics with no outdoor holding pens.
   t.   Uses of the same nature or class as the majority of the uses listed in
this district as either a Principal Use Permitted or a Special Land Use , but
not listed elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, as determined by the City
Council , following a Planning Commission public hearing and recommendation.
The determination shall be based on the standards of
Section 309. Any use not listed and not found to be “similar” is prohibited in
this zoning district .
   u.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to an
approved Special Land Use Permit as permitted with the approved Special Land
Use permit.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
All of the above listed businesses, facilities, and uses, including private and
public facilities, which use , store or generate hazardous substances and
polluting materials in quantities greater than twenty-five (25) gallons or two
hundred twenty (220) pounds per month shall require Special Land Use Review.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
SECTION 1303   ADDITIONAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
All Permitted and Special Land Uses shall comply with all applicable provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance including those listed below as a reference guide.
a. Article II:    Definitions
                  General Provisions for Standards on a variety of items such
b. Article III:   as: calculation of buildable lot, temporary uses and seasonal
                  events; fences; reception antennae; limitations on clearing
                  and grading site, etc.
c. Article XX:    Schedule of Regulations (minimum lot area , lot width ,
                  setbacks, max. height, etc.).
d. Article XXII:  Parking, parking area landscaping and loading/unloading and
                  standards.
e. Article XXIII: Landscaping Standards
f. Article XXIV:  Site Plan Review Standards
g. Ordinance 116  Sign Ordinance (
                  Chapter 1480)
h. Ordinance 220  Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
i. Ordinance 215  Subdivision Control Ordinance
 
ARTICLE XIV: R-P RESEARCH PARK DISTRICTS
Section
Sec. 1400   Intent
Sec. 1401   Permitted Uses
Sec. 1402   Special Land Uses
Sec. 1403   Additional Site Development Standards
SECTION 1400   INTENT.
The R-P Research Park District is intended to provide solely for a community of
research and related facilities. This area is further designed to insure the
compatibility between the research operations and the existing character of the
community in which the park is located.
SECTION 1401   PERMITTED USES.
In an R-P Research Park District, no building or land  shall be used or erected
, except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise
provided in this Ordinance:
   a.   Research, design, and pilot or experimental product development as
principal function.
   b.   Technical training as principal function.
   c.   Office buildings when incident to the above uses and the executive and
administrative offices of businesses engaged in basic research, design, and
pilot or experimental product design.
   d.   Essential public services and essential public service buildings.
   e.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures customary and incidental to
the principal uses, as defined in
Article II and meeting the standards of Section
312 through
317.
All of the above listed businesses, facilities, and uses, including private and
public facilities, which use , store or generate hazardous substances and
polluting materials in quantities greater than twenty-five (25) gallons or two
hundred twenty (220) pounds per month shall require Special Land Use Review.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
SECTION 1402   SPECIAL LAND USES.
The following uses may be permitted upon review and approval by the City
Council , in accordance with the general standards for all Special Land Uses
listed in
Section 2102, and the standards for the specific use listed in
Section 2110. A Special Land Use request shall be accompanied by an Impact
Assessment, as described in
Section 328.
   a.   Restaurants or other places serving food and/or beverages except open-
front stores or drive-ins.
   b.   Manufacturing, processing, assembling or packaging of finished or
semifinished products from previously prepared material, fully enclosed.
      1.   Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above-
permitted uses.
      2.   Industrial operations shall be permitted only as part of a “Planned
Industrial Park” consisting of at least fifteen (15) acres and being platted
and developed in at least five (5) individual sites having an internal service
road system with the following setbacks considered as minimum:
 
Yard                                             Minimum Setback
                                                 (in feet)
Front Yard  (abutting internal street )          20
Front Yard  (abutting major thoroughfare)        40
Side Yard  (abutting internal street )           20
Side Yard  (abutting major thoroughfare)         40
Side Yard  (internal between buildings)          Equal to Bldg.
Height Rear Yard  (external abutting residence ) 50
 
      3.   The industrial operation shall not include any stamping or grinding
in product preparation unless it is incidental to the primary use .
      4.   The processing of material for shipment in bulk form, to be used in
an industrial operation at another location, shall not be permitted.
      5.   A twenty-foot (20-ft.) greenbelt  shall be provided on those sides
of the property abutting land zoned for residential use and shall be set aside
as a dedicated easement for greenbelt purposes. The greenbelt shall be reviewed
and approved by the City Council in conformity with the requirements of
Article XXIII.
   c.   Uses of the same nature or class as the majority of the uses listed in
this district as either a Principal
Permitted Use or a Special Land Use , but not listed elsewhere in this Zoning
Ordinance, as determined by the City Council , following a Planning Commission
public hearing and recommendation. The determination shall be based on the
standards of
Section 309. Any use not listed and not found to be “similar” is prohibited.
   d.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to an
approved Special Land Use Permit as permitted with the approved Special Land
Use permit.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
All of the above listed businesses, facilities, and uses, including private and
public facilities, which use , store or generate hazardous substances and
polluting materials in quantities greater than twenty-five (25) gallons or two
hundred twenty (220) pounds per month shall require Special Land Use Review.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
SECTION 1403   ADDITIONAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
All Permitted and Special Land Uses shall comply with all applicable provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance including those listed below as a reference guide.
a. Article II:    Definitions
                  General Provisions for Standards on a variety of items such
b. Article III:   as: calculation of buildable lot, fences; reception antennae;
                  limitations on clearing and grading site, etc.
c. Article XX:    Schedule of Regulations (minimum lot area , lot width ,
                  setbacks, max. height, etc.).
d. Article XXII:  Parking, parking area landscaping and loading/unloading and
                  standards.
e. Article XXIII: Landscaping Standards
f. Article XXIV:  Site Plan Review Standards
g. Ordinance 116  Sign Ordinance (
                  Chapter 1480)
h. Ordinance 220  Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
i. Ordinance 215  Subdivision Control Ordinance
 
ARTICLE XV: I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Section
Sec. 1500   Intent
Sec. 1501   Permitted Uses
Sec. 1502   Special Land Uses
Sec. 1503   Additional Site Development Standards
SECTION 1500   INTENT.
The I-1 Light Industrial District is designed to accommodate research,
wholesale activities, warehouses, and industrial operations whose external,
physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner
detrimentally affect any of the surrounding districts. The I-1 District is
intended for the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly,
and/or treatment of finished or semifinished products from previously prepared
material. The processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form to be used
in an industrial operation at another location, shall not be permitted.
The goals of the I-1 district include the following:
   a.   Provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs
of the City’s future economy for all types of manufacturing and related uses;
   b.   Prohibit the use of industrial areas for new residential development ;
   c.   Promote manufacturing development which is free from danger of fire,
explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation, and other hazards, and from
offensive noise, vibrations, smoke, odor and other objectionable influences.
SECTION 1501   PERMITTED USES.
In an I-1 Light Industrial District, no building or land  shall be used erected
or except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise
provided in this Ordinance:
   a.   Research, design, and pilot or experimental product development when
conducted within a completely enclosed building.
   b.   Warehousing and wholesale establishments, and trucking facilities.
   c.   Manufacturing (indoors), compounding, processing, packaging, or
treatment of such products as, but not limited to: bakery goods, candy,
cosmetics, pharmaceutical, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery,
tool, die, gauge and machine shops.
   d.   Manufacturing, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles or
merchandise indoors from previously prepared materials such as: bone, canvas,
cellophane, cloth, cork, elastomers, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair,
horn, leather, paper, plastics, rubber, precious or semiprecious metals or
stones, sheet metal, shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood (excluding saw
and planing mills) and yarns.
   e.   Manufacturing of pottery and ceramic products using only previously
pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   f.   Manufacturing of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and metal or
rubber stamps, or other molded rubber products.
   g.   Manufacturing or assembly of electrical appliances and instruments.
   h.   Research and experimental laboratories.
   i.   Manufacturing and repair of electric or neon signs, light sheet metal
products, such as heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves.
   j.   Central dry cleaning plants or laundries, with no retail service.
   k.   Essential public service buildings, stations structures, storage yards
and other related uses.
   l.   Radio, television, microwave, and cellular phone towers and similar
facilities that meet the standards of Section 334.
(As amended 6-10-1998)
   m.   Public utility plants, tanks; water supply and sewage disposal plants.
Railroad transfer and storage tracks, rights-of-way, and freight terminals.
   n.   Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber,
contractor’s equipment and supplies.
   o.   Commercial kennels.
   p.   Greenhouses.
   q.   Trade or industrial schools.
   r.   Commercial mini-storage warehouses and storage buildings including the
dwelling and office of a caretaker, with no outdoor storage . Buildings spaced
not less than thirty (30) feet apart.
   s.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to any
of the above-permitted uses as defined in
Article II and meeting the standards of Sections
312 through
317.
All of the above listed businesses, facilities, and uses, including private and
public facilities, which use , store or generate hazardous substances and
polluting materials in quantities greater than twenty-five (25) gallons or two
hundred twenty (220) pounds per month shall require Special Land Use Review.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
SECTION 1502   SPECIAL LAND USES.
The following uses may be permitted upon review and approval by the City
Council , in accordance with the general standards for all Special Land Uses
listed in
Section 2102, and the standards for the specific use listed in
Section 2110. All Special Land Use requests shall require submission of an
Impact Assessment as described in
Section 328.
   a.   Major auto repair such as auto engine and body repair shops if
completely enclosed.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   b.   Contractor’s yards .
   c.   Lumber and planing mills if completely enclosed and no property lines
from the exterior boundary of the “I-1” District.
   d.   Commercial composting.
   e.   Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to appropriate measures
to prevent noxious results and nuisances.
   f.   Recycling stations.
   g.   Retail uses with an industrial character outdoor storage requirements
or activities, such as, but not limited to: lumber yard , building materials
outlet , upholsterer, cabinet maker, outdoor sales of boats , house trailers,
automobile garages, or agricultural implements.
   h.   Retail, restaurant , and service establishments serving the needs of
the industrial district , such as, but not limited to: banks, savings and loan
associations, credit unions, automobile service stations , motels, bowling
alleys, trade or industrial schools, or industrial clinics.
   i.   Outdoor theaters.
   j.   Uses of the same nature or class as the majority of the uses listed in
this district as either a Principal Permitted Use or a Special Land Use , but
not listed elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, as determined by the City
Council , following a Planning Commission public hearing and recommendation.
The determination shall be based on the standards of
Section 309. Any use not listed and not found to be “similar” is prohibited.
   k.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to an
approved Special Land Use Permit as permitted with the approved Special Land
Use permit.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
All of the above listed businesses, facilities, and uses, including private and
public facilities, which use , store or generate hazardous substances and
polluting materials in quantities greater than twenty-five (25) gallons or two
hundred twenty (220) pounds per month shall require Special Land Use Review.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
SECTION 1503   ADDITIONAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
All Permitted and Special Land Uses shall comply with all applicable provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance including those listed below as a reference guide.
a. Article II:    Definitions
                  General Provisions for Standards on a variety of items such
b. Article III:   as: fences; reception antennae; limitations on clearing and
                  grading site, etc.
c. Article XX:    Schedule of Regulations (minimum lot area , lot width ,
                  setbacks, max. height, etc.).
d. Article XXII:  Parking, parking area landscaping and loading/unloading and
                  standards.
e. Article XXIII: Landscaping Standards
f. Article XXIV:  Site Plan Review Standards
g. Ordinance 116  Sign Ordinance (
                  Chapter 1480)
h. Ordinance 220  Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
i. Ordinance 215  Subdivision Control Ordinance
 
ARTICLE XVI: I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Section
Sec. 1600   Intent
Sec. 1601   Permitted Uses
Sec. 1602   Special Land Uses
Sec. 1603   Additional Site Development Standards
SECTION 1600   INTENT.
The I-2 General Industrial District is designed for large scale or specialized
industrial operations, manufacturing, assembling, and fabrication activities.
These uses may produce external physical effects on the surrounding districts.
The I-2 District is intended for manufacturing, processing, and compounding of
semifinished or finished products from raw materials or from previously
prepared material.
SECTION 1601   PERMITTED USES.
In an I-2 General Industrial District, no building or land  shall be used or
erected , except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless
otherwise provided in this Ordinance:
   a.   Any principal use first permitted in an I-1 District.
   b.   Heating and electric power generating plants.
   c.   Manufacture of corrosive acid or alkali, cement, lime, gypsum or
plaster of paris.
   d.   Production of petroleum or other inflammable liquids, refining or
storage.
   e.   Essential public services and buildings without storage yards .
   f.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above-
permitted uses as defined in
Article II, and meeting the standards of Sections
312 through
317.
All of the above listed businesses, facilities, and uses, including private and
public facilities, which use , store or generate hazardous substances and
polluting materials in quantities greater than twenty-five (25) gallons or two
hundred twenty (220) pounds per month shall require Special Land Use Review.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
SECTION 1602   SPECIAL LAND USES.
The following uses may be permitted upon review and approval by the City
Council , in accordance with the general standards for all Special Land Uses
listed in
Section 2102, and the standards for the specific use listed in
Section 2110. A Special Land Use request shall be accompanied by an Impact
Assessment, as described in
Section 328.
   a.   Radio, television and cellular phone towers.
   b.   Blast furnaces.
   c.   Chemical plants and storage.
   d.   Commercial composting centers.
   e.   Essential public service storage yards .
   f.   Uses of the same nature or class as the majority of the uses listed in
this district as either a Principal Use Permitted or a Special Land Use , but
not listed elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, as determined by the City
Council , following a Planning Commission public hearing and recommendation.
The determination shall be based on the standards of
Section 309. Any use not listed and not found to be “similar” is prohibited.
   g.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to an
approved Special Land Use Permit as permitted with the approved Special Land
Use permit.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
All of the above listed businesses, facilities, and uses, including private and
public facilities, which use , store or generate hazardous substances and
polluting materials in quantities greater than twenty-five (25) gallons or two
hundred twenty (220) pounds per month shall require Special Land Use Review.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
SECTION 1603   ADDITIONAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
All Permitted and Special Land Uses shall comply with all applicable provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance including those listed below as a reference guide.
a. Article II:    Definitions
                  General Provisions for Standards on a variety of items such
b. Article III:   as: fences; reception antennae; limitations on clearing and
                  grading site, etc.
c. Article XX:    Schedule of Regulations (minimum lot area , lot width ,
                  setbacks, max. height, etc.).
d. Article XXII:  Parking, parking area landscaping and loading/unloading and
                  standards.
e. Article XXIII: Landscaping Standards
f. Article XXIV:  Site Plan Review Standards
g. Ordinance 116  Sign Ordinance (
                  Chapter 1480)
h. Ordinance 220  Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
i. Ordinance 215  Subdivision Control Ordinance
 
ARTICLE XVII: P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICTS
Section
Sec. 1700   Intent
Sec. 1701   Permitted Uses
Sec. 1702   Required Conditions
Sec. 1703   Minimum Distances and Setbacks
Sec. 1704   Additional Site Development Standards
SECTION 1700   INTENT.
The P-1 Vehicular Parking District is intended for areas solely used for off-
street parking of private passenger vehicles as a use incidental to a principal
use . This district will generally be provided by petition or request to serve
a use  district which has developed without adequate off-street parking
facilities.
SECTION 1701   PERMITTED USES.
Premises in such districts shall be used only for an off-street vehicular
parking area , and shall be developed and maintained subject to such
regulations as are hereinafter provided.
SECTION 1702   REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   a.   The parking area shall be accessory to and for use in connection with
one (1) or more businesses, or industrial establishments, located in adjoining
business or industrial districts, or in connection with one (1) or more
existing professional or institutional office buildings or institutions.
   b.   Such parking lots shall be contiguous to a multiple-family residential
or nonresidential district . Parking areas may be approved when adjacent to
said districts, or on the end of a block where such areas front on a street
which is perpendicular to that street servicing the district . There may be a
private driveway, or public street or public alley between such P-1 District
and above-listed districts.
   c.   Parking area shall be used solely for parking of private passenger
vehicles, for periods of less than one (1) day and shall not be used as an off-
street loading area.
   d.   No commercial repair work or service of any kind, or sale or display
thereof, shall be conducted in such parking area.
   e.   No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits and
conditions of use , shall be maintained on such parking area.
   f.   No buildings other than those for shelter or attendance shall be
erected upon the premises and they shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in
height.
   g.   Applications for P-1 Districts rezoning shall be made by submitting a
dimensional layout of the area requested showing the intended parking plans in
accordance with
Article XXII.
SECTION 1703   MINIMUM DISTANCES AND SETBACKS.
   a.   Side and rear yards: Where the P-1 District is contiguous to the side
and/or rear lot lines  of premises  within a residentially-zoned district , the
required wall shall  be located along said lot line.
   b.   Front Yards: Where the P-1 District is contiguous to a residentially
zoned district  which has a common frontage in the same block  with residential
structures, or wherein no residential structures have been yet erected , there
shall  be a setback  equal to the required residential setback  for said
residential district , or a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet, whichever is the
greater. The required wall shall be located on this minimum setback  line
unless, under unusual circumstances, the City Council  finds that no good
purpose would be served. The land  between said setback  and street  right-of-
way  line shall be kept free from refuse and debris, and shall be planted with
shrubs, trees, or lawn and shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition,
neat and orderly in appearance.
SECTION 1704   ADDITIONAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
All Permitted and Special Land Uses shall comply with all applicable provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance including those listed below as a reference guide.
a. Article II:    Definitions
                  General Provisions for Standards on a variety of items such
b. Article III:   as: standards for fences; reception antennae; limitations on
                  clearing and grading site, etc.
c. Article XX:    Schedule of Regulations (minimum lot area , lot width ,
                  setbacks, max. height, etc.).
d. Article XXII:  Parking, parking area landscaping and loading/unloading and
                  standards.
e. Article XXIII: Landscaping Standards
f. Article XXIV:  Site Plan Review Standards
g. Ordinance 116  Sign Ordinance (
                  Chapter 1480)
h. Ordinance 220  Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
i. Ordinance 215  Subdivision Control Ordinance
 
ARTICLE XVIII: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) DISTRICT
(Amended 11-10-2004)
Section
Sec. 1801   Intent
Sec. 1802   Definitions
Sec. 1803   Eligibility
Sec. 1804   Submittal and Approval Process
Sec. 1805   Mixed Use Design and Review Standards
Sec. 1806   Open Space /Residential Design and Review Standards
Sec. 1807   Appeals, Violations, Variances and Expiration
SECTION 1801   INTENT.
The intent of the Planned Unit Development District, PUD, is to permit
flexibility in the regulations for development which either includes a mix of
land uses or is proposed for a site containing unique natural features which
the developer and City desire to preserve. The standards of this section are
intended to encourage innovative design and create opportunities which may not
be obtainable through the conventional standards of other articles of this
Zoning Ordinance.
The PUD standards are not intended to be used as a technique to circumvent the
intent of the Zoning Ordinance, to avoid imposition of specific Zoning
Ordinance standards, or the planning upon which it is based, unless there is a
clear public benefit consistent with the overall intent of the Zoning
Ordinance. Thus, the provisions of this section are designed to promote land
 use substantially consistent with the character of the surrounding area and
the City’s Master Plan , with modifications and departures from generally
applicable requirements made to provide the developer with flexibility in
design on the basis of the total PUD plan approved by the City.
SECTION 1802   DEFINITIONS.
Mixed Use PUD: A Mixed Use PUD is a unified development  project, comprised of
a variety of complimentary uses, located on a specific parcel  of land  or
several contiguous parcels of land , for which a comprehensive development
plan meeting the requirements of this Article is approved by the City Council .
Open Space/Residential PUD: An Open Space/Residential PUD is a residential
development  in which dwelling units are placed in a more compact arrangement
than is typical of a conventional subdivision, to preserve natural features
and provide open space /recreation areas.
SECTION 1803   ELIGIBILITY.
Planned unit developments may be allowed upon determination by the City Council
, following a recommendation by the Planning Commission , that the site and
proposed project meet the following eligibility criteria:
   a.   The subject site shall be a minimum size of five (5) acres of
contiguous land ; provided, the minimum site area may be waived by the Planning
Commission for previously developed sites that are proposed to be redeveloped
with a mixed-use PUD, or for PUD sites that will be an infill development
utilizing innovative design to achieve compatibility with surrounding land
uses.
   b.   The subject site shall be under the control of one owner or group of
owners operating collectively, and shall be capable of being planned and
developed as one integral unit. An approved PUD plan runs with the land , not
with the owner . If the land is sold or otherwise exchanged, the approved PUD
plan shall remain in effect unless the applicant submits a request to amend or
terminate the PUD plan.
   c.   The site shall have frontage along, and direct access to a street (s)
capable of accommodating anticipated traffic volumes. Any project over five
acres shall have direct access to a Major Street (per the Act 51 Map made
pursuant to Public Act 51 of 1951, State Trunk Line Highway System, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 247.651 et seq.) or an arterial or collector road as identified in
the City’s Master Plan .
   d.   The site contains significant natural or historic features which will
be preserved to a greater extent through development under the PUD standards
than if the site was developed under conventional zoning, or the PUD will
provide a complementary mixture of uses or housing types within a unique, high
quality design as determined by the Planning Commission .
   e.   The planned unit development offers higher design quality and/or
provides amenities that will result in a recognizable and substantial benefit
to the ultimate users of the project and to the City, where such benefit would
otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely to be achieved through conventional zoning.
These benefits shall be demonstrated in terms of preservation of natural
features , unique architecture, extensive landscaping , special sensitivity to
adjacent land uses, particularly well designed access and circulation systems,
integration of various site features into a unified development and/or
contribution to infrastructure and facility improvements to help offset the
impacts of the PUD project.
   f.   A finding that the proposed type and density of use shall not result in
an unreasonable increase in traffic or the use of public services, facilities
and utilities compared to permitted uses under conventional zoning.
   g.   The proposed development  shall be consistent with the City Master Plan
.
SECTION 1804   SUBMITTAL AND APPROVAL PROCESS.
A PUD may be designated by the City or may be requested by the applicant. If
the City initiated the PUD, and the site is already designated PUD on the City
Zoning Map, the applicant is still responsible for the submission of a PUD
preliminary plan and materials as described below, however the site shall
already be deemed as meeting the eligibility criteria of
Section 1802 above.
   The PUD submittal and approval process is as follows:
   a.   Optional Preapplication Conference. Prior to formal submission of an
application for planned unit development  approval, the applicant may  request
a meeting with City staff and consultants to obtain guidance that will assist
the applicant in preparation of the application and plan. The City shall
charge a fee for the conference to cover administrative and consultant costs.
   b.   Submit PUD Request and Preliminary Plan: The applicant shall  prepare
and submit the following to the Building and Zoning Administrator :
      1.   A completed application form and application fee. A separate escrow
deposit may be required for administrative costs and consultant fees to cover
meeting costs and to review the PUD submittal.
      2.   Proof of ownership of the land to be utilized or evidence of a
contractual ability to acquire such land , such as an option or purchase
agreement.
      3.   A complete and current legal description and size of property in
acres.
      4.   An Impact Assessment meeting the requirements of
Section 328. The number of submittal copies shall be determined by the Building
and Zoning Administrator .
      5.   A site analysis map illustrating the location of existing buildings
and structures, rights-of-way and easements; driveways adjacent to and across
from the subject site; woodlands and trees outside woodlands over twelve inches
(12”) in caliper ; significant historical features; existing drainage patterns
(by arrow), surface water bodies, floodplain areas and wetlands; topography at
two (2) foot contour intervals; and surrounding land uses, zoning and buildings
within 100 feet of the subject site.
      6.   A preliminary site plan illustrating a conceptual layout of proposed
land  use , acreage allotted to each use , residential density (calculations
shall be provided for both overall and buildable acreage as described in
Section 322), building footprints, structures, required setbacks, roadways,
parking areas, drives, driveways, pedestrian paths, conceptual landscape plan,
natural features to be preserved and a preliminary plan for utilities and
stormwater management. If a multi-phase Planned Unit Development is proposed,
identification of the areas included in each phase. For residential uses
identify the number , type, and density proposed by phase.
      7.   A list of anticipated deviations from the Zoning Ordinance
regulations which would otherwise be applicable.
      8.   Any other information which the Planning Commission or Council
require to determine if the proposed project meets the eligibility criteria
(e.g. preliminary building elevations, floor plans, sign plans, etc.)
      9.   A PUD Development Agreement that identifies any modifications from
conventional zoning, obligation of the developer and subsequent owners,
provisions for maintenance and similar information to clarify conditions of
approval.
   c.   Planning Commission Review: The Building and Zoning Administrator
 shall  submit the information to the Planning Commission . The Planning
Commission  may  request a joint introductory meeting with the City Council  to
discuss eligibility and help establish direction. The Planning Commission
 shall  review the PUD rezoning request and submittal information, conduct a
public hearing, and make a recommendation to the City Council  based on the
review standards of
Section 1804.
   d.   City Council Review: Following receipt of a recommendation from the
Planning Commission , the City Council  shall  conduct a public hearing on the
requested PUD rezoning and the preliminary PUD site plan and either approve,
deny or approve with a list of conditions made part of the approval. The City
Council  shall review the request based on the standards of
Section 1804. The City Council  may  require a re-submittal of the preliminary
PUD site plan reflecting the conditions for approval by the Building and Zoning
Administrator  prior to submittal of a PUD Final Site Plan. The City Council
may impose additional reasonable conditions to insure public services and
facilities will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility
loads caused by the PUD, to protect the natural environment, to insure
compatibility with adjacent uses of land , and to promote the use  of land  in
a socially and economically desirable manner.
   e.   Final Site Plan Approval: If the rezoning and preliminary site plan
are approved by the City Council , the applicant shall  submit a site plan  for
review by the Planning Commission  in accordance with
Article XXIV  and/or a subdivision for review in accordance with the
Subdivision Regulations. The Planning Commission  shall ensure that any phasing
shall be logical, provide sufficient access if later phases are delayed and
provide amenities and infrastructure improvements at least in proportion to the
extent of the phase.
   f.   Amendments: If the Planning Commission  determines that a proposed use
or site plan  is not consistent with the approved PUD, the applicant shall  be
directed to submit a request to amend the PUD following the same procedures
outlined above.
SECTION 1805   MIXED USE DESIGN AND REVIEW STANDARDS.
Any Mixed Use PUD shall comply with the following project design standards:
   a.   Eligibility: The proposed Mixed Use PUD meets the eligibility criteria
of
Section 1803.
   b.   Uses Permitted: Any residential, office , commercial, or industrial use
may  be permitted upon a determination by the City that the uses would meet the
intent of this Article, the City’s Master Plan , and is compatible with
surrounding land  uses. Any proposed use  listed as a Special Land Use  in
Article XXI shall  meet the standards listed in
Section 2110.
   c.   Harmony with surrounding uses: The uses and design of the Mixed Use PUD
will be harmonious with the character of the surrounding area in terms of
density , intensity of use , size and height of buildings, architecture and
other impacts.
   d.   Dimensional Standards: The setbacks and other dimensional standards for
various uses shall  generally be consistent with the standards associated with
the most applicable district (s) for the various uses listed in
Article XX  - Schedule of Regulations. Where the proposed design deviates from
the typical standards, the applicant shall provide a table that clearly
compares each requested modification to the Ordinance standard and provides
justification for the modification for approval by the City Council . Unless
variations are specifically requested and approved by the City, the site plan
or subdivision plan shall comply with applicable City standards. In no case
shall the setbacks for buildings adjacent to existing single family  homes be
less than fifty (50) feet.
   e.   Architecture: Buildings shall  provide harmony with adjacent uses in
terms of texture, materials, peaked roof lines, scale and massing. However,
there shall be a variation of front facade  setbacks and architectural style to
avoid repetition along the street  edge. Nonresidential buildings shall utilize
brick as the primary material for all exterior walls that are visible from a
public road or a parking lot.    Other accent materials may  be used where the
materials are durable and compatible with the type of use  and development
proposed in keeping with the character of the city. Roofs shall be pitched with
architectural shingles. Unifying elements, accents, style, color, and materials
shall be provided for different uses within the project.
   f.   Residential Uses: For a mixed-use PUD with a residential component,
portions of the site that are allocated towards residential use  shall  comply
with the requirements of section 1806.
   g.   Natural Features: The development  shall  be designed to promote
preservation of any significant natural or historic features on the site.
   h.   Infrastructure: The uses and design shall  be consistent with the
available capacity of the existing street  network and utility systems or the
applicant shall upgrade the infrastructure as required to accommodate the Mixed
Use PUD.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   i.   Additional Considerations: The Planning Commission  and City Council
 shall  consider the following design elements as appropriate: perimeter
setback  and landscaping ; drainage and utility design; underground
installation of utilities; facilities for pedestrian circulation; internal
roadway design; and the achievement of an integrated development  with respect
to signs, lighting, landscaping  and building materials.
   j.   Design: The site design, site elements and architecture shall  be of
high quality, coordinated and consistent with the City’s design guidelines.
SECTION 1806   OPEN SPACE/RESIDENTIAL DESIGN AND REVIEW STANDARDS.
Any Open Space/Residential PUD shall comply with the following project design
standards:
   a.   Eligibility: The proposed Open Space/Residential PUD meets the
eligibility criteria of
Section 1803.
   b.   Uses Permitted: Only residential uses as listed in Articles
V,
VI, and
VIII are permitted. Attached residential units shall  be permitted only upon a
determination by the City when the following criteria are met.
      1.   Attached unit buildings shall meet the dimensional standards set
forth in
Article XX for either LDMF or HDMF Districts.
      2.   Attached unit buildings shall be arranged and designed to promote
compatibility with adjacent uses.
      3.   Attached unit buildings shall provide a variation in building height
, setbacks, rooflines, window, door openings, materials, and colors.
      4.   The units shall relate well to the streetscape and minimize the
visual dominance of garage doors in the front yard through the provision of
front porches, doors, windows, architectural details that face the street , and
a variation in garage door design and location (e.g. side entry, recessed from
front building line , limited projection beyond front building line ).
      5.   The arrangement of units maximizes the preservation of open space
and the protection of natural features .
      6.   The overall density is no greater than could be achieved through the
underlying zoning. See “d” below.
   c.   Harmony with surrounding uses: The uses and design of the Open Space/
Residential PUD will be harmonious with the character of the surrounding area
in terms of density , intensity of use , size and height of buildings,
architecture and other impacts.
   If the proposed units are to be developed as part of a golf course, the
arrangement of units should not unduly interfere with the operations of the
golf course. The City may require a review by an independent golf course design
professional.
   d.   Density Standards: The permitted density  within an Open Space/
Residential PUD shall not exceed the density  allowed by the underlying
residential zoning district  as described in
Article XX  Schedule of Regulations.
      1.   The maximum number of dwelling units permitted within an Open Space/
Residential PUD project shall be the number of units permitted under a
conventional plan. This shall be demonstrated through the preparation of a
comparison plan that illustrates how many dwelling units could feasibly and
practically be constructed on the subject site in accordance with all
dimensional requirements of the zoning district and design standards for
stormwater and public streets. Portions of a MDEQ regulated wetland shall not
be located within an individual lot. The lots on the comparison plan shall not
require exceptional or unusual engineering to accommodate residential
construction, as determined by the City.
      2.   The area used for density calculations shall not include public
street  rights-of-way , private road access easements, lakes, streams,
detention ponds, or submerged wetlands containing surface water or open water
ponds during at least one (1) month of the year.
   e.   Dimensional Standards: The setbacks and other dimensional standards for
various uses shall  be consistent with the standards associated with the
various uses listed in
Article XX  - Schedule of Regulations. Where the proposed design deviates from
the typical standards, the deviations shall meet the intent of this Article and
the applicant shall provide a table that clearly compares each requested
modification to the Ordinance standard. Unless variations are specifically
requested and approved by the City, the site plan  or subdivision plan shall
comply with applicable City standards. In no case shall the setbacks for
buildings adjacent to existing single family  homes be less than fifty (50)
feet.
   f.   Open Space
      1.   Area included in the open space calculations
         a.   At least twenty (20) percent of the sites gross area or two (2)
acres, whichever is greater, shall be dedicated open space and held in common
ownership.
         b.   The total area of dedicated open space  shall equal or exceed any
reduction in area for minimum lot sizes in the development based on the
parallel plan, except where a density bonus is approved as permitted herein.
         c.   The minimum size of an individual open space area shall be 20,000
square feet with a maximum width to depth ratio of 3:1. This standard is
intended to ensure open space is valuable and usable rather than scattered,
isolated, or remnant lands. The City may waive this standard for clearly
identified pathway corridors between a single row of lots intended to connect
open spaces, if such corridors are determined to be desirable.
         d.   At least 50% of the open space must be usable to the residents
for passive or active recreation, exclusive of permitted water bodies,
stormwater facilities, or other required site plan elements. At least one
active neighborhood park area shall be provided that includes facilities such
as playground equipment, picnic pavilions, soccer fields, ball fields or
similar facilities.
         e.   All natural land , including fairways, associated with golf
courses.
         f.   No more than twenty-five (25) percent of any required open space
 shall include detention ponds, surface water bodies, or wetlands regulated by
the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. Detention ponds that do not
provide a natural appearance and are not incorporated into the overall plan as
an amenity, as determined by the City, shall not be included as required open
space .
         g.   Any building or use accessory to recreation, conservation, or an
entryway may be erected within the dedicated open space , subject to the
approved open space plan. Accessory structures or uses of a significantly
different scale or character than the abutting residential districts shall not
be located near the boundary of the development if it may negatively impact the
residential use of adjacent lands, as determined by the City.
      2.   To be included in the calculations for the minimum open space area,
the following design standards must be met.
         a.   The open spaces shall be organized around the site’s most
important natural features on the site and link existing and planned greenways,
as illustrated on the City Pathways and Parks and Recreation Plans. A
preliminary meeting with City staff, consultants and/or the Planning Commission
to discuss the site analysis, natural feature priorities and development
concepts prior to preparation of plans is encouraged.
         b.   The open space  shall include pathways to link adjacent open
spaces, public parks, bike paths or non-motorized routes.
         c.   In addition to preservation of the most important natural
features , where possible additional open space  shall be located and designed
to achieve the following:
            1.   preserve or create a buffer from adjacent land uses where
appropriate;
            2.   maintain existing natural viewsheds; and
            3.   open space  shall be located within prominent and highly
visible areas of the development , such at the terminus of key views along
roads, at the intersection of arterial or collector streets, at high points or
centrally located within a residential area.
      3.   The following land areas shall not be included in calculations for
required open space :
         a.   the area within any existing or future public street  right-of-
way ;
         b.   the area within private road easements or other easements that
include roads, drives, or overhead utility lines;
         c.   the area located below the ordinary high water mark of an inland
lake, river or stream or any pond with standing water year round;
         d.   the required setback areas around, or minimum spacing between
buildings, except that the setback area around a permitted open space
 accessory building  may be considered open space ;
         e.   parking and loading areas, except those exclusively associated
with a recreation facility or common open space area; and
         f.   any other undeveloped areas not specifically addressed in this
Article, but determined by the Planning Commission to inadequately meet the
intent and standards for open space .
      4.   Protection of Open Space:
         The dedicated open space  shall be set aside by the developer through
an irrevocable conveyance and protected by a Maintenance Agreement, in a form
and manner acceptable to the City. Such conveyance shall assure the open space
will be protected from alteration and all forms of development , except as
shown on an approved site plan or subdivision plat . Said documents shall bind
all successors and future owners in fee title to commitments made as part of
the proposal, but shall allow transfer of ownership and control to a
subdivision or condominium association consisting of residents within the
development , provided notice of such transfer is provided to the City. Such
conveyance shall indicate the allowable use (s) within the dedicated open space
. Upon transfer to a successor of the developer, the open space shall be
maintained by the property owners association or condominium association. The
City may require the inclusion of open space restrictions to prohibit
activities such as the following:
         a.   dumping or storing of any material or refuse;
         b.   activity that may cause risk of soil erosion or threaten plant
material;
         c.   cutting or removal of plant material except for removal of dying
or diseased vegetation;
         d.   use of motorized off-road vehicles;
         e.   cutting, filling or removal of vegetation from wetland areas; and
         f.   use of pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers within or adjacent
to wetlands.
         g.   Infrastructure: The uses and design shall  be consistent with the
available capacity of the existing street  network and utility systems or the
applicant shall upgrade the infrastructure as required to accommodate the Open
Space/Residential PUD.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
         h.   Architecture: Typical elevations shall  be approved by the
planning commission as part of the final site plan  or, alternatively, design
guidelines or a “pattern book” or design code shall be included in the
Development Agreement. Identical or similar single family  buildings or
elevations may  not be repeated more frequently than every sixth house along
the same side of any street . Buildings shall be considered similar if they
have similar door and window configuration, direction of roof pitch, building
mass and building form. Attached unit buildings shall provide a variation in
building height , setbacks, rooflines, window, door openings, materials and
colors. Buildings shall relate well to the streetscape through the provision of
front porches, doors, windows and architectural details that face the street
and assist in minimizing the dominance of garages. For at least 50% of all
units, garages shall be side entry, rear entry or front entry with the garage
recessed a minimum of five (5) feet behind the front building line .
         i.   Additional Considerations: The Planning Commission  and City
Council  shall  consider the following design elements as appropriate:
perimeter setback  and landscaping ; drainage and utility design; underground
installation of utilities; facilities for pedestrian circulation; internal
roadway design; and the achievement of an integrated development  with respect
to signs, lighting, landscaping  and building materials.
SECTION 1807   APPEALS, VIOLATIONS, VARIANCES AND EXPIRATION.
   a.   The Board of Appeals  shall have the authority to hear and decide
appeal requests by property owners for variances from the Zoning Ordinance.
However, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall not have the authority to change
conditions or make interpretations to the PUD site plan or written agreement.
   b.   A violation of the PUD plan or agreement shall be considered a
violation of this Ordinance.
   c.   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not have authority to grant variances
from the approved PUD plan pertaining to uses, perimeter setbacks, perimeter
landscaping or setbacks. Such changes shall require an amendment to the PUD
plan.
   d.   Approval of the PUD rezoning and preliminary site plan by the City
Council  shall confer upon the applicant the right to proceed through the
subsequent planning phase for a period not to exceed two (2) years from date of
approval. If application for final site plan approval is not requested within
this time period, re-submittal of the application shall be required. The City
Council  may extend the period up to an additional two (2) years, if requested
in writing by the applicant prior to the expiration date.
ARTICLE XIX: PRD PUBLIC RECREATION DISTRICT
Section
Sec. 1900   Intent
Sec. 1901   Permitted Uses
Sec. 1902   Special Land Uses
Sec. 1903   Uses Not Permitted
Sec. 1904   Required Conditions
Sec. 1905   Additional Site Development Standards
SECTION 1900   INTENT.
The purpose of the PRD Public Recreation District is to enhance the quality of
life in the community by preserving certain public lands characterized by
distinctive natural features for the enjoyment and benefit of all residents of
the City, to be used as passive recreation areas. Distinctive natural features
 may include, but are not limited to, woodlands, wildlife habitat, wetlands, or
other ecologically significant lands.
It is further the intent of this district to preserve certain public open lands
for the enjoyment and benefit of all residents of the City for use as active
recreation areas and facilities where playground and sports activities may
occur. Such public active or passive recreation areas should be located where
the activities occurring thereon will minimize disturbance to nearby
residential uses.
SECTION 1901   PERMITTED USES.
No building shall be erected and no building or land shall be used except for
the following uses, and subject to the standards and requirements set forth in
this Ordinance and the review procedures in
Article XXIV Site Plan Review and Approval. The following shall apply to each
individual use which may be located on a lot with other uses:
   a.   Passive outdoor recreation activities including, but not limited to
hiking, fishing, interpretive nature trails, equestrian trails and cross-
country skiing.
   b.   Outdoor athletic fields for activities including, but not limited to
soccer, baseball/softball, football, tennis and hockey/ice skating, provided
that such uses are located on sites maintaining not less than 2 acres and are
setback a minimum of 50 feet from any property line.
   c.   Outdoor playgrounds including, but not limited to play structures and
playground equipment, provided that such uses are located on sites maintaining
not less than 1/4 acre and are setback a minimum of 20 feet from any property
line.
   d.   Forest preserves and natural areas.
   e.   Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish and wildlife.
   f.   On-site driveways, parking and roads where alternative means of access
are proven to be impractical.
   g.   Accessory building and uses which are customarily incidental to the
principal use on the lot, subject to the same required conditions that are
applicable to the principal uses and the standards of
Article III. Such accessory uses may include, but are not limited to:
      •   Nature Centers;
      •   Maintenance and storage buildings;
      •   Pavilions;
      •   Restroom facilities.
SECTION 1902   SPECIAL LAND USES.
The following uses shall be permitted as Special Land Uses subject to the
following requirements and subject to the review procedures in Article XXI
Special Land Use . The following shall apply to each individual use , which may
be located on a lot with other uses.
   a.   Indoor ice rinks.
   b.   Community Centers.
   c.   Park or recreation administration buildings.
   d.   Water parks, splash parks or public pools
SECTION 1903   USES NOT PERMITTED.
Uses which generate excessive traffic or noise, alter the natural terrain or
features of the site, create noxious fumes or other air pollutants, or disturb
the peace shall not be permitted because these uses typically have
characteristics which are incompatible with the intent and purposes of this
district . Such uses may include, but are not limited to:
   a.   Motorcycle, snowmobile or other form or motorized off-road vehicle
trails or tracks.
   b.   Camp sites, lodges and recreational vehicle campgrounds.
   c.   Firing ranges.
SECTION 1904   REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   a.   Site Plan Review - Submission of a site plan  for review and approval
by the City shall  be required, in accordance with the provisions of
Article XXIV  Site Plan Review and Approval prior to issuance of a building
permit and/or development . However, submittal of a sketch plan may  be
permitted in certain instances in accordance with
Section 2403, such as improvements within an existing park, where a complete
site plan  is not considered essential.
   b.   Natural Features Standards - Uses shall  be developed to preserve the
natural features of the site, in accordance with the intent of the district
and shall comply with the following standards:
      1.   Buildings shall not be developed on areas with slopes greater than
thirteen percent (13%), unless the City determines that there is no alternative
to locating the building within the steeply sloped area. Trails located in
areas with slopes greater than thirteen percent (13%) shall be designed to
minimize impact to slopes.
      2.   Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to provide a
naturalistic appearance in terms of natural shape, shallow depth, minimum side
slopes and perimeter landscaping .
      3.   There shall be no structures or fill material placed within the 100
year floodplain, except landscaping , trails and passive recreation facilities
that do not obstruct the flow of the floodway may be allowed within the 100
year floodplain by the City during site plan review.
      4.   All site plans shall be designed to minimize impact to woodlands, as
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City during site plan review in
accordance with the regulations set forth in
Section 318.
      5.   Uses shall protect wetlands and drainage ways in accordance with the
regulations set forth in
Section 319.
   c.   Public Access - Uses shall  have direct access onto a public hard-
surface street , except that indirect access onto a public street  may  be
permitted where the City determines that such an alternative would promote
traffic safety and would not cause undue disruption to surrounding properties.
All streets, roads and access drives shall be concrete or asphalt, and be
designed and constructed in accordance with City standards. The City has the
discretion to modify the design standards for internal roads where such
modification will enhance preservation of natural features .
   d.   Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements - Uses shall  provide off-
street parking  and loading  in accordance with the provisions set forth in
Article XXII  Parking and Loading. However, for those uses not specifically
listed in
Article XXII , the City shall have the discretion to determine parking
requirements during site plan  review with consideration given to the ITE
Parking Generation Manual.
SECTION 1905   ADDITIONAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
All Permitted and Special Land Uses shall comply with all applicable provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance including those listed below as a reference guide.
a. Article II:    Definitions
                  General Provisions for Standards on a variety of items such
b. Article III:   as: fences; reception antennae; limitations on clearing and
                  grading site, etc.
c. Article XX:    Schedule of Regulations (minimum lot area , lot width ,
                  setbacks, max. height, etc.).
d. Article XXII:  Parking, parking area landscaping and loading/unloading and
                  standards.
e. Article XXIII: Landscaping Standards
f. Article XXIV:  Site Plan Review Standards
g. Ordinance 116  Sign Ordinance (
                  Chapter 1480)
h. Ordinance 220  Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
i. Ordinance 215  Subdivision Control Ordinance
 
ARTICLE XX: SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS FOR PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS: RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
Section
Principal Buildings: Residential Districts - Schedule of Regulations
Principal Buildings: Non-Residential and PUD Districts - Schedule of
Regulations
Central Business District Building Setbacks
Sec. 2000   Averaged Lot Size Option
Sec. 2001   Subdivision Open Space Option
 
Article XX Schedule of Regulations for Principal Buildings: Residential
Districts
         Minimum Lot                   Principal Structure
District Size or      Maximum Building Minimum Yard Setback6,
         Maximum      Height           7
         Density                                              Max Lot  Minimum
         Min.                                                 Coverage Floor
         Lot                                                  by All   Area
         Area,                                  Each          Bldgs    (Per
         Max   Width2 Stories Feet3    Front4,5 Side Rear              Unit)
         Units
         per
         Acre1
Article XX Schedule of Regulations for Principal Buildings: Residential Districts
            Minimum Lot     Maximum
District    Size or Maximum Building      Principal Structure Minimum Yard Setback6, 7
            Density         Height                                                                         Max Lot
            Min. Lot                                                                                       Coverage Minimum Floor
            Area,                                                                                          by All   Area (Per
            Max      Width2 Stories Feet3 Front4,5 Each Rear                                               Bldgs    Unit)
            Units                                  Side
            per
            Acre1
            12,000
R-1 Single  sq. ft., 90                                                                                             See Footnote
Family      2.7      feet8  2       30    309      109  359                                                25%      10
            units/
            acre8
            9,000
R-2 Single  sq. ft., 75                                                                                             See Footnote
Family      3.6      feet   2       30    259      89   309                                                25%      10
            units/
            acre8
R-3 Single  7,200
Family      sq. ft., 65                                                                                             See
Detached or 4.5      feet   2       25    259      89   309                                                25%      Footnote10
Attached    units/
            acre
            4,000
            sq. ft.,
            8.0
            units/
            acre 20
R-T Two     units
Family      per acre 80     2       25    309, 11  109, 359, 11                                            25%      700 sq. ft.
Residential for      feet                          11
            extended
            care and
            nursing
            care for
            the
            elderly
            Minimum                                                                                                 1 BR = 700
            15,000                                                                                                  sq. ft.
            sq. ft.                                                                                                 2 BR = 850
            lot                                                                                                     sq. ft.
Low Density Maximum                                                                                                 3 BR = 1,000
Multiple    six (6)  100                           16 feet between buildings, 25 feet between every 4th             sq. ft.
Family      units    feet   2       35    35       building11                                              25%      4 BR = 1,150
Residential per                                                                                                     sq. ft. max
(LDMF)      acre,                                                                                                   10%
            maximum                                                                                                 efficiencies,
            4 units                                                                                                 max 40% 1 BR
            per                                                                                                     unit
            building
            Maximum
            12 units
            per
High        acre, 20
Density     units
Multiple    per acre 165                  50 feet from all property lines  and between buildings or the
Family      for      feet   5       50    height of the building, whichever is greater11                   25%
Residential extended
(HDMF)      care and
            nursing
            care for
            the
            elderly
Manufacture          50
d Housing   8 units  feet   1       14    See Article VII Mobile Home Park District12
Park (MHP)  per acre per
                     unit
                                                                                                                    Same as
Planned     minimum                       See Article XVIII. Setbacks from perimeter property lines  shall         underlying
Unit        5 acre   Same as underlying   be consistent with the underlying zoning dist. for the specific  25%      zoning
Development lot      zoning district      use                                                                       district  for
(PUD)                                                                                                               the specific
                                                                                                                    use
 
(Amended 2-14-1996)
1   Maximum density  shall be based on 25% calculation for lakes, rivers,
steams and land defined as a Wetland (regulated) by the MDNR. Public street
rights-of-way for streets within the project can be included.
2   Measurement for irregular shaped lots and lots along curvilinear streets.
In no case shall frontage measured along the street right-of-way be less than
sixty (60) feet. (See Section 321). Narrow deep lots shall be avoided. The
depth of a lot generally shall not exceed three (3) times the width as measured
at the building line for platted lots and four (4) times the width for
unplatted lots.
3   Exceptions to Supplementary Height Regulations. The following kinds of
structural appurtenances may exceed the height limitations for authorized use ,
upon approval of the Planning Commission. (a) Schools, churches and other
similar institutional buildings may be erected to a height not exceeding sixty
(60) feet provided the front, side and rear yards shall not be less than the
height of the building wall abutting on such yard; (b) chimneys, church spires,
cupolas, domes, towers, flag poles, penthouses, water tanks, radio or
television or cellular phone antennae, monuments may be erected to a height not
exceeding sixty (60) feet unless approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
Setbacks or television and cellular phone antennae shall be equal to half the
height of the structure; (c) mechanical equipment such as blowers, ventilating
fans and air conditioning units, shall be placed no closer than twelve (12)
feet to any lot line.
4   In the case of corner lots or lots with dual frontage, front setback
requirements shall be maintained along all street frontages.
5   Exceptions to Front and side yard Setbacks: Where fifty (50) percent or
more of the aggregate street frontage between two (2) successive intersecting
streets is occupied by buildings of the type and use permitted in the district
before the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendments thereto, with a
front yard setback less than required by this Ordinance, the minimum front yard
for new buildings shall be the average setback distance of existing buildings
located within two hundred (200) feet on either side of a given lot. However,
the depth of the front yard resulting therefrom shall not be less than one-half
(1/2) of the dimensions specified in the Schedule of Regulations.
6   Architectural features, not including vertical projections, may extend or
project into a required side yard not more than two (2) inches for each one (1)
foot of width of such side yard; and, may extend or project into a required
front yard or rear yard not more than three (3) feet. An unenclosed, open and
uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into the front yard a maximum of
ten (10) feet.
7   See Sections 312 through 317 for accessory building and structure setbacks.
8   See Section 2000, Average Lot Size Option and Section 2001, Subdivision
Open Space Option, regarding flexibility allowances.
9   For all permitted and special land uses other than single family
residential, the minimum setback shall be equal to the height of the principal
building unless a greater setback is specified in the zoning district.
10   The following regulations shall govern the minimum floor area required of
each residence hereafter erected:
 
                      R-1           R-2           R-3
1 Story              1,400 sq. ft. 1,200 sq. ft. 1,000 sq. ft.
1-1/2 Story1st Floor 1,200 sq. ft. 1,000 sq. ft. 800 sq. ft.
1-1/2 Story2nd Floor 500 sq. ft.   450 sq. ft.   350 sq. ft.
2 Story     1st Floor 825 sq. ft.   750 sq. ft.   600 sq. ft.
2 Story     2nd Floor 825 sq. ft.   750 sq. ft.   600 sq. ft.
 
In one and one-half (1-1/2) Story and two (2) Story dwelling units, the
required square footage of the upper level in each zoning district may be
reduced one (1) square foot for each square foot that the lower level exceeds
the minimum allowable floor area, provided that in no case shall the square
footage of the upper level be less than four hundred and fifty (450) square
feet. Also, in no case shall the one and one-half (1-1/2) or two (2) Story
dwelling have less total square footage than the combined square footage as it
relates to one and one-half (1-1/2) or two (2) Story dwellings in the schedule
above.
11   For buildings with multiple dwelling units, a ten (10) foot landscaped
setback from all roads, drives, parking areas and adjacent single family
residential districts shall be provided.
12   All mobile homes shall be setback at least fifty (50) feet from the park
property line and arterial street. The 50 foot buffer shall include a
landscaped greenbelt as described in
Section 2303.
Architectural features, not including vertical projections, may extend or
project into a required side yard not more than two (2) inches for each one (1)
foot of width of such side yard; and, may extend or project into a required
front yard or rear yard not more than three (3) feet. An unenclosed, open and
uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into the required front yard a
maximum of ten (10) feet. An unenclosed, open and uncovered deck may project
into the required rear yard a maximum of ten (10) feet, provided it shall not
be more than three (3) feet above average grade.
Article XX Schedule of Regulations for Principal Buildings, Nonresidential
and Planned Unit Development Districts
                           Minimum Yard Setbacks 3
         Min. Lot Min. Lot        Each           Parking Max. Lot Max. 5, 6
District Area 1   Width 2  Front  Side Rear Yard Lot /   Coverage Height
                           Yard 4 Yard           Loading
                                                 Area
Article XX Schedule of Regulations for Principal Buildings, Nonresidential and Planned Unit Development
Districts
             Min. Lot Min. Lot Minimum Yard Setbacks 3                             Max. Lot   Max. 5, 6
District     Area 1   Width 2  Front    Each Side   Rear Yard   Parking Lot /      Coverage   Height
                               Yard 4   Yard                    Loading Area
                                                                10 ft. front yd,
                                                                rear yd and        35% bldg.
Office       governed                   15 ft. each             adjacent to        60%        30 ft.
Service      by       85 ft.   20 ft.   side        20 ft.      residential dist;  impervious 2.5
District     setbacks                                           ( or 5 ft. high    surface    stories
                                                                wall in rear per
                                                                Sec. 2310)
                                                                10 ft. front yd,
                                        10 ft. 20               rear yd and
Neighborhood 23,280                     ft.                     adjacent to        governed   30 ft.
Business     sq. ft.  60 ft.   25 ft.   adjacent to 20 ft.      residential dist;  by         (amended
District (B- (1/                        residential             (or 5 ft. high     setbacks   8-9-2006)
1)           2 acre)                    district 7              wall in rear yard
                                                                per
                                                                Sec. 2310)
                               Old Town
Central                        10 ft.10             10 ft., 25
Business                       North                ft. from                                  40 ft.
District     none     none     Gateway  0 ft.7      res. dist.                    none       ***
Overlay Zone                   25 ft.10             (amended 8-                               (amended
(CBD)                          (amended             19-2008)                                  8-9-2006)
                               12-9-
                               2009)
                               30 ft.,
Community    23,280            75 ft.   10 feet, 75                                35% bldg.
Business     sq. ft.           from     ft. from    20 ft., 75                     75%
District (B- (1/      85 ft.   res.     res. or     ft. from                      impervious 30 ft.
2)           2 acre)           dist. or arterial    res. dist.                     surface
                               arterial r.o.w.
                               r.o.w.
General                                 10 ft.; 20  20 feet; 50                    35% bldg
Business                                ft adjacent feet                           75%        30 ft.
District (B- 1 acre   100 ft.  30 ft.   to          adjacent to                   impervious 2 stories
3)                                      residential residential                    surface
                                        dist.       dist.
                      min. lot          20 feet; 50 feet or
Research              size = 2          equal to the height of  20 feet, 30 feet   20% bldg.  30 ft. 2-
Park         15 acres acres;   40 ft.   building (whichever is  adjacent to a      60%        1/
District              min. 250          greater) when abutting  residential        impervious 2 stories
                      ft. of            a residential district8 district           surface
                      frontage
                                        20 feet; 50 feet or                        governed
                                        equal to the height of  20 feet, 40 feet   by
Light                 min. 100          building (whichever is  adjacent to a      setbacks
Industrial   1 acre   ft. of   40 ft.   greater) when abutting  residential        and        40 ft.
District              frontage          a residential           district           landscapin
                                        district8, 9                               g
                                                                                   standards
                                                                                   governed
                                        30 feet; 50 feet or     20 feet, 40 feet   by
General               min. 100          equal to the height of  adjacent to a      setbacks
Industrial   2 acres  ft. of   60 ft.   building (whichever is  residential        and        60 ft.
District              frontage          greater) when abutting  district           landscapin
                                        a residential district9                    g
                                                                                   standards
                               All setbacks adjacent to a residential              70%
                               district shall equal the required rear yard        impervious Accessor
                                setback of the residential district. In other     surface or y
Parking                        cases, the minimum setback along a public           as         building
District     none     none     street right-of-way shall be; ten (10) feet and 0  governed   14 ft.
                               where the parking lot abuts the adjacent principal  by         Parking
                               property which the lot serves. The setback for any  setbacks   structure
                               parking structure shall be a minimum fifty (50)     whichever  40 ft.
                               feet from any residential district.                 is less.
 
*** Amendments to Article X allows a maximum building height  of 50’ for mixed
uses and establish a minimum height of 24’.
(Amended 2-14-1996; amended by Ordinance 1908-01, passed 8-14-2019; amended by
Ord. 1710-01, passed 12-13-2017; Ord. 2412-05, passed 1-8-2025)
1   For property containing easements, floodplain or MDNR regulated wetlands
refer to the description of “lot area” in
Section 322.
2   Minimum lot width is measured at the required front yard setback distance
from right-of-way except corner lots and double frontage lots are considered to
have two front yards. Narrow deep lots shall be avoided. The depth of a lot
generally shall not exceed three (3) times the width as measured at the
building line for platted lots and four (4) times the width for unplatted lots.
3   See Article XXIII for landscaping, screening and buffering standards which
may increase the width of the required setback area.
4   Exceptions to front yard setback: Where fifty (50) percent or more of the
aggregate street frontage between two (2) successive intersecting streets is
occupied by buildings of the type and use permitted in the district before the
effective date of this Ordinance or any amendments thereto, with a front
yard setback less than required by this Ordinance, the minimum front yard for
new buildings shall be the average setback distance of existing buildings
located within two hundred (200) feet on either side of a given lot. However,
the depth of the front yard resulting therefrom shall not be less than one-half
(1/2) of the dimensions specified in the Schedule of Regulations.
5   Exceptions to height requirements: The following kinds of structural
appurtenances may be permitted to exceed the height limitations for authorized
use , upon approval of the Planning Commission.
   a.   Schools, churches and other similar institutional buildings may be
erected to a height not exceeding sixty (60) feet provided the front, side and
rear yards shall not be less than the height of the building abutting on such
yard.
   b.   Chimneys, church spires, cupolas, domes, towers, flag poles,
penthouses, water tanks, radio or television or cellular phone antennae,
monuments may be erected to a height not exceeding sixty (60) feet unless
approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Setbacks for television and cellular
phone antennae shall be equal to half the height of the structure, provided
that applicant demonstrates the design will protect adjacent uses and
structures if the structure collapses.
   c.   Mechanical equipment such as blowers, ventilating fans and air
conditioning units, shall be placed no closer than three (3) feet to any lot
line in commercial districts and no closer than twelve (12) feet to any lot
line in residential districts. Mechanical equipment in industrial districts
shall comply with all yard setbacks.
   d.   Any mechanical equipment located on the roof of any building shall not
exceed a height of ten (10) feet above the surrounding roof surface, and shall
occupy no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the total roof area. When roof-
mounted equipment is located on a building that is adjacent to a residential
use or is in view from the adjacent roadway, appropriate architectural
screening shall be required.
   e.   Structural extensions appropriate to the building design, such as
cornices, shall be limited to five feet above the stated height limit.
6   Where maximum height is described in both height and stories, the maximum
height shall be whichever is less.
7   Where the building is connected to building on an adjoining lot by an
approved fire wall, the required side yard on the common side may be reduced to
zero (0) feet if permitted by the building and fire codes, provided a ten (10)
foot setback shall be provided if the wall includes any windows or similar
openings.
8   The setback may be reduced to not less than twenty-five (25) feet by the
Planning Commission if a wall or landscaped berm is provided to screen loading
areas, and the rear of the building has the same architectural character and
materials as the front and side.
9   All outdoor storage and display areas shall be in the rear yard and shall
be completely screened with an obscuring wall as required in Section 2310. The
Planning Commission may require the wall be up to eight (8) feet high in
consideration of adjacent uses.
10   A greater or lesser distance may be required by the Planning Commission.
If a lesser setback is authorized, a corresponding width reduction to the
requirements of Section 2303 Required Landscaping Along Public Streets shall
also be permitted. The following criteria shall be employed by the Planning
Commission to determine the minimum and maximum setback for a specific site in
the Central Business District:
   (1)   Consistency with existing setbacks within one hundred fifty (150) feet
of the same blockface or area, as appropriate; or
   (2)   Consistency with site limitations and constraints; or
   (3)   For sites bound by vacant lots, consistency with existing or
historical setbacks within the same or opposite blockface or area; or
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   (4)   Avoidance of impacts upon recorded easements, rights-of-way, or sight
distances; or
   (5)   Other site-specific considerations that may warrant an increase or
decrease in setback.
   (6)   Parking shall be located behind the front building line and no closer
than 10 feet to a residential property line.
(Amended 7-14-2010)
SECTION 2000   AVERAGED LOT SIZE OPTION.
The intent of this Section is to permit the subdivider or developer to vary lot
sizes and lot widths to average the minimum size of lot per unit as required in
Article XX - Schedule of Regulations for each Single-Family Residential
District. If this option is selected, the following conditions shall be met:
   a.   In meeting the average minimum lot size, the Subdivision shall be
designed so that no lot has area or width reduced more than ten percent (10%)
than the minimum area or width required in the Schedule of Regulations and
shall not create an increase in the number of lots.
   b.   Each final plat submitted as part of a Preliminary Plat shall average
the minimum required for the district in which it is located. The dimensions
shall be illustrated on the plan or in tabular form.
SECTION 2001   SUBDIVISION OPEN SPACE OPTION.
   a.   Intent: The intent of the Subdivision Open Space Plan is to promote the
following objectives:
      1.   Provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the
natural features such as woodlands, steep topography, water bodies and
wetlands.
      2.   Encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the
development of residential areas.
      3.   Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of open area
while recognizing a reduction in development costs, and allowing the developer
to avoid natural obstacles on the site.
      4.   Encourage the provision of open space within reasonable distance to
lots in the subdivision and to further encourage the development of
recreational facilities, such as pathways which link up to the City’s sidewalk
system.
   b.   Modifications to the standards as outlined in
Article XX - Schedule of Regulations may be made in the R-1, R-2 and R-
3 Single-Family Residential Districts when the following conditions are met:
      1.   Individual lots in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Single-Family Residential
Districts may be reduced up to twenty percent (20%). In the R-2 Districts, this
reduction may be accomplished in part by reducing lot widths up to five (5)
feet. In the R-1 Districts, this reduction may be accomplished in part by
reducing lot widths up to ten (10) feet. These lot-area reductions shall be
permitted, provided that the dwelling unit  density shall be no greater than if
the land area to be subdivided were developed in the minimum square-foot lot
areas as required for each Single-Family District under
Article XX - Schedule of Regulations. The area remaining through the reduction
of lot sizes shall be retained as permanent open space . The City may require
submission of a “parallel” plan to illustrate that the number of lots provided
under the Open Space option would be feasible with a traditional subdivision
layout (for example, each lot in the parallel plan must have buildable envelope
meeting setback requirements and not including ponds or wetlands regulated by
the MDNR).
      2.   The City may allow up to fifty percent (50%) of the area considered
not to be buildable under traditional subdivision practices (such as MDNR
regulated wetlands, non-regulated wetlands, floodplain, steep slopes, etc.) to
be used in the “parallel” plan for determining density if the City finds that
the project will result in a recognizable benefit to the City and the residents
of the proposed subdivision.
      3.   Rear yards  may be reduced to no less than thirty (30) feet when
such lots border land dedicated for park, recreation and/or open space
purposes, provided the width of the dedicated land shall not be less than one
hundred (100) feet measured at the point at which it abuts the rear yard of the
adjacent lot.
      4.   The area to be dedicated for subdivision open space purposes shall
in no instance be less than four (4) acres, and shall be in a location and
shape approved by the City Council .
      5.   This plan, for reduced lot sizes, shall be permitted only if it is
mutually agreeable to the City and the subdivider or developer.
      6.   This plan, for reduced lot sizes, shall be started within six (6)
months after having received approval of the final plat, and must be completed
in a reasonable time . Failure to start within this period shall void all
previous approval.
ARTICLE XXI: SPECIAL LAND USES
Section
Sec. 2100   Intent
Sec. 2101   Application, Review and Approval Procedures
Sec. 2102   General Review Standards for All Special Land Use s
Sec. 2103   Conditions of Approval
Sec. 2104   Validity of Permit
Sec. 2105   Inspections
Sec. 2106   Revocation
Sec. 2107   Amendments to Special Land Use Permits
Sec. 2108   Special Land Use Expansions
Sec. 2109   Restrictions on Resubmittal of a Special Land Use Permit
Sec. 2110   Special Land Use Specific Requirements
SECTION 2100   INTENT.
This Article is intended to regulate uses which may be compatible with uses in
some, but not all, locations within a particular zoning district . Among the
purposes of the Special Land Use standards of this Article are to accomplish
the following:
   a.   Provide a mechanism for public input on decisions involving more
intense land uses.
   b.   Establish criteria for both new development and infill/redevelopment
consistent with the City’s land  use goals and objectives as stated in the City
Master Plan .
   c.   Ensure uses can be accommodated by the environmental capability of
specific sites.
   d.   Provide site design standards to diminish negative impacts of
potentially conflicting land uses.
   e.   Provide greater flexibility to integrate land uses within the City.
This Article provides both general standards for all Special Land Uses (
Section 2101) and specific location, site or operational standards for
particular Special Land Uses (
Section 2102). The process for a Special Land Use involves a Public Hearing
with the Planning Commission with final review on the use and site plan by the
City Council . Approval of any Special Land Use requires a Special Land Use
Permit.
SECTION 2101   APPLICATION, REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
The procedure for Special Land Use review shall be as follows:
   a.   An applicant for a Special Land Use  shall submit an application for
review and pay the required fee. The application presented for consideration
shall contain the following:
      1.   Name of proposed development .
      2.   Common description of the property and complete legal description
(also address, if available.)
      3.   Dimensions of land : width, length, acreage, and frontage.
      4.   Existing zoning classification and zoning of all adjacent
properties.
      5.   Proposed use of the land .
      6.   Name, address, City and phone number of:
         (a)   Firm or individual who prepared the application.
         (b)   Legal owner of the property .
         (c)   Applicant (including basis of representation.)
      7.   Signature of the legal owner and the Applicant.
      8.   A site plan , prepared in accordance with the provisions of
Article XXIV of this Ordinance.
   b.   Planning Commission Public Hearing
      1.   If the Building and Zoning Administrator finds all of the
information required above is in order, the Planning Commission  shall schedule
a Public Hearing to review the request.
      2.   The Planning Commission  shall direct the City Clerk to publish a
notice of the public hearing in a newspaper which circulates in the City and
copies of the notice shall be sent by mail to property owners and occupants of
structures within three hundred (300) feet of the property in question. The
notice shall be given not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15)
days before the date of the public hearing, and shall:
         (a)   Describe the nature of the Special Land Use request.
         (b)   Indicate the property which is the subject of the Special Land
Use request.
         (c)   State the date, time and place of public hearing.
         (d)   Indicate that written comments may be submitted prior to or at
the public hearing.
   c.   The Planning Commission  shall conduct the required public hearing.
   d.   The Planning Commission  shall review the application in terms of the
requirements of the Special Land Use General standards listed in
Section 2102 below and any specific standards of
Section 2110.
   e.   The Planning Commission  shall recommend that the City Council either
approve, approve with conditions (as described below in
Section 2104) or deny the Special Land Use and the accompanying site plan .
   f.   The Special Land Use request and other pertinent information, together
with the recommendation of the Planning Commission , shall be placed on the
agenda of the next City Council meeting. The City Council shall either approve
or reject the request within sixty (60) days, unless an extension has been
agreed upon in writing by both the City Council and the Applicant.
SECTION 2102   GENERAL REVIEW STANDARDS FOR ALL SPECIAL LAND USES.
Prior to approving a Special Land Use application, the Planning Commission and
City Council  shall require the following general standards be satisfied for
the use at the proposed location. In addition to specific standards for
individual Special Land Uses listed in
Section 2110, the Planning Commission and City Council shall require
stipulation to ensure that the following are met:
   a.   The Special Land Use will be consistent with the goals, objectives and
future land use plan described in the Grand Blanc Community Master Plan .
   b.   The Special Land Use will be consistent with the stated Intent of the
zoning district .
   c.   The Special Land Use will be designed, constructed, operated and
maintained to be compatible with, and not significantly alter, the existing or
intended character of the general vicinity in consideration of environmental
impacts, views, aesthetics, noise, vibration, glare, air quality, drainage,
traffic, property values or similar impacts.
   d.   The Special Land Use will not significantly impact the natural
environment.
   e.   The Special Land Use can be served adequately by public facilities and
services such as police and fire protection, drainage structures, water and
sewage facilities, refuse disposal and schools.
   f.   The proposed use  shall be of a nature that will make vehicular and
pedestrian traffic no more hazardous than is normal for the district involved,
taking into consideration the following:
      1.   vehicular turning movements;
      2.   proximity and relationship to intersections;
      3.   adequacy of sight distances;
      4.   location and access of off-street parking ; and,
      5.   provisions for pedestrian traffic.
   g.   The proposed use  shall be such that the location and height of
buildings or structures, and the location, nature and height of walls, fences,
and landscaping will not interfere with or discourage the appropriate
development and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonably affect their
value.
   h.   The proposed use  shall be designed, located, planned, and operated to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
SECTION 2103   CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   a.   The City Council  may impose conditions of approval, which will help
ensure the Special Land Use meets the standards of this Ordinance provided that
the conditions:
      1.   protect the health, safety, and welfare of those affected;
      2.   are related to the valid exercise of the police power of the City;
      3.   are necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this Ordinance;
      4.   are related to the standards established in this Ordinance for the
land  use or activity under consideration and are necessary to ensure
compliance with those standards;
      5.   provide adequate protection to existing land uses so the proposed
land  use will not be detrimental or injuries to the surrounding neighborhood.
   b.   Approval of a Special Land Use , including conditions made part of the
approval, is attached to the property described in the application and not to
the owner of such property . A record of conditions imposed shall be made a
part of the City Council minutes and maintained by the Building and Zoning
Administrator . The conditions shall remain unchanged unless an amendment to
the Special Land Use permit is approved by the City Council .
SECTION 2104   VALIDITY OF PERMIT.
   a.   Building Permit: The Building and Zoning Administrator  or Building
Inspector may  issue a building permit in conformity with the particular
Special Land Use  so approved. In all cases where a particular Special Land Use
has been granted as provided herein, application for a building permit must be
made and received by the City no later than one hundred twenty (120) days
thereafter, or such approval shall  automatically be revoked unless an
extension is granted. The City Council  may grant an extension of the first
approval for good causes shown under such terms and conditions for such a
period of time not to exceed six (6) months.
   b.   Performance Guarantee: The City Council  shall  require a performance
guarantee  to ensure completion of the improvements (excluding the building).
The performance guarantee  may  take the form of a cash deposit, surety bond,
certified check, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit.
   c.   Where actual physical construction of a substantial nature of
structures authorized by a Special Land Use permit has not commenced within one
(1) year of issuance, and a written application for extension of the approval
has not been filed as provided below, the permit shall become null and void and
all rights thereunder shall terminate (note: it is the responsibility of the
applicant to request such an extension).
   d.   Upon written application filed prior to the termination of the one (1)
year period as provided above, the City Council  may authorize a single
extension of the time limit for a further period of not more than one (1) year.
Such extension shall be granted only based on evidence from the applicant that
the development has a reasonable likelihood of commencing construction during
the one (1) year extension period.
   e.   Any approved Special Land Use  shall be deemed a use permitted in the
district in which it is located and is not to be considered a non-conforming
use.
   f.   If a use regulated as a Special Land Use which has not previously
received a Special Land Use permit ceases operations for more than one (1)
year, the Special Land Use permit shall become null and void, and a new Special
Land Use permit shall be required to reopen the use. The time frame shall be
extended to two (2) years for a use which was approved as a Special Land Use
under this Ordinance amendment (i.e. a Special Land Use Permit is on file).
   g.   The Building and Zoning Administrator  shall make periodic
investigations of development authorized by Special Land Use permit to
determine continued compliance with all requirements imposed by the Planning
Commission and this Ordinance. Non-compliance with the requirements and
conditions approved for the Special Land Use shall constitute grounds to
terminate said approval following a public hearing.
SECTION 2105   INSPECTIONS.
The Building and Zoning Administrator  shall make periodic investigations of
developments authorized by Special Land Use permit to determine continued
compliance with all requirements imposed by the Planning Commission and this
Ordinance. Non-compliance with the requirements and conditions approved for the
Special Land Use shall constitute grounds to terminate said approval following
a public hearing.
SECTION 2106   REVOCATION.
The revocation of a Special Land Use  may occur if its recipient fails to
continuously abide by its terms and conditions. The revocation procedure is as
follows:
   a.   The City Council , through its designated administrators, shall notify
the recipient, in writing, of any violations of City codes or provisions of the
Special Land Use .
   b.   The recipient shall have thirty (30) days to correct all deficiencies
to the satisfaction of the City Council .
   c.   If after thirty (30) days any deficiencies remain, the City Council
 may then revoke the Special Land Use , or if the conditions warrant, allow
additional time.
   d.   A repeat violation may cause immediate revocation of the Special Land
Use .
SECTION 2107   AMENDMENTS TO SPECIAL LAND USE PERMITS.
Any person or agency who has been granted a Special Land Use permit shall
notify the Building and Zoning Administrator of any proposed amendment to the
approved site plan of the Special Land Use permit. The Building and Zoning
Administrator  shall determine whether the proposed amendment constitutes a
minor or major amendment based on the determination standards for all site
plans in accordance with
Article XXIV. A major amendment to a Special Land Use permit shall comply with
the application and review procedures contained in this Article.
SECTION 2108   SPECIAL LAND USE EXPANSIONS.
The expansion, change in activity, reuse or redevelopment of any use requiring
a Special Land Use Permit shall require resubmittal in manner described in this
Article. A separate Special Land Use Permit shall be required for use requiring
Special Land Use review on a lot, or for any expansions of a Special Land Use
which has not previously received a Special Land Use Permit.
SECTION 2109   RESTRICTIONS ON RESUBMITTAL OF A SPECIAL LAND USE PERMIT.
No application for a Special Land Use permit which has been denied wholly or in
part shall be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of denial,
except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions relating
to all of the reasons noted for the denial found to be valid by the Planning
Commission or City Council . A resubmitted application shall be considered a
new application.
SECTION 2110   SPECIAL LAND USE SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.
The following sections identify specific requirements which shall be complied
with by individual Special Land Use s, as determined by the Planning Commission
and City Council , in addition to the general standards of
Section 2102.
   a.   Listing: Special Land Use s with specific site and/or use standards
described on the following pages:
      1.   Accessory apartment in a single family home
      2.   Accessory above ground fuel services and storage
      3.   Principal and/or accessory use , generation or storage of hazardous
materials
(Amended 2-14-1996)
      4.   Accessory commercial outdoor sales or storage (see commercial
outdoor sales)
      5.   Adult regulated uses
      6.   Adult foster care homes
(Amended 2-14-1996)
      7.   Arcades and similar devices at public commercial Mechanical
amusement device centers
      8.   Automobile service centers (minor repair) and major auto repair
establishments
      9.   Automobile service (gasoline) station s including those accessory to
another use
      10.   Automobile washes, automatic or self-service
      11.   Banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions with over three
drive-through lanes
      12.   Bed-and-breakfast inns in R1 - R3
      13.   Cemeteries
      14.   Churches
      15.   Commercial outdoor sales or storage (as permitted or accessory use
)
      16.   Composting centers
      17.   Essential public service buildings and structures
      18.   Essential public service storage yards
      19.   Funeral Homes
      20.   General and specialty hospitals
      21.   Group Foster Care Homes
      22.   Group day care homes
      23.   Housing for the elderly , retirement villages, etc.
      24.   Kennels, commercial
      25.   Motels, hotels including accessory convention/meeting facilities
and restaurants
      26.   Nursing and convalescent homes
      27.   Open air business - see commercial outdoor display, sales and
storage
      28.   Outdoor cafes, outdoor eating areas and open front restaurants
      29.   Outdoor theaters
      30.   Radio, television microwave, and cellular phone towers (impact
assessment per
Section 328 is not required)
      31.   Recreation: Commercial outdoor establishments (excluding golf
related uses)
      32.   Recreation: Golf courses, Country Clubs, and par three golf courses
      33.   Recreation: Golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses
      34.   Recreation: Indoor commercial recreation (bowling alleys, ice
areas, skating rinks, etc.)
      35.   Recreation: Private, non-commercial institutional or community
recreation facilities, and swimming pool clubs.
      36.   Recycling Centers
      37.   Restaurants and other establishments with drive-in or drive-thru
facilities
      38.   Schools: Public, parochial and private intermediate or secondary
schools
      39.   Shopping centers
      40.   Theaters, concert halls and play houses
      41.   Urgent medical care centers
      42.   Veterinary Clinics
   b.   List of specific requirement by use :
      1.   Accessory apartment in a single family home
      These standards are intended to assist in accommodating the needs of the
growing number of senior citizens in the City while providing reasonable
control in recognition of the high percentage of owner  occupied single family
homes in the City. The purpose of these standards is also to prevent the
undesirable proliferation of permanent two-family units which would, over time,
disrupt the character of single family neighborhoods.
         a.   Accessory apartments shall be entirely within the existing
structure and shall include no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total
floor area of the home.
         b.   The exterior of the home shall remain unchanged, so it does not
give the appearance of being divided into separate units. The addition of a
separate exterior door is prohibited. The applicant shall demonstrate the home
may be easily converted back to a one unit single family home when the
accessory apartment dweller(s) leave the premises or the house is sold.
      2.   Accessory above ground fuel services and storage
      Location of accessory fuel services related to the marine, aviation,
agriculture, mobile home park s, recreational uses, medical facilities, and
industrial uses shall be permitted subject to the following:
         a.   Such uses are only allowed in the General Business District,
Research Park (RP), Light Industrial (I-1) and General Industrial (I-2) zoning
districts.
         b.   Minimum lot size for above ground fuel service or storage shall
be three (3) acres.
         c.   Above ground storage tanks other than those holding water shall
be located not less than seventy-five (75) feet from any occupied building or
any lot line and shall be mounted on a solid concrete slab to prevent overturn
and spilling, according to EPA specifications.
         d.   A Pollution Incidence Prevention Plan shall be submitted and
approved.
      3.   Principal and/or accessory use , generation or storage of hazardous
materials
(Amended 2-14-1996)
      These standards, intended to protect groundwater and city wellheads, seek
to ensure the following:
         a.   Projects and related improvements shall be designed to protect
the natural environment, including lakes, ponds, streams, wetlands, floodplain,
groundwater, and steep slopes.
         b.   Stormwater management and drainage facilities shall be designed
to retain the natural retention and storage capacity of any wetland, water
body, or watercourse, and shall not increase flooding or the potential for
pollution of surface or groundwater, on-site or off-site.
         c.   General purpose floor drains shall be connected to a public sewer
system or an on-site holding tank in accordance with state , county , and
township requirements, unless a groundwater discharge permit has been obtained
from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources.
         d.   Sites at which hazardous substances and polluting material are
stored, used, or generated shall be designed to prevent spills and discharges
of polluting materials to the air, surface of the ground, groundwater, lakes,
streams, rivers or wetlands.
         e.   State and federal agency requirements for storage, spill
prevention, recordkeeping, emergency response, transport and disposal of
hazardous substances and polluting materials shall be met. No discharges to
groundwater, including direct and indirect discharges, shall be allowed without
appropriate state and county permits and approvals.
      The applicant shall provide documentation for the following, with
appropriate correspondence from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources
(MDNR), Michigan State Police Fire Marshall, the EPA, local fire department,
and other applicable local codes and ordinances:
         a.   Description of any discharge of any type of wastewater to a storm
sewer, drain, lake, stream, wetland, other surface water body or into the
groundwater.
         b.   Description of storage of any salt, oil or other potentially
hazardous materials including common name, name of chemical components,
location, maximum quantity expected on hand at any time, type of storage
containers or base material, and anticipated procedure for use and handling.
         c.   Description of any transportation, on-site treatment, storage or
disposal of hazardous waste generated in quantities of 250 gallons or 220
pounds per month.
         d.   Description of any secondary containment measures proposed
including design, construction materials and specifications, volume and
security measures.
         e.   Name and phone number(s) of person (s) responsible for materials
and available 24 hours, in case of detected spill.
         f.   Location of existing and proposed service facilities and
structures, above and below ground, including:
            1.   Public and private groundwater supply wells on-site.
            2.   City wells located within an one thousand (1,000) foot radius
of the site.
            3.   Septic systems and other wastewater treatment systems (the
location of the drainfield and the septic tank should be clearly
distinguished).
            4.   Areas to be used for the storage, use , loading/unloading,
recycling, or disposal of hazardous substances and polluting materials,
including interior and exterior areas.
            5.   Underground storage tanks locations.
            6.   Location of exterior drains, dry wells, catch basins,
retention/detention areas, sumps and other facilities designed to collect,
store, or transport stormwater or wastewater. The point of discharge for all
drains and pipes should be specified on the site plan .
         g.   Location of existing wetlands and watercourses, including lakes,
ponds, rivers, and streams.
         h.   Soil characteristics of the parcel , at least to the detail
provided by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service.
         i.   Existing topography, with a maximum contour interval of two (2)
feet indicated.
         j.   Delineation of areas on the site which are known or suspected to
be contaminated, together with a report on the status of site cleanup.
         k.   Completion of the form title “Groundwater Protection Information
for Site Plan Review”.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   In addition, the City may require businesses, facilities, and uses which
generate, use or store hazardous materials to submit an Environmental Impact
Assessment according to
Section 328.
      4.   Accessory commercial outdoor display, sales or storage - see
commercial outdoor sales
      5.   Adult Regulated Uses
         a.   Intent: In the development  and execution of these zoning
regulations, it is recognized there are some uses that, because of their very
nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational
characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under
certain circumstances, thereby causing a deleterious effect upon the adjacent
areas. The proximity of adult uses to certain uses considered particularly
susceptible to the negative impacts or the concentration of adult uses tends to
erode the quality of life, adversely affect property  values, disrupt business
investment, encourage residents and businesses to move or avoid the community,
increase crime and contribute a blighting affect on the surrounding area. This
subsection describes the uses regulated and the specific standards needed to
insure that the adverse effects of these uses will not contribute to the
deterioration of the surrounding neighborhood, to prevent undesirable
concentration of these uses and to require sufficient spacing from uses
considered most susceptible to negative impacts.
         b.   Uses Regulated: The following uses are regulated by this
subsection.
            (1)   Adult Book or Supply Store
            (2)   Adult Model Studio
            (3)   Adult Motion Picture Arcade
            (4)   Adult Motion Picture Theater or Adult Live Stage Performing
Theater
            (5)   Adult Outdoor Motion Picture Theater
            (6)   Adult Physical Cultural Establishment
            (7)   Cabaret
            (8)   Massage Parlor except those licensed by the State of Michigan
and meeting the criteria outlined in the definitions section (
Article II).
         c.   Required Spacing: The establishment of the types of Adult
Regulated Uses listed in “b” above shall  meet all of the following space
requirements; with the distance between uses measured horizontally between the
nearest point of each property  line:
            (1)   at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any other adult
regulated use ;
            (2)   at least one thousand (1,000) feet from all churches,
convents, temples and similar religious institutions;
            (3)   at least one thousand (1,000) feet from all public, private
or parochial nursery, primary or secondary schools, public parks and hospitals;
            (4)   at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any use defined as a
“care organization ”;
            (5)   at least eight hundred (800) feet from any single family or
multiple family residential district or use ;
            (6)   at least eight hundred (800) feet from any pool or billiard
hall, coin-operated amusement center, indoor and outdoor recreation such as
miniature golf; dance club catering primarily to teenagers, movie theaters, ice
or roller skating rinks and similar uses frequented by children and teenagers.
         d.   Special Site Design Standards
            (1)   Maximum size of the building shall be five thousand (5,000)
square feet.
            (2)   The building and site shall be designed, constructed and
maintained so material such as a display, decoration or sign depicting,
describing, or relating to “specific sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas ” (as defined in this ordinance) cannot be observed by
pedestrians, motorists on a public right-of-way or from an adjacent land  use .
            (3)   Adult regulated uses  shall be located within a free standing
building. A shared or common wall structure or shopping center are not
considered to be a free standing building.
            (4)   The color of the building materials shall be reviewed by the
Planning Commission and approved by the elected body.
            (5)   A six (6) foot high brick or masonry wall shall be
constructed to screen the parking lot. The Planning Commission  may permit use
of landscaping in place of the wall.
            (6)   Access shall be from an arterial roadway.
         e.   Waivers:
         Upon denial of any application for a regulated use under this
subsection, the applicant may appeal for a waiver of the location provisions
above to the Board of Zoning Appeals consistent with the standards set forth
below. The Board of Zoning Appeals may waive the location provisions set forth
in this subsection, after all the following findings are made:
            (1)   Compliance with Regulations: The proposed use  will not be
contrary to any other provision of these zoning regulations, or injurious to
nearby properties;
            (2)   Not Enlarge District: The proposed use  will not enlarge or
encourage the development  of a “skid row” or “strip”;
            (3)   Consistent with Programs: The establishment of an additional
regulated use  will not be contrary to, or interfere with, any program of urban
renewal or neighborhood development ;
            (4)   Consistent with Law: All applicable City, state  or federal
laws and regulations will be observed.
            (5)   Procedure for Waiver: Prior to granting a waiver of the
location restrictions set forth above, and not less than five (5), nor more
than fifteen (15) days before the request for waivers is considered or a public
hearing held pursuant to this section, the Council shall  publish , in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City, one notice indicating that a
request for waivers to establish a regulated use  has been received, and shall
send by mail or personal delivery a copy of that notice to the owners of the
property  for which waivers are being considered, and to all waivers are being
considered, and to all persons to whom any real property  is assessed within
300 feet of the boundary of the premises  in question, and to the occupants of
all structures within 300 feet. If the name of the occupant  is not known, the
term “occupant” may  be used in making notification.
         The notice of application shall further indicate that a public hearing
on the proposed regulated use  may be requested by a property  owner or
occupant , no less than eighteen (18) years of age, or a structure located
within 300 feet of the boundary of the property being considered for the
regulated use . The applicant, City Council , or Board of Zoning Appeals may
request a public hearing.
         f.   Conditions of Approval: Prior to the granting of approval for the
establishment of any regulated use , the Planning Commission  may  impose any
conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location, construction,
maintenance, or operation of the regulated use  as in its judgment may be
necessary for the protection of the public interest. Any evidence, bond, or
other performance and guarantee may be required as proof that the conditions
stipulated in connection therewith will be fulfilled.
         g.   Specific Penalties: No person  operating an adult entertainment
business shall  permit any person  under the age of 18 to be on the premises
of said business either as an employee or customer.
      6.   Adult foster care homes:
         1.   Such uses shall be duly licensed by the State Department of
Social Services.
         2.   Buildings and lots so used shall conform to all state and local
code requirements.
         3.   The facility shall not result in an excessive concentration of
such facilities in the general area or the City of Grand Blanc overall, as
determined by the City Council .
(Amended 2-14-1996)
      7.   Arcades, mechanical amusement devices and similar devices:
         a.   Any part of the lot occupied by such use shall not be located
within three hundred (300) feet of any residential district or within five
hundred (500) feet of the property line of any public, parochial or other
private school offering courses in general education.
         b.   Access to the site shall be directly from a Regional Arterial or
Arterial street .
         c.   All activities, except for off-street parking or loading , shall
be conducted within completely enclosed buildings constructed in accordance
with all other applicable codes and City Ordinances.
      8.   Automobile service centers (minor repair) and major automotive
repair (such as body shops)
      All principal and accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of
five hundred (500) feet from a single family residential district .
         a.   If the gas station has auto repair or automobile mall, there
shall be a minimum lot frontage on a paved road of two hundred (200) feet.
         b.   Overhead doors shall not face a public street or residential
district . The City Council can modify this requirement upon determining there
is no reasonable alternative and the poor visual impact will be diminished
through use of landscaping beyond that required in
Article XXIII.
         c.   Only one driveway shall be permitted from any street unless the
City Council determines additional driveways are necessary and will not
increase potential for accidents or congestion.
         d.   Where adjoining residential district , a wall six (6) feet in
height shall be erected along any common lot line. Such fence or wall shall be
continuously maintained in good condition.
         e.   All repair work shall be conducted completely within an enclosed
building.
         f.   There shall be no outdoor storage or display of vehicle
components and parts, materials, commodities for sale, supplies or equipment.
         g.   Storage of wrecked, partially dismantled, or other derelict
vehicles, or overnight parking of any vehicle except a wrecker is prohibited
beyond one (1) day.
         h.   The applicant shall submit a Pollution Incidence Protection Plan
(PIPP). The PIPP shall describe measures to prevent groundwater contamination
caused by accidental gasoline spills or leakage, such as: special check valves,
drain back catch basins and automatic shut off valves, as approved by the Fire
Department.
         i.   The applicant must submit an Impact Assessment as described in
Section 328.
      9.   Automobile service (gasoline) stations (including those accessory to
another use )
         a.   The minimum lot-area for gasoline service stations shall be
fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet for stations having no more than two (2)
service bays and no more than two (2) pump islands. There shall be added three
thousand (3,000) square feet for additional service bay and fifteen hundred
(1,500) square feet for each additional pump island. At least one (1) street
lot line shall be at least one hundred fifty (150) feet in length along one (1)
major thoroughfare. The lot shall be so shaped and the station so arranged as
to provide ample space for vehicles which are required to wait.
         b.   Pump islands shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet from any
public right-of-way or lot line. Tanks, propane, and petroleum products shall
be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from any lot line.
         c.   Overhead canopies shall be setback at least twenty (20) feet from
the right-of-way with materials consistent with the principal building . The
proposed clearance of any canopy shall be noted on the site plan .
         d.   Access driveways shall be along an arterial street . Only one
driveway shall be permitted from any street unless the City Council determines
additional driveways are necessary and will not increase accident or congestion
potential.
         e.   Where adjoining residential district , a wall six (6) feet in
height shall be erected along any common lot line. Such wall shall be
continuously maintained in good condition. The City Council  may require
landscaping , including a berm , as an alternative.
         f.   All repair work shall be conducted completely within an enclosed
building.
         g.   There shall be no outdoor storage or display of vehicle
components and parts, supplies or equipment, except within an area defined on
the site plan approved by the City Council and which extends no more than ten
(10) feet beyond the building.
         h.   Storage of wrecked, partially dismantled, or other derelict
vehicles is prohibited.
         i.   The applicant shall submit a Pollution Incidence Protection Plan
(PIPP). The PIPP shall describe measures to prevent groundwater contamination
caused by accidental gasoline spills or leakage, such as: special check valves,
drain back catch basins and automatic shut off valves.
         j.   A Traffic Impact Study shall be provided in accordance with
Section 329.
         k.   In the event that an automobile service station use has been
abandoned or terminated for a period of more than one (1) year, all underground
gasoline storage tanks shall be removed from the premises , as per state
requirements.
      10.   Automobile washes, automatic or self-service
         a.   Only one (1) ingress/egress driveway shall be permitted on any
single street .
         b.   Where adjoining a residential district , a solid fence or wall
six (6) feet in height shall be erected along any common lot line. Such fence
or wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition. The Planning
Commission  may require landscaping , including a berm , as an alternative.
         c.   All washing facilities shall be within a completely enclosed
building.
         d.   Vacuuming and drying may be located outside the building, but
shall not be in the required front yard and shall be set back at least fifty
(50) feet from any residential district .
         e.   All cars required to wait for access to the facilities shall be
provided stacking spaces fully off the street  right-of-way which does not
conflict with vehicle maneuvering areas to access gasoline pumps or vacuums,
and as required in
Article XXII, Parking Standards.
         f.   A Traffic Impact Study shall be provided in accordance with
Section 329.
         g.   Truck wash must be at least one hundred (100) feet from all
property lines and entirely screened using landscaping from residential
      11.   Banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions with drive-
through facilities with over three (3) drive-through lanes.
         a.   Only one (1) ingress/egress driveway or one (1) pair of one-way
driveways or one stand-alone ready teller structure , shall be permitted along
any street .
         b.   Exit and required stacking lanes shall not face directly at a
single family residence zoned for residential use unless the alignment is
designed or landscaped to prevent headlight glare.
         c.   A Traffic Impact Study shall be provided in accordance with
Section 329.
      12.   Bed-and-breakfast inns in R-1 through R-3
         a.   Sufficient parking for the rooms shall be located off-street and
shall not be located in the front yard .
         b.   No bed-and-breakfast inn shall be located closer than three
hundred (300) feet to another bed-and-breakfast inn.
         c.   Meals or other services provided on the premises  shall only be
available to residents, employees and overnight guests of the inn.
         d.   The dwelling unit in which the bed and breakfast establishment is
located shall be the principal residence of the operator, and said operator
shall live on the premises while the establishment is active.
         e.   There shall be a maximum of six (6) rooms for lodging.
         f.   Sufficient landscaping  shall be used to screen adjacent
residences from parking areas or any outdoor eating area.
         g.   A sketch plan showing the floor plan shall be submitted for
approval.
         h.   Maximum sign size shall be twenty (20) square feet with a maximum
height of five (5) feet. Sign materials are to be comparable with the arch of
the building.
      13.   Cemeteries
         a.   Minimum property size shall be twenty (20) acres.
         b.   All grave sites, buildings and structures shall be setback at
least one hundred (100) feet from all property lines .
         c.   The City Council  shall determine that the cemetery will have a
“parklike” setting.
         d.   Uses such as crematoriums, mausoleums, casket sales and monument
sales shall be permitted as an accessory use to a cemetery . Setbacks and
landscaping shall be compatible with adjacent uses.
      14.   Churches, temples and similar places of worship
         a.   Minimum lot-area  shall be three (3) acres plus an additional
fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet for each one hundred (100) persons of
occupant load as determined by City Building Code.
         b.   Buildings of greater than the maximum height permitted in
Article XX - Schedule of Regulations may be allowed provided the front, side
and rear yard setbacks are increased above the minimum required by one (1) foot
for each foot of building height that exceeds the maximum permitted.
         c.   All vehicular access to the site shall be onto a Regional
Arterial, Arterial or Collector street , as classified in the City Master Plan
. The Planning Commission  may allow secondary access onto local (residential)
streets if the uses fronting the street which would be most impacted by traffic
flow are predominantly non-single family homes.
         d.   Wherever an off-street parking area is adjacent to a residential
district , a continuous obscuring wall, fence and/or landscaped area at least
five (5) feet in height shall be provided. The City Council may reduce this
buffer based on the standards of
Section 2311.
         e.   The City Council  may require a Traffic Impact Study,
particularly if the church is to have services or activities during peak times
on the roadway, or if there are other religious institutions in the vicinity
which could create traffic conflicts (refer to
Section 329).
      15.   Commercial Outdoor Sales or Storage and Open Air Businesses (as a
permitted or accessory use , including sales or storage of: building/lumber
supply, contractors yards , flea markets, auctions, garden/landscape supplies,
nurseries, greenhouses, stone, farm implement, automobiles, trucks,
recreational vehicles, mobile homes, boats , jet skis, mowing equipment,
construction equipment and similar materials or equipment).
         a.   Any stockpiles of soils, fertilizer or similar loosely packaged
materials shall be sufficiently covered or contained to prevent dust or blowing
of materials.
         b.   All outdoor storage areas shall be paved and include a stormwater
drainage system approved by the City Council .
         c.   No outdoor storage  shall be permitted in the front yard or in
any required side yard or required rear yard of buildings for the district in
which the commercial outdoor display, sales or storage use is located.
         d.   The site shall include a building of at least five hundred (500)
feet of gross floor area for office  use in conjunction with the approved use .
         e.   The display and storage area shall be paved with a permanent,
durable and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained to dispose
stormwater without negatively impact adjacent property .
         f.   All loading and truck maneuvering shall be accommodated on-site.
         g.   All outdoor storage areas adjacent to a residential district
 shall provide a wall or buffer strip as described in
Article XXIII.
      16.   Commercial Composting Centers
         a.   The applicant shall submit an Impact Assessment (See
Sec. 328) describing the expected odors, aesthetics, environmental impacts,
vehicular and truck traffic impacts associated with the use , and any
mitigation measures to be employed.
         b.   The site plan which shall clearly illustrate the layout of the
composting operation, including: buildings, staging area, parking, on-site
truck maneuvering (truck turning radii shall be illustrated), curing area,
landscaped buffers, sales area and fencing.
         c.   Commercial composting operations shall be at least one thousand
(1000) feet from any residential district .
         d.   All composting operations shall be at least two hundred (200)
feet from the boundary of any lake, stream, drain, wetland or other surface
water body. The applicant shall describe procedures for managing stormwater
runoff and preventing pollution of surface water bodies or groundwater.
Groundwater quality monitoring devices shall be provided.
         e.   Documentation shall be provided indicating that the soils
percolate and are not characterized by a high water table.
         f.   The applicant shall describe acceptable methods for control of
odors.
         g.   A landscaped buffer strip or wall, as described in
Article XXIII shall be provided on all sides adjacent to a residential district
.
         h.   Access shall be provided solely on Class A truck routes.
         i.   All storage areas shall be enclosed in a building.
         j.   Temporary signs shall be prohibited.
      17.   Essential Public Service Buildings and Structures
         a.   Operating requirements necessitate that the facility be located
at the subject site to serve the immediate vicinity.
         b.   Electric or gas regulator equipment and apparatus shall be
setback a minimum of thirty (30) feet from all lot lines or equal to district
 setback s, whichever is greater. They can not be located in the district
 front yard  setback .
         c.   Essential Public Service Storage Yards shall be screened from any
adjacent residential district by a buffer strip or berm (See
Section 2303).
         d.   The buildings or structures shall be architecturally compatible
with the surrounding buildings and shall be of brick construction.
      18.   Essential Public Service Storage Yards
         a.   Requirements of item 17 above.
         b.   The minimum lot size shall be three (3) acres.
         c.   An open air fence six (6) feet in height shall be constructed on
the boundary property lines .
      19.   Funeral Home
         a.   Adequate assembly area is provided off-street for vehicles to be
used in a funeral procession, provided further that such assembly area shall be
provided in addition to any required off-street parking area. A caretaker’s
residence  may be provided within the main building of mortuary establishments.
      20.   General and Specialty Hospitals
         a.   All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of
at least ten (10) acres in area.
         b.   The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from
bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least one hundred (100) feet for
front, rear and side yards for all two (2) story structures. For every story
above two (2), the minimum yard distance shall be increased by at least twenty
(20) feet.
      21.   Group Foster Care Homes or Family Group Home
         a.   No foster care group home shall be located closer than fifteen
hundred (1500) feet to any other foster care group home or foster care family
home, measured from the nearest wall of each such structure .
         b.   The City Council  shall approve no additional facility which
would contribute to an excessive concentration of Foster Care Group Homes
within a neighborhood.
         c.   A minimum of thirty-five (35) square feet of indoor play area
shall be provided for each child. Indoor play area shall be computed exclusive
of hallways, bathrooms, reception and office areas, kitchens, storage areas and
closets, basements, except those which are finished and have dual means of
egress, and areas used exclusively for rest or sleep.
         d.   A minimum of one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of outdoor
play area for each child. The total outdoor play area shall have a total
minimum area of not less than five thousand (5000) square feet.
      22.   Group Day Care Homes
         a.   Group Day Care Homes shall have a minimum lot-area of one half
acre (21,780 square feet).
         b.   An on-site drive shall be provided for drop offs/loading. This
drive shall be arranged to allow maneuvers without affecting traffic flow on
the public street.
         c.   There shall be a fenced, contiguous open space with a minimum
area of 5,000 square feet provided on the same premises as the group day care
home . The required open space  shall not be located within a required front
yard .
         d.   A minimum of thirty-five (35) square feet of indoor play area
shall be provided for each child. Indoor play area shall be computed exclusive
of hallways, bathrooms, reception and office areas, kitchens, storage areas and
closets, basements, except those which are finished and have dual means of
egress, and areas used exclusively for rest or sleep.
         e.   A minimum of one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of outdoor
play area for each child. The total outdoor play area shall have a total
minimum area of not less than five thousand (5000) square feet and be fenced
and screened with landscaping on the exterior side of the fence .
      23.   Housing for the Elderly
         a.   All sites shall be located within adequate walking distance of
food stores, shopping centers, restaurants and drug stores, as determined by
the City Council .
         b.   All dwelling units shall consist of at least three hundred fifty
(350) square feet per unit (not including kitchen and sanitary facilities.)
         c.   Total area coverage of all buildings (including dwelling units
and related service buildings) shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of
total site, exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way .
         d.   Passive recreation area(s) shall be provided at the rate of
twenty-five (25) square feet per one hundred (100) square feet of living area.
         e.   The minimum lot size shall be not less than three (3) acres.
         f.   All units shall have at least one (1) living room and one (1)
bedroom , except that not more than ten (10) percent of the units may be of an
efficiency-type apartment .
         g.   The gross density of the dwelling units shall not exceed twenty
(20) units per acre, exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way of either
interior or bounding roads.
         h.   Except as provided herein, all buildings and sites shall be in
compliance with RM-1 requirements in
Article XX - Schedule of Regulations.
         i.   No housing for the elderly  shall be converted to any other use
without complying with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in effect.
         j.   The City Council  may add any conditions it deems appropriate to
ensure the compatibility of the development with the surrounding area.
         k.   All buildings permitted hereunder shall not exceed forty (40)
feet in height.
      24.   Kennels, Commercial
         a.   For kennels housing dogs, the minimum lot size shall be two (2)
acres.
         b.   Building wherein dogs are kept, dog runs, and/or exercise areas
shall not be located nearer than one hundred (100) feet to property lines and
shall not be located in any required front, rear or side yard  setback area.
         c.   Such facilities shall be subject to other conditions and
requirements necessary to prevent possible nuisances (i.e., fencing, sound-
proofing, sanitary requirements).
         d.   An operations/management plan shall be submitted to the City.
      25.   Motels: Hotels, bed-and-breakfast  inns, including accessory
convention/meeting facilities and restaurants.
         a.   Access shall be provided so as not to conflict with the adjacent
business uses or adversely affect traffic flow on a major thoroughfare.
         b.   Each unit shall contain not less than two hundred fifty (250)
square feet of floor area.
         c.   No guest shall establish permanent residence at a motel for more
than thirty (30) days within any calendar year.
      26.   Nursing and Convalescent Homes
         a.   There shall be provided on the site, not less than fifteen
hundred (1,500) square feet of open space for each bed in the home. The fifteen
hundred (1,500) square feet of land area shall provide for landscape setting,
off-street parking , service drives, loading space , yard requirement and
accessory uses, but shall not include the area covered by main or accessory
buildings.
         b.   Principal buildings shall not be closer than forty (40) feet to
any property line.
      27.   Open Air Businesses - see commercial outdoor display, sales and
storage
      28.   Outdoor Cafes or eating areas and open front restaurant (i.e.
window service)
         a.   Any outdoor eating area shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of
the gross floor area of the principal building ; and shall not be located in
any required front, side or rear setback area; except in the CBD District when
specifically approved by the City Council .
         b.   Any outdoor eating area shall be located no closer than fifteen
(15) feet from any street  right-of-way or any vehicular parking or maneuvering
areas. Such eating areas shall be separated from all vehicular parking and
maneuvering areas by means of a greenbelt , wall, or architectural feature.
         c.   The outdoor eating area shall not be located within fifty (50)
feet of any properties used or zoned for residential purposes. The area shall
be completely screened from view from all residential properties by an
obscuring wall or greenbelt , in compliance with this Ordinance.
         d.   The outdoor eating area shall be kept clean and void of litter at
all times. Fences or landscaping shall be provided to control blowing debris.
         e.   All vending machines and arcades shall be located within a
completely enclosed building.
      29.   Outdoor Theaters
      Because outdoor theaters possess the unique characteristics of being used
only after darkness and since they develop a concentration of vehicular traffic
in terms of ingress and egress from their parking area, they shall be permitted
in I-1 District only. Outdoor theaters shall further be subject to the
following conditions:
         a.   Outdoor theaters shall abut, and have all access from, a Regional
Arterial or Arterial.
         b.   All vehicles, waiting or standing to enter the facility, shall be
provided off-street waiting space. No vehicle shall be permitted to wait or
stand within a dedicated right-of-way .
         c.   The area shall be designed as to prevent the movie screen from
being viewed from residential areas or adjacent major roadways. All lighting
used to illuminate the area shall be installed and confined within, and
directed onto the premises of the outdoor theater site. Landscaping shall be
provided to screen  automobile headlights off-site.
         d.   A Traffic Impact Study shall be provided in accordance with
Section 329.
      30.   Radio, Television, Microwave, and Cellular Phone Towers
         a.   Height: Towers for radio, television, cellular phones and other
transmitting and relay antenna towers shall be located so any setback equals
the setback from any residential district . The setback from all other
districts shall be at least one-half (2) the height of the tower, provided the
applicant provides engineering information the tower is self collapsing. The
setback area shall remain clear of any building or structure except an
accessory utility building.
         b.   Lighting: The City Council  shall approve any lighting on the
tower.
         c.   No signs or logo shall be permitted on the tower.
         d.   The City Council  may require a security fence to prevent access
to the tower.
      31.   Recreation: Commercial Outdoor Recreation Establishments (excluding
golf related uses)
         a.   Such uses shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
recreational fields, rinks or courts, including football, softball, soccer,
tennis, basketball, ice skating, and similar activities, swimming pools open to
the general public or operated by a private nonprofit organization, archery and
shooting ranges, commercial riding stables, animal racing, go-cart, automobile
or motorcycle tracks, music concert pavilions and bandshells, amusement parks
and uses accessory to the above uses, such as refreshment stands, retail shops
selling items related to the above uses, maintenance buildings, office for
management functions, spectator seating and service areas, including locker
rooms and rest rooms.
         b.   The site shall be adequate to accommodate the intended use (s),
parking and adequate buffer areas without significant impact on nearby
properties in terms of noise, traffic, lighting glare, views, odors,
trespassing, dust or blowing debris, as determined by the City Council . The
applicant shall provide documentation that the site area is adequate using
national facility standards.
         c.   The site shall be located on a paved street which is classified
as a Regional Arterial or arterial in the City Master Plan .
         d.   No building or spectator seating facility shall be located within
one hundred (100) feet of a property line.
         e.   The site shall be periodically cleared of debris.
      32.   Recreation: Golf courses, Country Clubs, Par Three Golf Courses as
principal use
         a.   The site shall have access directly onto a Regional Arterial or
Arterial road , as defined in the City Master Plan .
         b.   The site plan  shall be designed to achieve a relationship
between the arterial and any proposed service roads, entrances, driveways and
parking areas which will contribute pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety.
         c.   Development features including the principal buildings, accessory
structures and fairways, shall be designed and arranged to minimize any adverse
effects upon adjacent property . All principal or accessory buildings shall be
not less than two hundred (200) feet from any public street right-of-way or
property line abutting residentially zoned lands; provided the City Council
 may modify this requirement where topographic conditions, existing vegetation
or new landscaping will screen views. In no case shall the setback be less than
seventy five (75) feet.
         d.   Operational hours for maintenance vehicles, course maintenance
and/or irrigation may be restricted by the City Council to protect nearby
residential districts. Maintenance sheds shall not be visible from any adjacent
single family residential areas.
         e.   Any swimming pool  shall meet the standards of Section 313 and
comply with all applicable building codes and City Ordinances.
      33.   Recreation: Golf Driving Ranges, Miniature Golf Courses
         a.   All traffic ingress and egress  shall be from Regional Arterial
or Arterial as classified in the City Master Plan .
         b.   Parking lots shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the
street  right-of-way and one hundred (100) feet from any property line abutting
a residential district .
         c.   Any lot line abutting a residential district  shall provide a
fifty (50) foot wide, landscaped buffer strip with landscaping meeting the
standards of
Article XXIII.
         d.   No building shall be constructed or located closer than two
hundred (200) feet from the property line of any abutting residential lot.
         e.   The site plan  shall illustrate expected trajectory or ball
dispersion patterns along fairways and for driving ranges where adjacent to
residential uses, buildings, parking lots or public streets.
         f.   Site size shall be sufficient to retain errant balls within the
site by means of landscaping , berms or a six (6) foot high fence . Netting
shall be prohibited unless the City Council determines the netting would be
compatible with surrounding uses.
         g.   The City Council  may restrict lighting and hours of operation
for a driving range in consideration of surrounding land uses and zoning.
         h.   Tee areas for a driving range shall be clearly distinguished by
elevating the stations six (6) inches to one and one half (1-1/2) feet above
the ground, or through use of short walls or alternate distinction to separate
tee stations.
      34.   Recreation: Indoor commercial recreation such as bowling alleys,
indoor golf, ice arenas, skating rinks, etc.)
         a.   The principal and accessory buildings and structures shall not be
located within one hundred (100) feet of any residential district or permitted
use .
         b.   All uses shall be conducted completely within a fully enclosed
building.
         c.   The buildings shall be sound-proofed.
         d.   A minimum eight (8) foot high, twenty (20) foot wide berm
landscaped with evergreen trees to create a totally obscuring screen  shall be
provided.
      35.   Recreation: Private, non-commercial institutional or community
recreation facilities, and swimming pool clubs.
         a.   The proposed site shall have at least one (1) property line
abutting a Regional Arterial or Arterial roadway as classified in the City
Master Plan , and the site shall be so planned as to provide all ingress and
egress directly onto or from said road.
         b.   Front, side and rear yards  shall be at least eighty (80) feet
wide, and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs, and grass . All such
landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. There shall be no
parking or structures permitted in these yards , except required entrance
drives and those walls used to obscure the use from abutting residential
districts.
         c.   Off-street parking  shall be provided so as to accommodate not
less than one half of the member families and/or individual members. The City
Council  may modify the Off-street parking requirements in those instances
wherein it is determined that the users will be pedestrian and originate from
the immediately adjacent areas. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or
zoning compliance permit, by-laws of the organization shall be provided in
order to establish the membership involved for computing the Off-street parking
requirements. In those cases wherein the proposed use or organization does not
have by-laws or formal membership, the Off-street parking requirements shall be
determined by the City Council on the basis of usage.
         d.   Swimming pools shall meet the applicable standards of
Section 313, all applicable building and health codes.
      36.   Recycling Centers
         a.   Recycling stations shall be only for the collection of recyclable
materials for hauling to another site for processing. A one (1) or two (2) yard
dumpster may be provided for non-recyclable waste, such as twine, lids, etc.
         b.   Paved loading and stacking spaces shall be provided for at least
three (3) automobiles.
         c.   All storage of recycled materials shall be within appropriate
containers, with access through doors on the sides of the container.
         d.   The City Council  may require a totally obscuring fence or wall
around the perimeter of the recycling center .
         e.   The hours of operation and materials accepted shall be clearly
posted.
         f.   Front, side and rear yards  shall be at least eighty (80) feet
wide, and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs, and grass . All such
landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. There shall be no
parking or structures permitted in these yards , except required entrance
drives and those walls used to obscure the use from abutting residential
districts.
      37.   Restaurants and other establishments with drive-in or drive-through
facilities
         a.   Location shall be along a Regional Arterial or Arterial, as
classified in the City Master Plan .
         b.   Only one (1) access shall be provided onto any Regional Arterial
or Arterial, though the Planning Commission  may allow two (2) curb cuts for a
one-way circulation pattern. Access points shall be located at least sixty (60)
feet from the intersection of any two streets.
         c.   Such restaurants constructed adjacent to other commercial
developments shall have a direct vehicular access connection where possible.
         d.   A six (6) foot high wall which creates a completely obscuring
effect shall be provided when abutting or adjacent districts are zoned
residential, OS-1 or B-1.
         e.   Applicant shall provide a traffic impact study in accordance with
Section 329.
         f.   Each drive-through facility shall provide an escape lane to allow
other vehicles to pass those waiting to be served. The Planning Commission  may
waive this requirement where it can be demonstrated that such a waiver will not
adversely impact public safety or the convenience of patrons.
         g.   Except for corner lots, drive-through windows shall be located on
a side or rear building elevation. For corner lots, drive-through windows may
be located in the front yard of the lesser traveled roadway, provided views are
screened to the Planning Commission ’s satisfaction.
(Amended by Ordinance 2105-02, passed 5-12-2021)
      38.   Schools: Public, parochial and private intermediate and/or
secondary schools offering courses in general education.
      All vehicular access to the site shall be onto a Regional Arterial,
Arterial or Collector road, as classified in the City Master Plan . The City
Council  may allow secondary access onto local (residential) streets if the
uses fronting the street which would be most impacted by traffic flow are
predominantly non-single family homes.
      39.   Shopping centers
      Shopping centers of over 30,000 square feet or gross floor area in the
Community Business District and over 60,000 square feet in the General Business
District shall meet the standards below. For purposes of calculation, the
principal building and all outbuildings including those on outlots, shall be
including in calculating the gross floor area threshold for this section.
         a.   A Traffic Impact Study shall be submitted (refer to
Section 329).
         b.   The principal building with front parking shall be setback two
hundred-fifty (250) feet from any public right-of-way or property line.
         c.   Such shopping centers shall have access to at least one (1)
Arterial when in a Community Business District; access to at least one (1)
Regional Arterial when located within a General Commercial District.
         d.   The design of regional shopping centers shall ensure that
vehicular circulation patterns are designed and regulated to reduce conflicts
between vehicles and pedestrians onsite, and the impacts of traffic generated
by the center on adjacent streets.
         e.   Internal circulation shall be designed such that no intersection
includes more than four (4) aisles or drives.
         f.   Site entrances shall be restricted to three-way movements, with
unrestricted inbound movements.
         g.   Internal drives defined by the ends of aisles shall have raised
curbed islands at appropriate locations to define circulation paths and control
movements through the parking lot.
         h.   Loading facilities which serve the commercial establishment in
the principal building  shall be screened from public view.
         i.   Any building side facing a public street or residential district
 shall be constructed with brick, fluted block or similar decorative material.
         j.   Any outlots shall have circulation and parking designed to
complement the entire site.
      40.   Theaters (indoor), cinemas, concert halls and play houses
         a.   Access shall be from a Regional Arterial or Arterial roads.
         b.   A traffic impact study shall be submitted according to
Section 329.
         c.   Wrought iron fencing may be placed along the frontage to direct
pedestrians to safe crossing points, if the City Council determines the need.
         d.   The subject site shall be located with access to an existing
traffic signal, or placed such than installing a traffic signal will not
significantly impact through traffic flow.
         e.   The principal building and parking lot shall be setback at least
fifty (50) feet from any adjacent residential district . This setback  shall be
landscaped with at least the amount of plant materials specified in
Article XXIII.
      41.   Urgent medical care centers
         a.   Access shall be from a Regional Arterial or Arterial.
         b.   Building entrances shall not be visible to residences or schools.
      42.   Veterinary Clinics
         a.   The use  shall be operated by a licensed or registered
veterinarian.
         b.   The principal and all accessory buildings or structures used for
the treatment or holding of animals shall be setback at least two hundred (200)
feet from abutting residential districts, churches or restaurants on the same
side of the street ; fifty (50) feet from the front property line and fifty
(50) feet from all other property lines .
         c.   All principal use activities shall be conducted within a totally
enclosed principal building ; no outdoor pet enclosures or runs are permitted.
         d.   Any indoor boarding shall be limited to that incidental to
treatment or surgery.
         e.   Any veterinary clinic building or structure which is used for the
treatment or holding of animals which is adjacent to a residential district
 shall have the following construction features:
            1)   walls are soundproofed to all a maximum transmission of 65 dB
measured at any point on the outside of the exterior wall,
            2)   doors must be solid core,
            3)   ventilation must be force air.
         f.   Outdoor exercising is allowed when the pet is accompanied by a
employee provided no animals shall be permitted outside of the buildings
between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
         g.   A caretakers quarters may be permitted.
ARTICLE XXII: PARKING AND LOADING
Section
Sec. 2200   Off-Street Parking Requirements
Sec. 2201   Parking Units of Measurement
Sec. 2202   Stacking Space Requirements
Sec. 2203   Barrier Free Parking Requirements
Sec. 2204   Off-Street Parking Space Layout, Standards, Construction and
Maintenance
Sec. 2205   Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Sec. 2206   Restrictions of the use of Parking Lots
SECTION 2200   OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   The purpose of this section is to provide in all districts at the time or
erection or enlargement of any main building or structure , automobile off-
street parking space with adequate access to all spaces. Off-street parking
spaces, in conjunction with all land or building uses, shall be provided, prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as hereinafter prescribed:
   a.   Off-street parking spaces may be located within a nonrequired side or
rear yard and within the rear yard  setback unless otherwise provided in this
Ordinance. Off-street parking shall not be permitted within a front yard or a
side yard  setback unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
   b.   Off-street parking for other than residential use  shall be either on
the same lot or within three hundred (300) feet of the building it is intended
to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point
of the off-street parking lot . Ownership shall be shown of all lots or parcels
intended for use as parking by the Applicant.
   c.   Required residential off-street parking spaces  shall consist of a
parking strip, parking bay, driveway, garage , or combination thereof and shall
be located on the premises they are intended to serve, and subject to the
provisions for accessory uses, buildings and structures (Sections
312 through
317).
   d.   Any area once designated as required Off-street parking shall not be
changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities are provided
elsewhere.
   e.   Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, in
connection with the operation of an existing building or use , shall not be
reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building
or new use .
   f.   Two (2) or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required
Off-street parking ; in which case, the required number of parking spaces shall
not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses
computed separately.
   Two (2) or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required Off-
street parking , in which case the required number of parking spaces for the
uses calculated individually may be reduced if a signed agreement is provided
by the property owners, and the Planning Commission determines that the peak
usage will occur at significantly different periods of the day and/or there is
potential for a parker to visit two (2) or more uses.
   g.   Where two or more uses are present on the premises , parking
requirement shall be calculated for each use , unless specifically provided
otherwise herein.
   h.   The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks, or the
repair of vehicles is prohibited.
   i.   For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for Off-
street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use which the Planning
Commission considers similar in type.
For uses not specifically listed in Section 2201, the requirements for Off-
street parking facilities shall be in accordance with a similar use or based on
documentation regarding the specific parking needs for the particular use , as
determined by the Planning Commission .
   j.   When units or measurements determining the number of required parking
spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and
including one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half (1/2)
shall require one (1) parking space .
   k.   During construction, Off-street parking shall be provided on site for
all construction vehicles and employees.
   l.   Carports and garages or multiple-family dwellings shall be calculated
as parking spaces on a one to one basis. Carports and garages in multiple-
family dwelling developments shall have a maximum height of fourteen (14) feet,
measured from the grade to the peak of the structure . Carports shall be
enclosed or obscured at least twenty-five percent (25%) along all sides visible
from public streets, residential districts or vehicular drives within the site.
SECTION 2201   PARKING UNITS OF MEASUREMENT.
   a.   Floor Area:
      1.   Where floor area is the unit for determining the required number of
Off-street parking and loading spaces, said unit shall mean the gross floor
area (GFA), unless otherwise noted.
      2.   Where the floor area measurement is specified as gross leasable
floor area (GLA), parking requirements shall apply to all internal building
areas excluding the floor area used for incidental service, storage, mechanical
equipment rooms, heating/cooling systems and similar uses, and other areas not
intended for use by the general public. Where these areas are not yet defined,
leasable floor area shall be considered to be eight-five percent (85%) of the
gross floor area, unless a higher percentage is applicable, as determined by
the City Building and Zoning Administrator .
      3.   In calculating bench seating for places of assembly, each twenty-
four (24) inches of benches, pews or other such seating, shall be counted as
one seat.
      4.   Where the number of spaces required is based on the number of
employees, calculations shall be based upon the maximum number of employees
likely to be on the premises during the peak shift.
      5.   When units of measurements determining the number of required
parking or loading spaces results in a fractional space, any fraction shall be
counted as one (1) additional space.
   b.   The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use  shall
be determined in accordance with the following schedule:
 Use Number of Minimum Parking Spaces per Unit of Measure
    Use                                                                           Number of Minimum Parking Spaces per Unit of Measure
Residential
1.  Single- and two-family dwellings                                              2.0 spaces per dwelling unit
2.  Multiple-family dwellings                                                     1.5 spaces per each efficiency or one bedroom  dwelling unit  2.0 spaces per
                                                                                  each two bedroom  unit and 3.0 spaces for each three or four bedroom  unit
3.  Senior independent units                                                      1.5 spaces per unit
    Senior “interim care” and “intermediate care” units retirement village1.0 space per each room  or two beds, whichever is less, plus 1.0 space per
                                                                                  each employee expected during the peak shift
    Convalescent homes , nursing home  units, sanitariums, rest homes, etc.       1.0 space per each three beds or two rooms, whichever is less, up to 120
                                                                                  beds; plus 3.0 spaces per each additional eight beds over 120 beds
4.  Manufactured home s in a mobile home park                                     2.0 spaces per each manufactured /mobile home  unit or site
Institutional
1.  Churches, places of worship                                                   1.0 spaces per each three seats or six feet of pews
    Hospitals, including emergency rooms but excluding areas devoted to           2.5 spaces per each licensed bed; or 1.0 space per each two licensed beds,
2.  outpatient care                                                               plus 1.0 space per each staff doctor and employee during peak shifts,
                                                                                  whichever is greater (requirements for outpatient care listed separately)
                                                                                  10.0 space per each instructor, plus 1.0 space per each employee and
3.  Primary schools (elementary and junior high schools)                          administrator, plus spaces required for any assembly hall, auditorium and/or
                                                                                  outdoor arena
4.  Secondary (high) schools, commercial schools, colleges required for any       1.0 per each instructor, plus 1.0 per each employee and administrator, plus
    assembly hall, auditorium, or outdoor arena                                   5.0 spaces per each classroom, plus parking
5.  Dance and union halls, fraternal orders, civic clubs, banquet rooms, and      1.0 space per every two persons of capacity authorized by the City Building
    similar uses or facilities                                                    Code (amended 2-14-1996)
7.  Golf course driving range                                                     1.0 space per two tees
    Golf course, par three                                                        3.0 spaces per each course hole
    Golf Course Open to the General Public, or Country Club, Except Miniature or  Six (6) spaces for each one (1) golf hole and one (1) for each one (1)
8.  “Par-3” Courses                                                           employee, plus spaces required for each accessory use  such as a restaurant
                                                                                  or bar or banquet rooms
9.  Fraternity or Sorority                                                        One (1) for each five (5) permitted active members, or one (1) for each two
                                                                                  (2) beds, whichever is greater
10. Auditoriums, assembly halls and outdoor arenas                                1.0 space per each three seats or six feet of bleachers
11. Theaters and Auditoriums                                                      One (1) for each three (3) seats plus one (1) for each two (2) employees
12. Child care centers                                                            2.0 spaces plus 1.0 additional space per each eight children of licensed
                                                                                  authorized capacity (amended 2-14-1996)
13. Public Libraries                                                              One (1) for each three hundred fifty (350) square feet of usable floor space
14. Public Recreation Centers                                                     5.0 spaces per 1000 square feet or gross floor area
Business and Commercial (amended 8-19-2008)
1.  Planned Commercial or Shopping Center  or enclosed malls                      1.0 space per 250 sq. ft. of gross leasable floor area
2.  Automobile Wash  (Automatic) *                                                2.0 spaces, plus 1.0 space per each employee on peak shift
3.  Auto Wash (Self-Service or Coin Operated)*                                    5.0 spaces per each washing stall in addition to the stall itself
4.  Barber Shop/Beauty Salon                                                      2.5 spaces per each barber or beautician’s chair/station
5.  Bowling Centers                                                               5.0 spaces per lane plus 25% of the required parking for any lounge
6.  Ice/Roller Skating Rink                                                       6.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
7.  Restaurant - sit-down  type without liquor license                            1.0 space per 1,00 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area
    Restaurant/bar/nightclub with liquor license                                  15 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area
    Restaurant with drive-through                                                 1.0 space per 50 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area
    Restaurant - take out with less than six tables and/or booths                 6.0 spaces plus 1.0 space for each employee on peak shift
8.  Showroom of a plumber, decorator or similar trade                             1.0 space per 800 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area
    Appliance Store                                                               1.0 spaces per 250 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area
9.  Convenience Store , with or without gasoline service *                        1.0 space per 250 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area, plus spaces required for
                                                                                  an auto service station activities or gasoline sales.
    Equipment Repair                                                              1.0 space per 800 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area
10. Laundromat                                                                    1.0 space per each two washing machines
11. Funeral Homes                                                                 1.0 space per 50 sq. ft, of service parlors, chapels and reception area, plus
                                                                                  1.0 space per each funeral vehicle stored on the premises .
12. Motel /Hotel  with Lounge, Restaurant, Conference or Banquet Rooms or Exhibit 1.0 space per guest room  plus 10.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of lounge,
                                                                                  restaurant , conference or banquet rooms or exhibit space
    Motel  with Restaurant/Lounge                                                 1.0 space per guest room , plus 12.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of restaurant /
                                                                                  lounge space
    Motel  without Restaurant/Lounge; Bed and Breakfast  Inn                      1.0 spaces per guest room , plus 2.0 spaces for employees
13. Automobile Sales                                                              1.0 space per 200 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area, plus 3.0 spaces per each
                                                                                  auto service bay
                                                                                  2.0 spaces per each service bay, plus 1.0 space per employee, plus 1.0 space
    Auto Service Station and Auto Care Centers without Convenience Goods          per each tow truck, plus 1.0 space for each 500 square feet devoted to sales
                                                                                  of automotive goods
14. Other general retail uses not specified *                                     1.0 space per 250 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area
15. Health Fitness Centers without Swimming Pool                                  1.0 space per 200 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area
    Swimming Pool                                                                 1.0 space per each three persons of capacity authorized by the City Building
                                                                                  Code (amended 2-14-1996)
    Racquetball/Tennis Centers                                                    1.0 space per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area or 6.0 spaces per court,
                                                                                  whichever is greater
* See Section 2202 for required stacking spaces
Offices (Amended 8-19-2008)
1.  Branch Bank, Credit Union or Savings and Loans *                              1.0 spaces per 200 sq. ft. gross floor area plus 2.0 spaces per each 24-hour
                                                                                  teller
2.  General Office Building                                                       3.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
3.  Medical/Dental Clinic /Office                                                 6.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area
* See Section 2202 for required stacking spaces
Industrial
1.  Light Industrial, Manufacturing, Testing Labs, Research and Development       1.5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area, or 1.2 spaces per employee at
    Centers                                                                       peak shift, whichever is greater, plus 1.0 space for each corporate vehicle
                                                                                  1.0 space per each 1500 sq. ft. gross floor area, or 1.0 space per employee
2.  Warehousing                                                                   at peak shift, whichever is greater; plus 1.0 space for each corporate
                                                                                  vehicle (separate standard provided for mini-storage)
 
SECTION 2202   STACKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   a.   Separate, outdoor, stacking spaces which will not conflict with traffic
accessing the use , and each twenty (20) feet in length, shall be provided for
the following uses:
      (1)   Automobile repair station = 1 space per bay
      (2)   Automobile service station = 2 spaces per pump island
      (3)   Convenience store  drive-through = 2 spaces
      (4)   Drive-through financial institution = 4 spaces per window
      (5)   Drive-through food service = 10 spaces
      (6)   Dry cleaning drop-off station = 2 spaces
      (7)   Fully automatic car wash = 10 spaces per bay
      (8)   Self-serve car wash = 2 spaces per bay
      (9)   Semi-automatic car wash = 10 spaces per bay
The Planning Commission  may reduce the number of stacking spaces noted above,
based on evidence provided by the applicant regarding the specific needs of the
proposed use .
   b.   Stacking spaces which block access to parking spaces shall not be
included in calculating the required number of spaces.
(Amended by Ordinance 2105-02, passed 5-12-2001)
SECTION 2203   BARRIER FREE PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   a.   Handicapped parking space (s) shall be located as close as possible to
elevators, ramps, walkways, and entrances so that the physically handicapped
are not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked cars to reach them. Access
from the parking lot to the principal use and all accessory uses shall be by
means of ramping consisting of asphalt and/or concrete material constructed to
the engineering specifications and standards of the City.
      On each site proposed for use , additions, and/or redevelopment, for
which the Zoning Ordinance requires submission of a site plan , designated
handicapped parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following
table. The number of barrier free spaces may be increased if needed to comply
with the Michigan Department of Labor, Construction Code Commission, Barrier
Free Design Division, or the Americans with Disabilities Act or for which the
Planning Commission determines may have a higher demand for such spaces. Such
space(s) shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet wide and twenty (20) feet in
depth, clearly depicted upon the site plan , and clearly indicated by a sign
and/or pavement markings. A fifteen (15) foot wide space for vans may also be
required. Also refer to the adopted Building Code for additional information
relating to accessibility standards for barrier free parking
(Amended 2-14-1996)
 
Total Spaces # Required Total Spaces # Required
1—25       1          151—200    6
26—50      2          201—300    8
51—75      3          301—400    12
76—100     4          Over 400     12 plus 2 for every 250 or fraction
                                     thereof over 400
101—150    5
 
   b.   Where a curb exists between a parking lot surface and a sidewalk
entrance, an inclined approach or curb cut with a gradient of not more than a
1:12 slope and width of a minimum four (4) feet shall be provided for
wheelchair access.
SECTION 2204   OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE LAYOUT, STANDARDS, CONSTRUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE.
Whenever the off-street parking requirements above require the building of an
off-street parking facility, or where P-1 Vehicular Parking Districts are
provided, such off-street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed and
maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations:
   a.   No parking lot shall be constructed until a permit is issued by the
Building and Zoning Administrator . Applications for a permit shall be
submitted in a form specified by the Building and Zoning Administrator .
Applications shall be accompanied with two (2) sets of site plans for the
development and construction of the parking lot showing that the provisions of
this Section will be fully complied with.
   b.   Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in
accord with the following minimum requirements:
 
Parking Pattern      Maneuvering Lane Parking Space Width Parking Space Length
                     Width
0°(Parallel Parking)12 ft.           8 ft.               23 ft.
30° to 53°         12 ft.           8 ft. 6 in.         20 ft.
54° to 74°         15 ft.           8 ft. 6 in.         20 ft.
75° to 90°         24 ft.           9 ft.               18 ft.
Note: The vehicle overhang of the curb may  be credited as two (2) feet if
abutting landscaping  or a sidewalk  at least seven (7) feet wide (Amended 2-
14-1996)
 
   c.   All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering
lanes.
   Parking lots shall be designed to prevent vehicles from backing into the
street or requiring use of the street for maneuvering between parking rows.
   d.   Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly
defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles. Adequate ingress and egress
to the parking facility shall be provided by clearly defined driveways. All
driveways and parking lots shall have a concrete or asphalt surface and
adequate concrete curbing in accordance with specifications of the City of
Grand Blanc. The parking area shall be surfaced within one (1) year of the date
the occupancy permit is issued.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   Ingress and egress to a parking lot lying in an area zoned for other than
single-family residential use shall not be across land zoned for single-family
residential use .
   e.   All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic movement,
except that the 90° pattern may permit two-way movement.
   f.   Each entrance and exit to and from any off-street parking lot located
in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use  shall be at
least twenty-five (25) feet distant from adjacent property located in any
Single-Family Residential District.
   g.   See
Article XXIII for required parking lot screening walls and internal landscaping
.
   h.   Off-street parking areas shall be drained to prevent surface flow into
adjacent property or toward buildings.
   i.   All lighting used to illuminate any Off-street parking area shall be
installed to be shielded within and directed onto the parking area only. All
parking lot or display lighting shall be designed, located and/or shielded to
prevent spillover onto adjacent properties, and shall be arranged to prohibit
adverse affect on motorist visibility on adjacent public roadways. (See
Section 323, Exterior Lighting.)
   j.   Curbing shall be provided where parking spaces abut landscaping , lot
lines , sidewalks or required setback areas.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
SECTION 2205   OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING.
On premise space for standing, loading and unloading vehicles shall be provided
for each use involving the receipt or distribution of goods.
   a.   All spaces shall be provided as required in
Article XX, Schedule of Regulations.
   b.   Loading docks and loading areas facing a residential district  shall be
adequately screened by a wall and/or landscaping as described in
Article XXIII, Landscape Standards.
   c.   All required loading and unloading spaces shall be laid out in the
dimension of at least ten by fifty (10 x 50) feet, or five hundred (500) square
feet in area, with a clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet in height.
Loading dock approaches shall be provided with a pavement having an asphalt or
portland cement binder so as to provide a permanent, durable and dustless
surface.
   d.   All loading and unloading in an “I” District shall be provided off-
street in the rear yard or interior side yard , and shall in no instance be
permitted in a front yard . In those instances where exterior side yards have a
common relationship with an industrial district across a public thoroughfare,
loading and unloading may take place in said exterior side yard when the
setback is equal to at least fifty (50) feet. Required loading areas shall not
be included in calculations for off-street parking space requirements.
   e.   The minimum number of loading spaces provided shall be in accordance
with the following table:
Institutional, Commercial and Office Uses
Up to 5,000 sq. ft. GFA      = 1.0 space
5,001—60,000 sq. ft. GFA   = 1.0 space, plus 1.0 space per each 20,000 sq.
                               ft. GFA
60,001 sq. ft. GFA and over  = 3.0 spaces, plus 1.0 space per each additional
                               50,000 sq. ft. GFA
Industrial Uses
Up to 1,400 sq. ft. GFA      = 0
1,401—20,000 sq. ft. GFA   = 1.0 space
20,001—100,000 sq. ft. GFA = 1.0 space, plus 1.0 space per each 20,000 sq.
                               ft. GFA in excess of 20,000 sq. ft.
100,001 sq. ft. GFA and over = 5.0 spaces
 
SECTION 2206   RESTRICTIONS OF THE USE OF PARKING LOTS.
   a.   Parking and/or storage of recreational vehicles or recreational
equipment shall meet the standards listed in the General Provisions (Section
308).
   b.   Parking or outdoor storage of commercial vehicles greater than one (1)
ton, semi-trucks and trailers, mobile homes, tractors, earthmoving equipment,
and similar vehicles shall be prohibited from residential districts unless
associated with approved construction on the site.
   c.   Parking of commercial vehicles over one (1) ton for a period exceeding
24 hours shall be prohibited in the Neighborhood Business and Office Districts,
and prohibited in the front yard in the Community and General Business
Districts.
   d.   The parking of vehicles advertised for sale on land not leased or owned
by the owner of the vehicle for over 24 hours shall be restricted to permitted
automobile sales establishments.
ARTICLE XXIII: LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
Section
Sec. 2300   Intent
Sec. 2301   Requirements and Timing of Landscaping
Sec. 2302   Special Provisions for Existing Sites
Sec. 2303   Required Landscaping along Public Streets
Sec. 2304   Interior Landscaping
Sec. 2305   Parking Lot Landscaping
Sec. 2306   Waste Receptacle and Mechanical Equipment Screening
Sec. 2307   Plant Materials and Minimum Spacing
Sec. 2308   General Layout and Design Standards
Sec. 2309   Incentives to Preserve Existing Trees
Sec. 2310   Walls and Buffer Strips between Land Uses
Sec. 2311   Waiver or Modification of Standards for Special Situations
SECTION 2300   INTENT.
The intent of this Article is to establish minimum standards for the design,
installation and maintenance of landscaping along public streets, as buffer
areas between uses, on the interior of a site, within parking lots and adjacent
to buildings. Landscaping is viewed as a critical element contributing to the
aesthetics, development quality, stability of property values and the overall
character in the City. The standards of this Article area also intended to
provide incentives to preserve quality mature trees, screen headlights to
reduce glare, integrate various elements of a site, help ensure compatibility
between land uses, assist in directing safe and efficient traffic flow at
driveways and within parking lots, and minimize negative impacts of stormwater
runoff and salt spray.
The landscape standards of this section are considered the minimum necessary to
achieve the intent. In several instances, the standards are intentionally
flexible to encourage flexibility and creative design. Applicants are
encouraged to provide additional landscaping to improve the function,
appearance and value of their property .
SECTION 2301   REQUIREMENTS AND TIMING OF LANDSCAPING.
Landscaping  shall be illustrated on any site plan , sketch plan or plot plan
reviewed by the City. The landscape plan shall clearly describe the location,
type, size and spacing of all plant materials. Wherever the Zoning Ordinance
requires landscaping or plant materials, it shall be planted within six (6)
months from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy and shall
thereafter be reasonably maintained with permanent plant materials which may be
supplemented with other plantings. The Building and Zoning Administrator may
require a performance guarantee to cover the cost of landscaping prior to
issuing a Certificate of Occupancy,
SECTION 2302   SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR EXISTING SITES.
Special provision is made for applying these standards to developed sites which
existed prior to the City adopting landscaping requirements. Therefore, when an
existing site is undergoing improvement, a change in use or expansion, the
objective of these standards is to gradually bring the existing site into
compliance with the minimum standards of this Article in relation to the extent
of expansion or change on a site.
When reviewing plans for a change in use or expansion which requires site plan
or sketch plan review, the Building and Zoning Administrator or body reviewing
the plan shall require an upgrade in landscaping , using the following as
guidelines:
   a.   Each building expansion of one percent (1%) of gross floor area should
include at least four percent (4%) of the landscaping required for new
developments.
   b.   The estimated cost of landscaping added should generally be equal to at
least 5% of the estimated value of the new construction.
   c.   Landscaping along the street and as a buffer between adjacent land uses
should take priority over parking lot and site landscaping , particularly where
there is no excess parking over that required by
Article XXII. Where parking lot landscaping can not be provided, additional
landscaping along the street or in the buffer areas should be considered.
SECTION 2303   REQUIRED LANDSCAPING ALONG PUBLIC STREETS.
One of the following street  landscaping options is required on land abutting
City street rights-of-way or where otherwise referenced.
   a.   Greenbelt: A greenbelt  meeting the following standards:
      1.   Minimum width of ten (10) feet; all required landscaping  shall be
within the required setback .
(Amended 2-14-1996)
      2.   At least one (1) deciduous tree (minimum 2.5 inch caliper ) and two
(2) minimum eighteen inch (18”) high shrubs per each thirty (30) lineal feet of
street frontage. Location of the trees and shrubbery along the length of the
greenbelt is discretionary (refer to
Section 2308). The body or individual with authority to approve the plan may
approve evergreens at least five foot (5’) high as a substitute for some of all
or the canopy trees.
      3.   The greenbelt area shall contain grass , ground cover , six-inch
(6”) deep wood chips, or six-inch (6”) deep crushed stone and curbed or edged
as necessary. Black edging shall be used for any planting beds.
      4.   Where headlights from parked vehicles will shine into the roadway,
the City may require use of a totally obscuring hedge .
   b.   Berms: A combination of a raised earth berm  and plantings meeting the
following standards:
      1.   Minimum height of two (2) feet with a crest at least three (3) feet
in width. The height of the berm  may meander if the intent of this Article is
met.
      2.   The exterior face of the berm  shall be constructed as an earthen
slope, with a slope not to exceed one (1) foot of vertical rise to three (3)
feet of horizontal distance (1:3). The interior face of the berm  may be
constructed as an earthen slope or retained by means of a wall, terrace or
other means acceptable to the Building and Zoning Administrator .
      3.   At least one (1) deciduous tree (minimum 2.5 inch caliper ) shall be
provided for each thirty (30) lineal street  berm length.
      4.   At least one (1) minimum eighteen inch (18”) high shrub  shall be
provided for each one hundred (100) square feet of berm surface area
(calculated from a plan view).
      5.   Berm slopes shall be protected from erosion by sodding or seeding.
If slopes are seeded, they shall be protected, until the seed germinates and a
permanent lawn is established by a straw mulch , hydromulching of netting
specifically designed to control erosion.
      6.   The base of any signs placed within the berm  shall be at, or below,
the average grade along the berm .
   c.   Buffer Strip: A buffer strip may  be required, particularly where the
uses across the street  are less intense than the use  of the subject site. The
intend of the buffer strip is to have a minimum five (5) foot high obscuring
area. A buffer strip shall  meet the following requirements:
      1.   Minimum width of ten (10) feet.
      2.   All trees shall be evergreens a minimum five (5) feet high at
planting .
      3.   The buffer planting area shall contain grass , ground cover , six-
inch (6”) deep wood chips, or six-inch (6”) deep crushed stone and curbed or
edged as necessary.
      4.   The following species and planting spacings are recommended:
Common Name Scientific Name (Ft. on Center)
Common Name          Scientific Name                (Ft. on Center)
“Burki” Red CedarJuniperus in Virginia “B”  5
Stone Pine           Pinus Cembra                   10
Mugo Pine            Pinus Mugo                     5
American Arborvitea  Thuga Occidentalis             5
Canadian Hemlock     Tsuga Occidentalis             12
Serbian Spruce       Picea Omoriac                  10
Irish Juniper        Juniperus Communis             3
White Fir            Abies Concolor                 8
Japanese Cryptomeria Cryptomeria Japonica           8
White Pine           Pinus Strobus                  10
Ketleeri Juniper     Juniperus Chinensis “Ketleeri5��
 
SECTION 2304   INTERIOR LANDSCAPING.
For every new development , except in the R-1 to R-3 Single Family Districts,
the R-T Two Family Residential District and the MH - Mobile Home Park District,
there shall be interior landscaping areas exclusive of any other required
landscaping consisting of at least five percent (5%) of the total lot-area .
This landscaped area should be grouped near building entrances, along building
foundations, along pedestrian walkways, and along service areas. All interior
landscaping shall conform to the following:
   a.   One (1) deciduous (minimum 2.5 inch caliper ) or ornamental tree
(minimum 2.0 inch caliper ) or evergreen tree (minimum 5 foot height) shall be
provided for every four hundred (400) square feet of required interior
landscaping area.
   b.   One (1) eighteen inch (18”) high shrub  shall be provided for every two
hundred fifty (250) square feet of required interior landscaping area.
   c.   The interior landscaping area shall contain grass , ground cover , six-
inch (6”) deep wood chips, or six-inch (6”) deep crushed stone and shall be
curbed or edged as necessary. Black edging shall be used for any planting beds.
SECTION 2305   PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING.
Within every parking area containing ten (10) or more spaces, at least three
percent (3%) of the total parking lot-area  shall be landscaped, in addition to
any other landscaping requirements. This landscaping shall meet the following
standards:
   a.   Deciduous trees (2.5 inch minimum caliper ) and ornamental trees
(minimum 2.0 inch caliper if tree form, six foot minimum height if clump form)
shall be used with at least one hundred (100) square feet of planting area per
tree . The area per tree  may be reduced to seventy-five (75) square feet if
the landscaped area is irrigated.
   b.   Landscaping  shall be dispersed throughout the parking lot in order to
break up large expanses of pavement and help direct smooth traffic flow within
the lot.
   c.   Landscaping  shall be installed such that, when mature, it does not
obscure traffic signs or lighting, obstruct access to fire hydrants nor
interfere with adequate motorist sight distance.
   d.   All islands shall be curbed. Dimensions of islands shall be shown on
the site plan . Minimum island width shall be ten (10) feet; minimum radii
shall be ten (10) feet at ends facing main aisles and a minimum one (1) foot
for radii not adjacent to main circulation aisles. The length of the islands
shall be two (2) feet shorter than adjacent parking space to improve
maneuvering.
SECTION 2306   WASTE RECEPTACLE AND MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT SCREENING.
Waste receptacles shall be located and screened in accordance with the
standards of
Section 314, waste receptacles. Ground mounted mechanical equipment shall be
screened with plant materials or a wall, when deemed necessary by the Planning
Commission .
SECTION 2307   PLANT MATERIALS AND MINIMUM SPACING.
All plant material shall be hardy to the area, free of disease and insects, and
conform to the American Standard for Nursery Stock of the American Association
of Nurserymen. The overall landscape plan shall not contain more than 33% of
any one plant species. The use of trees native to the area and Southeast
Michigan, and mixture of trees from the same species association, is
encouraged.
   a.   Recommended Trees and Shrubs for Parking Areas
 
London Plane Tree  Snowdrift Crabapple
Sweetgum           Marshal Green Ash
Linden Tree        Hardy Rubber Tree
Junipers           Hibiscus
Hawthorns          Scotch Pine
Dwarf Callery Pear  
 
   b.   Recommended Trees and Shrubs for Greenbelt and Interior Landscape Areas
Amur Maple           Sweetgum          Goldenrain Tree
Hackberry            London Plane Tree Scarlet Oak
Hawthorns            Pin Oak           European Linden
White Ash (seedless) Russian Olive     Littlelf Linden
Honeylocust          Zelkova           Japanese Tree
Lilac Scotch Pine    Border Privet     Buckthorn
Henry St. Johnswort  Junipers          Gingko
Mugo Pine            Serbian Spruce    Bristly Locust
Mockorange           Evonymus          Eastern Ninebark
Beauty Bush          Smoke Tree        Cottoneaster
Snowdrift Crabapple  Hedge Maple       Dwarf Callery Pear
Hardy Rubber Tree    Bayberry          European Hornbean
 
   c.   Recommended Salt Resistant Trees and Shrubs
 
Pinus Nigra     Sweetgum     Tamarix
Russian Olive   Black Locust Hibiscus
Adnorra Juniper Honey Locust  
 
   d.   Recommended Trees and Shrubs for Shady Areas
 
Evonymus           Honey Locust    Arborviteas
Mabonia Aquifolium Alpine Currant  Dogwoods
Amelanchier        Mountain Laurel Viburnums
Crownvetch         Cottoneasters    
 
   e.   Trees not Permitted (except where they are considered appropriate for
the ecosystem, such as in a wetland environment not in proximity to any
existing or proposed buildings or structures)
      1.   Box Elder
      2.   Soft Maples (Red-Silver)
      3.   Elms
      4.   Poplars
      5.   Willows
      6.   Horse Chestnut (nut bearing)
      7.   Tree of Heaven
      8.   Catalpa
   f.   Plant Material Spacing: Plant materials shall not be placed closer than
four (4) feet from the fence line or property line. Plant materials used
together in informal groupings shall meet the following on-center spacing
requirements:
 
Plant                  Narrow    Large     Small
Material     Evergreen Evergreen Deciduous Deciduous Large Shrubs Small Shrubs
Types                  Trees     Trees     Trees
Evergreen    Min. 10’Min. 12’Min. 20’Min. 12’Min. 6’    Min. 5’
Trees        Max. 20’
Narrow                 Min. 5’
Evergreen    Min. 12’Max. 10’Min. 15’Min. 10’Min. 5’    Min. 4’
Trees
Large                            Min. 20’
Deciduous    Min. 20’Min. 15’Max. 30’Min. 15’Min. 5’    Min. 3’
Trees
Small                                      Min. 8’
Deciduous    Min. 12’Min. 10’Min. 15’Max. 15’Min. 6’    Min. 3’
Trees
Large Shrubs Min. 6’ Min. 5’ Min. 5’ Min. 6’ Min. 4’    Min. 5’
                                                     Max. 6’
Small Shrubs Min. 5’ Min. 4’ Min. 3’ Min. 3’ Min. 5’    Min. 3’
                                                                  Max. 4’
 
SECTION 2308   GENERAL LAYOUT AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
   a.   Landscaped areas and plant materials required by this Ordinance shall
be kept free from refuse and debris. Plant materials, including lawn, shall be
maintained in a healthy growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. If
any plant material required by this Ordinance dies or becomes diseased, they
shall be replaced within thirty (30) days of written notice from the Township
or within an extended time period as specified in said notice.
   b.   Tree stakes, guy wires and tree wrap are to be removed after one (1)
year.
   c.   All landscaped areas shall be provided with a readily available and
acceptable water supply, or with at least one (1) outlet located within one
hundred (100) feet of all planted material to be maintained.
   d.   Landscaping materials and arrangement shall ensure adequate sight
visibility for motorists, adequate clearance for pedestrians and vehicles, and
accessibility to fire hydrants (see also
Section 330, Clear Vision Zone.
   e.   Cul-de-sacs, site entrances and boulevard medians shall be landscaped
with species tolerant of roadside conditions in southeast Michigan.
   f.   Landscape within the site shall be approved in consideration of sight
distance, size of planting area, location of sidewalks, maintenance of adequate
overhead clearance, accessibility to fire hydrants, visibility to approved
signs of adjacent uses, compatibility with the visual character of the
surrounding area, maintenance-performance guarantee , curbing around landscape
areas.
   g.   Plantings within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant shall be no taller
than six (6) inches at maturity.
SECTION 2309   INCENTIVES TO PRESERVE EXISTING TREES.
The City encourages the preservation of quality and mature trees by providing
credits toward the required trees for greenbelts, buffer strips, interior
landscaping and within parking lots. Trees intended to be preserved shall be
indicated with a special symbol on the site plan and be protected during
construction through use of a fence around the drip line. To obtain credit the
preserved trees shall be of a high quality and at least two and one half inches
(2-1/2”) caliper . Trees to be preserved shall be counted for credit only if
they are located on the developed portion of the site as determined by the
review body or individual.
The credit for preserved trees shall be as follows. Any preserved trees
receiving credit which are lost within two (2) years after construction shall
replaced by the land  owner with trees otherwise required.
 
Caliper of Preserved Tree
                          Numbers of Trees Credited
(In Inches)
over 12 inches            3
8”—11.9”            2
2.5”—7.9”           1
Note:   Caliper measurement for existing trees is the diameter at a height of
four and one-half (4.5) feet above the natural grade . (Diameter at Breast
Height, D.B.H.)
 
SECTION 2310   WALLS AND BUFFER STRIPS BETWEEN LAND USES.
In those instances where the following conditions occur, the need for the wall
or berm or similar type of landscaped buffer strip shall be determined by the
Planning Commission , City Council or the Building and Zoning Administrator ,
as appropriate.
   a.   For those Use Districts and use s listed below, there shall be provided
and maintained on those sides abutting or adjacent to a residential district an
obscuring wall as required below (except as otherwise required).
 Use Requirements
   Use                                      Requirements
1. P-1 Vehicular Parking District           5 foot high wall
2. Off-street Parking  area (other than P-  5 foot high wall
   1 Districts)
3. B-1, B-2, B-3 and OS-1 Districts         5 foot high wall
   I-1, I-2 and R-P Districts - open        5 foot to 8 foot high wall or fence
4. storage areas, loading or unloading      plus buffer strip
   areas, service areas
5. Auto Wash, Drive-in Restaurants          6 foot high wall
6. Hospital  - ambulance and delivery areas 6 foot high wall
7. Utility buildings, stations and/or       6 foot high wall
   substations
 
   b.   Required walls shall be located on the lot line except where
underground utilities interfere and except in instances where this Ordinance
requires conformance with front yard  setback lines in abutting Residential
Districts where there is an established wall height and material acceptable to
the City, the wall shall be continued on the subject site.
   c.   Such walls and screening barrier shall have no openings for vehicular
traffic or other purposes, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance and
except such openings as may be approved by the Zoning and Building
Administrator. All walls herein required shall be constructed of materials
approved by the Building and Zoning Administrator to be durable, weather
resistant, rustproof and easily maintained; and, wood or wood products shall be
specifically excluded.
Masonry walls may be constructed with openings which do not in any square
section (height and width) exceed twenty (20%) percent of the surface. Where
walls are so pierced, the openings shall be so spaced as to maintain the
obscuring character required, and shall not reduce the minimum height
requirement. The arrangement of the openings shall be reviewed and approved by
the Building and Zoning Administrator .
   d.   The City may approve a three (3) to four (4) foot high heavily
landscaped berm as an alternative to a wall upon finding the landscaped berm
will provide a similar screening effect.
SECTION 2311   WAIVER OR MODIFICATION OF STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL SITUATIONS.
The Planning Commission , City Council or Building and Zoning Administrator
 may determine existing landscaping or screening intended to be preserved, or a
different landscape design, would provide all or part of the required
landscaping and screening. In making such a determination to waive or reduce
the landscape and screening requirements of this Article, the following may be
considered.
   a.   Extent that existing natural vegetation provides desired screening.
   b.   There is a steep change in topography which would limit the benefits of
required landscaping .
   c.   The presence of existing wetlands.
   d.   Existing and proposed building placement.
   e.   The abutting or adjacent land is developed or planned by the City for a
use other than residential.
   f.   Building heights and views.
   g.   The adjacent residential district is over 200 feet away from the
subject site.
   h.   Similar conditions to the above exist such that no good purpose would
be served by providing the landscaping or screening required.
ARTICLE XXIV: SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL
Section
Sec. 2400   Intent
Sec. 2401   Relationship to Platting and Land Divisions or Combinations
Sec. 2402   Uses Requiring Site Plan Review
Sec. 2403   Projects Eligible for Sketch Plan Review (i.e., Administrative
Approval)
Sec. 2404   Exceptions to Site Plan Review
Sec. 2405   Criteria of Site Plan Review
Sec. 2406   Application for Site Plan Review
Sec. 2407   Environmental Impact Assessment
Sec. 2408   Performance Guarantee
Sec. 2409   Building Permits
Sec. 2410   Recorded and As-Built Condominium Documents
Sec. 2411   Effect of Approval
Sec. 2412   Amendment of Site Plan
Sec. 2413   Revocation
Sec. 2414   Property Maintenance After Approval
SECTION 2400   INTENT.
The intent of this article is to establish the procedures and consistent
standards for review and approval of site plans to ensure full compliance with
the regulations in this Ordinance and other applicable ordinances and state and
federal regulations of development proposals. Site plan review standards are
intended to encourage consultation and cooperation between the applicant and
the City to balance the property owners right to a reasonable rate of return on
investment with the City’s overall land  use goals and desire to minimize
adverse impacts on the investments of surrounding landowners. Therefore, these
site plan review standards insure a thorough evaluation of a development in
relation to the goals of the City of Grand Blanc Master Plan and the potential
impacts on the environment, drainage, utilities, traffic, aesthetics, property
values and other public health, safety and welfare issues.
This section also contains special provisions to evaluate impacts of particular
uses and to allow administrative approval in certain cases where there is a
change in use , a minor change to an existing site or a minor change determined
necessary in the field during construction.
SECTION 2401   RELATIONSHIP TO PLATTING AND LAND DIVISIONS OR COMBINATIONS.
The City Council  shall require the platting of parcels of property and/or the
approval of land divisions or land combinations prior to the consideration of
site plans where the City Council determines a site plan is needed to ensure
capability to comply with the standards of the Zoning Ordinance or other
ordinances.
SECTION 2402   USES REQUIRING SITE PLAN REVIEW.
Except as specifically provided in
Section 2403 and
Section 2404, the development of any new use , the construction of any new
structures, any change of an existing use of land or site, and all other
building or development activities shall require site plan approval pursuant to
this Article. For example, site plan review shall be required for, but not
limited to, the following:
   a.   Development of any non-single family  use or building in the R-1 thru
R-3 District.
   b.   Any residential development , except construction or expansion of one
single-family or two-family dwelling unit on an individual lot or parcel in the
R-1 through R-3 and the R-T zoning districts, or placement of dwelling units in
an approved mobile home park .
   c.   Development of any nonresidential use or building.
   d.   The erection, relocation, conversion or structural alteration to any
non single-family or two-family building, structure or site which results in
additional floor space.
   e.   Any development which would establish more than one (1) principal use
on a single lot, for example, a single family site condominium or similar
project where a single parcel is to be developed with more than one (1)
detached dwelling unit .
   f.   Special Land Use s in all zoning districts.
   g.   Cellular phone towers.
   h.   Essential public service buildings and storage areas.
   i.   Any change in the use of land or a building to a different class or
type or to a more intensive use , as determined by the Building and Zoning
Administrator , that may involve significant changes to features such as
building appearance, parking needs, traffic flow, traffic volumes, buffering
needs, hours of operation, noise, effluent discharge, drainage and similar
impacts. Any significant change adjacent to, or across the street from a
Single-Family Residential District shall require site plan review.
   j.   A change in use on a site which does not conform to the site design
standards of this Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 2403   PROJECTS ELIGIBLE FOR SKETCH PLAN REVIEW (I.E., ADMINISTRATIVE
APPROVAL).
   a.   Intent: The intent of this Section is to permit submittal of sketch
plan in certain specific instances where a complete site plan  is not
considered essential to ensure compliance with the intent and standards of this
Zoning Ordinance.
   b.   Procedure: The process for administrative approval shall  involve
submittal of a sketch plan and required application form and fee to the
Building and Zoning Administrator . The Building and Zoning Administrator
shall review the sketch plan to ensure compliance with standards of this
ordinance and make a report of administrative approvals to the Planning
Commission .
The Building and Zoning Administrator retains the option to require a complete
site plan for review by the Planning Commission , particularly for sites which
do not comply with previously approved site plans, sites with parking
deficiencies, sites abutting residential districts or sites experiencing
problems with drainage, traffic, noise, aesthetics or other general health and
safety issues. If a full site plan is required, the Building and Zoning
Administrator  shall inform the applicant to submit a set of plans in
accordance with Section 2406 of this Ordinance within fourteen (14) days of
receipt of the application.
   c.   Eligibility: A sketch plan, rather than a complete site plan  package,
may  be submitted for minor modifications to a legally existing and conforming
use  and building which is permitted in the zoning district  (i.e. Special Land
Use s are not eligible) including alterations  to a building or site that do
not result in expansion or substantially affect the character or intensity of
the use , vehicular or pedestrian circulation, drainage patterns, the demand
for public infrastructure or services, significant environmental impacts or
increased potential for hazards; including the following uses and situations:
      1.   Group day care homes.
      2.   Home occupations.
      3.   Temporary uses , sales and seasonal events.
      4.   An increase in the floor area on the site by up to one thousand
(1,000) square feet or five percent (5%) of the existing floor area, whichever
is less, with no required increase in parking area. Administrative approval is
not permitted if the cumulative total of the proposed expansion and any
expansion within the last five (5) years, as determined by the Building and
Zoning Administrator , exceeds this amount.
      5.   An existing building and site are to be re-occupied by a use
permitted in the subject zoning district and the new use will not require any
significant changes in the existing site facilities such as parking,
landscaping , lighting, signs, bikepaths or sidewalks.
      6.   Improvements to outdoor recreational uses and parks.
      7.   Expansion, replanting or alterations of landscaping areas consistent
with the other requirements of this Ordinance.
      8.   Improvements or installation of walls, fences, lighting or curbing
consistent with the other requirements of this Ordinance.
      9.   Alterations to the off-street parking layout or installation of
pavement or curbing improvements provided the total number of spaces shall
remain constant, and the construction plans and lot construction are approved
by the City Engineer .
      10.   Relocation of a waste receptacle to a more inconspicuous location
or installation of screening around the waste receptacle .
      11.   Changes to the facade or architectural features (an elevation plan
describing changes and construction materials is required).
      12.   Construction or relocation of a permitted accessory building of
less than one hundred (100) square feet.
      13.   Approved changes to utility systems.
      14.   Grading, excavation , filling , soil removal, creation of ponds or
clearing of trees.
      15.   A change in use in a nonconforming use building or site to a more
conforming situation.
      16.   Modifications to upgrade a building to improve barrier free design,
or to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C.
§§ 12101 et seq., or other federal, state or county regulations.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
      17.   Accessory structures
(Amended 2-14-1996)
      18.   Wireless communication facilities as described in
section 334.
(Amended 6-10-1998)
   d.   Requirements for a Sketch Plan: A “sketch plan” submittal shall
include at least the following:
      1.   Application form and review fee.
      2.   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the person
(s) responsible for preparing the plot plan.
      3.   North arrow.
      4.   Legal description of the property .
      5.   The “sketch plan” shall be drawn at an engineers scale. Any building
expansion over five hundred (500) square feet within a five (5) year period
involving public safety issues, as determined by the Building and Zoning
Administrator , shall require a professional seal of an architect, landscape
architect or engineer.
      6.   Property lines and dimensions.
      7.   Existing and proposed buildings and structures with dimensions,
setbacks and details or elevations where appropriate.
      8.   Existing and proposed parking including number of spaces provided v.
needed according to
Article XXII. If changes are made to the parking area, a detail of pavement,
stormwater runoff calculations and description of detention methods shall be
provided.
      9.   Details on any new driveways or changes to existing driveways
(radii, throat width, slope, boulevard design, etc).
      10.   Location of existing signs and details on any proposed changes or
new signs.
      11.   General illustration of existing landscaping ; location, size and
species of any new landscaping .
      12.   Layout of any proposed changes to utilities.
      13.   Description of any proposed changes to drainage.
      14.   Floor plan of any new building area or building elevations, if
applicable.
      15.   Any other items requested by City staff or the Planning Commission
.
SECTION 2404   EXCEPTIONS TO SITE PLAN REVIEW.
Site plan review shall not be required for the following:
   a.   Construction or erection of permitted accessory buildings and
structures accessory to a single- or two-family dwelling unit .
   b.   Construction or erection of permitted accessory buildings and
structures less than one hundred (100) square feet in area accessory to a
multiple family, commercial, office , essential service, municipal or
industrial use .
   c.   Grading, excavation , filling , soil removal, creation of ponds or
clearing of trees within an area up to one hundred (100) square feet, provided
such activity is normally and customarily incidental to single-family uses on
the site.
   d.   Permitted family foster care homes , family day care homes and adult
day care homes in single family zoning districts.
   e.   Keeping of animals, except kennels.
   f.   Internal construction or change in the floor plan that does not
increase gross floor area, increase the intensity of use or affect parking
requirements on a site which meets all site design standards of the Ordinance.
   g.   Repairing or curbing of parking lots.
   h.   Construction or erection of signs, retaining walls, fences, waste
receptacles, sidewalks, antennas, lights, poles, cooling/heating or other
mechanical equipment, telephone booths, newspaper boxes, landscaping and
similar structures which conform to other City standards.
SECTION 2405   CRITERIA OF SITE PLAN REVIEW.
The Planning Commission (and City Council for Special Land Use s) shall review
the site plan to insure that it complies with all of the criteria below:
   a.   The proposed use will not be injurious to the surrounding neighborhood.
   b.   The location of buildings, outside storage receptacles, parking areas,
fences or obscuring walls, and utility areas will minimize adverse effects of
the proposed use for the occupants of that property and the tenants, owners,
and occupants of surrounding properties.
   c.   There is a proper relationship between major thoroughfares and proposed
service drives, driveways, and parking areas to encourage the safety and
convenience of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The site plan includes the
minimum number of driveways required to provide reasonable access . Driveways
are spaced as far apart from intersections and other driveways as practical to
reduce accident and congestion potential. Sharing with adjacent uses is
encouraged. The Planning Commission  may require a traffic impact study as
outlined in Section 329.
   d.   The site plan provides for proper development of roads, easements, and
public utilities and protects the general health, safety, and welfare of the
City and its residents.
   e.   Building architecture, materials, roof line, colors, windows and
similar elements shall be consistent with the majority of other buildings in
the City, as determined by the Planning Commission (or City Council for Special
Land Use s). Brick construction or brick trim, varying facade depths and peaked
roofs, is encouraged. Stark white or bold colors and reflective glass are
discouraged. The intent of this standard is to provide a harmonious, unified
community to help create a sense of place and contribute to the image and
quality of life in the City.
   f.   The proposed site plan complies with all City codes and ordinances.
Site plans for Mobile Home Park Districts shall comply with the preliminary
plan requirements established in the Mobile Home Commission Act, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 125.2301 et seq.
SECTION 2406   APPLICATION FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW.
The detailed site plan presented for consideration shall contain all
information required in this Ordinance.
   a.   Application form provided by the City and required fee established by
resolution of the City Council .
   b.   Site Plan Drawings and Illustrations (Fully Dimensioned):
Site plans shall contain all of the required data prior to approval of such
plans by the City. Site plans shall consist of an overall plan for the entire
development . Sheet size shall be at least 24” x 36”, with the plan view drawn
to a scale of 1” = 20’ for property less than three (3) acres or 1” = 100’ for
property of three (3) or more acres. Included on the site plan will be all of
the following data as applicable.
 Data Required Multiple-Family Commercial, Industrial, Public, and Semi-Public
                               Development
                                                                                           Commercial,
                                                                                 Multiple- Industrial,
    Data Required                                                                Family    Public, and
                                                                                           Semi-Public
                                                                                           Development
1.  Applicant’s name, address, and telephone number.                           •       •
2.  Date (month, day, year) including dates of any revisions.                    •       •
3.  Title block.                                                                 •       •
4.  Engineers Scale.                                                             •       •
5.  Northpoint.                                                                  •       •
6.  Location map drawn at a scale of 1” = 2,000’,with northpoint indicated   •       •
    sufficient to indicate general surroundings and street  network.
7.  Name of the proposed development .                                           •       •
8.  Common description of the property  and complete legal description (also     •       •
    address, if available).
9.  Dimensions of site including width, length, frontage and acreage exclusive   •       •
    of rights-of-ways.
    Name, address, signature, and seal of Architect, Engineer, Surveyor, or
10. Landscape Architect, who was responsible for the preparation of the site     •       •
    plan .
11. Zoning classification of Applicant’s parcel  and all abutting parcels.     •       •
    A site analysis map illustration, current drainage flows (with arrows),
12. boundaries of any wetland regulated  by the MDNR, location and elevation of  •       •
    bodies of water, trees over eight inches (8”) caliper , steep slopes,
    floodplain boundaries and elevation and existing structures
13. Proximity to major thoroughfares and/or section corner.                      •       •
14. Location of any required fire lanes.                                         •       •
15. Existing and proposed contours of the site in sufficient detail to determine •       •
    drainage.
16. Location and elevation of existing drainage courses, floodplains, and lakes  •       •
    and streams.
17. Existing and proposed lot lines , property lines .                           •       •
18. Existing and future right-of-way  lines and easements.                       •       •
19. All buildings, structures, signs, parking areas, sidewalks, etc. on the site •       •
    and within 100 feet.
20. Proposed locations and dimensions of access drives, street  materials and    •       •
    curbing, drives and driveways (all radii measurements shown).
21. Proposed street  names.                                                      •       •
22. Location of existing and proposed sanitary sewers.                           •       •
23. Locations and sizes of the following:
    a)   well sites in the proposed development .                             •       •
    b)   water mains, hydrants, and building services.                        •       •
    c)   storm sewers, site grading, drainage, retention basin , and/or other
    pertinent facilities including drainage and retention calculations and       •       •
    design details.
24. Building footprints with length and width dimensions.                        •       •
25. Building elevations including types of materials and colors.                 •       •
26. Setback  and yard  dimensions for buildings.                                 •       •
    Location of interior and exterior sidewalks, pathways and bikepaths. Any
27. development  on City arterial and collector streets, shall  require the      •       •
    construction of sidewalks within City right-of-way . (amended 2-14-1996)
28. Location, type, intensity height and fixture details of external lighting.   •       •
    Projects in the downtown may  require ornamental street  lighting.
29. Locations and design details of any obscuring walls, berms, and fences.      •       •
30. Table illustrating compliance with parking requirements of                   •       •
    Article XXII  for number of spaces, dimensions and pavement materials.
31. Landscape plan in accordance with                                            •       •
    Article XXIII .
32. Entrance details and signs (Note: signs are subject to separate review under •       •
    the sign  ordinance.)
33. Location and type of all regulatory signs (stop sign , no parking signs,     •       •
    etc.)
    Location of waste receptacle (s), if any, and screening details in
34. accordance with Section 314. Turning radii of the waste receptacle  vehicle  •       •
    shall  be illustrated.
35. Location and method of screening of all transformer pads, reception antenna  •       •
    and air conditioners.
36. A density  schedule showing the number of dwelling units by type per gross   •
    acre and net acre (see Sec. 322).
37. Floor plans of a typical building.                                           •
38. Carport locations and details, if applicable, indicating carports will net   •
    the standards of Sec. 2200 (l).
39. Details of community buildings and fencing of swimming pool , if applicable. •
40. Location and details of any mail box clusters.                               •
41. Specific amount, type, and location of recreation space and facilities.      •
42. Loading and unloading areas meeting dimensional requirements of                        •
    Article XXII .
43. An impact assessment or traffic analysis, if required (                      •       •
    Sec. 2407).
44. For condominiums in developments, an illustration of all general commons and •       •
    limited commons.
    All businesses, facilities, and uses, including private and public
    facilities, which use , store or generate hazardous substances and polluting
45. materials in quantities greater than 25 gallons or 220 pounds per month                •
    shall  require the completion of the “Groundwater Protection Information
    Check List for Site Plan Review” and Special Land Use  Review. (amended 2-
    14-1996)
 
   c.   The applicant shall submit the required number of copies of an
application for site plan approval, site plans, and other information where
applicable. The number of copies required will be determined by the Building
and Zoning Administrator . The applicant or the applicant’s representative must
be present at the scheduled reviews or the matter will be tabled.
   d.   If the site plan is in order and contains the required information, the
site plan  shall be placed on the agenda of a regular or special Planning
Commission meeting.
   e.   The Planning Commission  shall have final authority on site plans for
permitted uses. The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation on the site
plan for Special Land Use s, with the final action by the City Council .
   f.   The Planning Commission  shall take action no sooner than fourteen (14)
days and within seventy (70) days of the meeting at which the application first
appeared on the agenda. However, preliminary plans for mobile home park s
within a Mobile Home Park District shall be submitted and reviewed in
accordance with the timetable established in the Michigan Mobile Home
Commission Act.
   g.   The Planning Commission , as a condition of its approval of a site plan
, may require reasonable modifications relating to: the location, height,
number of stories, and size of dwellings, buildings, and other structures; the
area of the yards , courts, and other open spaces; and the sanitary, safety,
and protective measures which shall be required for such dwellings, buildings,
and structures; and any other changes to meet the standards and intent of this
Zoning Ordinance and other Ordinances, laws and regulations.
   h.   For any approval with condition, the applicant shall submit a revised
plan within sixty (60) days illustrating compliance with all conditions for
approval by the Building and Zoning Administrator . No permits shall be issued
until such revised plan is submitted and approved.
   i.   The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of preparing all site
plan submittal information and for the evaluation of the site plan and related
documents by consultants selected by the City. An initial deposit will be
required at the time of submitting the application for site plan review. The
initial deposit will be established in the City's annual fee schedule. Should
necessary expenses exceed the initial deposit, all subsequent expenses shall be
billed periodically and shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
(Ord. 2512-04, passed 1-14-2026)
SECTION 2407   ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT.
Environmental Impact Assessment: The requirement for the submission of an
Environmental Impact Assessment, in accordance with Sec. 328 during the
rezoning, Special Land Use  and/or site plan  review process is to provide
relevant information concerning the environmental, economic, social, and
cultural effects on the community that a proposed project may  have and to
provide the necessary data for the City to make a rational determination on the
request. It is necessary to minimize pollution, retain environmental resources,
and to investigate the adequacy of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, water, and transportation system.
An Environmental Assessment providing the information and data specified
herein, shall be submitted by the applicant and prepared and reviewed at the
expense of the applicant:
   a)   whenever a request for rezoning or site plan approval is submitted,
whichever shall occur first, for parcels having an area of twenty (20) acres or
greater; or,
   b)   whenever a request for rezoning is not consistent with the City’s
Master Plan ; or
   c)   whenever a development of one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square
feet of gross floor area or greater is submitted for site plan review; or,
   d)   whenever a development of two hundred (200) dwelling units or greater
is submitted for site plan review; or
   e)   for any Special Land Use in the I-1 or I-2 industrial districts; or
   f)   whenever required for a Special Land Use ; or
   g)   for a site containing significant wetlands, steep slopes or other
natural features , as determined by the Planning Commission .
   h)   for businesses, facilities, and uses, including private and public
facilities, which use , store or generate hazardous substances and polluting
materials in quantities greater than 25 gallons or 220 pounds per month.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
SECTION 2408   PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.
   a.   The Zoning and Building Administrator shall require a performance
guarantee to ensure completion of the site improvements (excluding building).
The performance guarantee  may take the form of a cash deposit, surety bond,
certified check, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit.
   b.   At the time the building permit application is filed with the Building
and Zoning Administrator , the applicant shall deposit the performance
guarantee with the City Clerk. The amount of the performance guarantee shall be
determined by the City Engineer and the Building and Zoning Administrator in
consultation with the applicant. If the required improvements take longer than
six (6) months to complete, the City Manager shall authorize a rebate of any
cash deposit in proportion to the amount of work that has been completed.
SECTION 2409   BUILDING PERMITS.
   a.   An Applicant whose site plan has been approved shall file with the
Building and Zoning Administrator a building permit application and two (2)
sets of construction drawings stamped with an appropriate seal.
   b.   The Building and Zoning Administrator  shall issue a building permit
only after receiving a building application, two (2) sets of construction
drawings stamped with an appropriate seal and the required performance
guarantee .
   c.   Application for building permit:
   Following final approval of the site plan and the engineering plans, the
applicant may apply for a building permit. It shall be the responsibility of
the applicant to obtain all other applicable City, county , or state permits
prior to issuance of a building permit.
   A building permit for a structure in a proposed condominium project shall
not be issued until evidence of a recorded Master Deed has been provided to the
City. However, the Building and Zoning Administrator  may issue permits for
site grading, erosion control, installation of public water and sewage
facilities, and construction of roads, prior to recording the Master Deed . No
permit issued or work undertaken prior to recording of the Master Deed pursuant
to this Section shall grant any rights or any expectancy interest in the
approval of the Master Deed .
   d.   Expiration of site plan approval:
   If construction has not commenced within twelve (12) months of final
approval of the site plan , or if construction has not been completed within
twelve (12) months after it was commenced, the site plan approval becomes null
and void and a new application for site plan review shall be required. The
Planning Commission  may grant one (1) extension of up to twelve (12) months,
upon written request from the applicant, if it finds that the approved site
plan adequately represents current conditions on and surrounding the site and
provided that the site plan conforms to the current Zoning Ordinance standards.
   e.   Application for Certificate of Occupancy:
   Following completion of site work and building construction, the applicant
shall apply for a Certificate of Occupancy or a Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy from the Building and Zoning Administrator . It shall be the
applicant's responsibility to obtain these required certificates prior to any
occupancy of the property . The Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued to
the applicant until all escrows and City of Grand Blanc invoices are paid in
full.
(Ord. 2512-02, passed 1-14-2026)
SECTION 2410   RECORDED AND AS-BUILT CONDOMINIUM DOCUMENTS.
Upon approval of the site plan for a condominium project involving new
construction, the condominium project developer or proprietor  shall furnish
the City with the following:
   a.   One (1) copy of the recorded Master Deed , and
   b.   One (1) copy of any Condominium Bylaws and restrictive covenants.
   c.   Upon completion of the project, the condominium project developer or
proprietor  shall furnish the City with two (2) copies of an “as built survey”
and one (1) copy of the site plan on a mylar sheet of at least thirteen by
sixteen (13 x 16) inches with an image not to exceed ten and one half by
fourteen (10-1/2 x 14) inches. The as-built survey shall be reviewed by the
City Engineer for compliance with City Ordinances. Fees for this review shall
be established by the City Council .
SECTION 2411   EFFECT OF APPROVAL.
Upon final approval of the site plan , construction or expansion of any
permitted or special use  shall conform to the site plan . The approval by the
Planning Commission of a site plan shall expire within one (1) year after the
date of such approval, unless construction has commenced or an extension was
requested by the applicant in writing prior to the expiration and approved by
the Planning Commission . The Building and Zoning Administrator shall not issue
a building permit for any type of construction on the basis of the approved
site plan after such approval has expired. Approval shall also confer upon the
Building and Zoning Administrator the authority to approve minor modifications
to an approved site plan during construction, as described in Section 2403.
SECTION 2412   AMENDMENT OF SITE PLAN.
A previously approved site plan  may be amended by the Planning Commission upon
application by the applicant in accordance with the procedures provided in
Section 2406, or if eligible, Section 2403. Minor changes during construction
or for expansion or certain changes in use  may be approved administratively
when the following are proposed:
   a.   A change in internal floor plan which does not increase the intensity
of use or parking requirements.
   b.   Movement of a building, drive, road or parking by up to ten (10) feet
during construction due to an unanticipated and documented constraint, to
improve safety or to preserve natural features . The site plan  shall still
meet all required setbacks and other standards of this ordinance.
   c.   An increase or decrease road width by up to three (3) feet to improve
safety or preserve natural features . The design shall remain consistent with
the standards of the City.
   d.   An increase in open space or alteration of the open space boundary by
up to ten (10) feet with no decrease in overall open space .
   e.   Expansion, replanting or alterations of landscaping areas or change in
plant materials to a similar species, consistent with the other requirements of
this Ordinance.
   f.   Relocation of a waste receptacle to a more inconspicuous location.
   g.   A change in the exterior materials to a material of the same color and
quality as approved by the Planning Commission .
   h.   Relocation of a sign or light fixture meeting the dimensional and
locational standards of this Zoning Ordinance.
   i.   Relocation of sidewalks, bike paths or pathways with the intent of
improving public convenience and safety.
   j.   Minor modifications to comply with a City, state or federal
regulations.
SECTION 2413   REVOCATION.
Approval of a site plan  may be revoked by the Planning Commission if
construction is not in conformance with the approved plans. In such case, the
site plan  shall be placed on the agenda of the Planning Commission for
consideration and written notice shall be sent to the applicant at least ten
(10) days prior to the meeting. The Building and Zoning Administrator ,
applicant, and any other interested persons shall be given the opportunity to
present information to the Planning Commission and answer questions. If the
Planning Commission finds that a violation exists and has not been remedied
prior to the hearing, then it shall revoke the approval of the site plan and
all construction shall terminate.
SECTION 2414   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AFTER APPROVAL.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a property for which site plan
approval has been granted to maintain the property in accordance with the
approved site design on a continuing basis until the property is razed, or
until new zoning regulations supersede the regulations upon which site plan
approval was based, or until a new site design is approved. This maintenance
requirement includes healthy landscaping , walls, fences, pavement, pavement
markings, signs, building exterior, drainage facilities and all other elements
of a site. Any property  owner who fails to so maintain an approved site design
shall be deemed in violation of the use provisions of this Ordinance and shall
be subject to the same penalties appropriate for a use violation.
With respect to condominium projects, the Master Deed  shall contain provisions
describing the responsibilities of the condominium association, condominium
owners, and public entities, with regard to maintenance of the property in
accordance with the approved site plan on a continuing basis. The Master Deed
shall further establish the means of permanent financing for required
maintenance and improvement activities which are the responsibility of the
condominium association. Failure to maintain an approved site plan shall be
deemed in violation of the use provisions of this Ordinance and shall be
subject to the same penalties appropriate for a use violation.
ARTICLE XXV: RESERVED
ARTICLE XXVI: NONCONFORMING LOTS, NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND, NONCONFORMING
STRUCTURES AND NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES
Section
Sec. 2600   Intent
Sec. 2601   Definitions
Sec. 2602   Nonconforming Lots
Sec. 2603   Nonconforming Use of Land
Sec. 2604   Nonconforming Structures
Sec. 2605   Nonconforming Uses of Structures and Land
Sec. 2606   Nonconforming Sites
Sec. 2607   Repairs and Maintenance
Sec. 2608   Uses Under Exception Provisions Not Nonconforming Uses
Sec. 2609   Change of Tenancy or Ownership
Sec. 2610   Acquisition of Nonconforming Uses
SECTION 2600   INTENT.
It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit legal nonconforming lots,
structures, or uses to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage
their survival.
It is recognized that there exists within the districts established by this
Ordinance and subsequent amendments, lots, structures and uses of land and
structures which were lawful before this Ordinance was passed or amended which
would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance
or future amendments.
Such uses are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses
in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used
as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district .
A nonconforming use of a structure , a nonconforming use of land , or a
nonconforming use of a structure and land  shall not be extended or enlarged
after passage of this Ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of
additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises , or by addition of
other uses of a nature which would not be permitted generally in the district
involved.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require a
change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which
actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this Ordinance and upon which actual building construction has
been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include
the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a
permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing
building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding such demolition
or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided work shall be
diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.
The following table summarizes the nonconforming regulations contained in this
Section:
Summary of Nonconforming Regulations
Issue Requirements
Summary of Nonconforming Regulations
Issue                                  Requirements
Period of nonuse before nonconformity  Nonconforming use : 180 days
must cease
                                      Nonconforming structure : 12 months
Establishment of new conforming use    Not permitted
Change in ownership                    No affect on nonconformity
Nonconforming single family  use      May  be enlarged, subject to conditions
                                       Permitted under certain conditions
Substitution of one nonconformity for  Landscaping and other site development
another including change of use        standards must be met under present
                                       Ordinance standards
Issue                                  Requirements
Contiguous nonconformity lots under    Must be combined
same ownership
Expansion of nonconformity use  within Permitted subject to conditions
building
Expansion of nonconformity use  beyond Not permitted
existing building
                                       The nonconformity may  not be increased
Enlargement of nonconforming structure (example: if a front setback  is
or buildings                           nonconforming, expansion is still
                                       permitted to the side or rear providing
                                       the front setback  is maintained).
Maintenance, structural repairs        Generally permitted
Renovation, modernization              Maximum value: 25% of fair market value
Rebuilding after catastrophe           Permitted if damage is less than 50% of
                                       pre-catastrophe fair market value
 
SECTION 2601   DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning ascribed to them:
   a.   Effective Date: Whenever this article refers to the “effective date,”
the reference shall  be deemed to include the effective date of any amendments
to this Ordinance if the amendments created a nonconforming situation.
   b.   Nonconforming Building: A building or portion thereof which was
lawfully in existence at the effective date of this Ordinance, or amendments
thereto, that does not meet the limitations on building size, location on a
lot, or other regulations for the district  in which such building is located.
   c.   Nonconforming Lot: A lot which was lawfully in existence at the
effective date of this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, that does not meet the
minimum area or lot dimensional requirements of the district  in which the lot
is located.
   d.   Nonconforming Use: A use  which was lawfully in existence at the
effective date of this Ordinance, or amendment thereto, and which does not now
conform to the use  regulations of this Ordinance for the zoning district  in
which it is now located.
   e.   Structural Nonconformity: A nonconformity that exists when the height,
size, or minimum floor space of a structure , or the relationship between an
existing building and other buildings or lot lines , does not conform to the
standards of the district  in which the property  is located. Also sometimes
referred to as a Dimensional Nonconformity.
SECTION 2602   NONCONFORMING LOTS.
Any nonconforming lot shall be used only for a use permitted in the district in
which it is located. In any district in which single-family dwellings are
permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this
Ordinance, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be
erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lot
fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally
applicable in the district ; provided that yard dimensions and other
requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to
the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Yard requirement
variances may be obtained through approval of the Board of Appeals .
If two or more lots or combination of lots with contiguous frontage in single
ownership are of record at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance,
and if all or part of the individual lots do not meet the requirements
established for lot width and area, the lots involved shall be considered to be
an individual parcel for the purposes of this Ordinance. No portion of said
parcel shall be used, occupied , or sold in a manner which diminishes
compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this Ordinance,
nor shall any division of an parcel be made which creates a lot with width or
area less than the requirements stated in this Ordinance. These provisions
shall not apply to contiguous lots in single ownership where each of the lots
is occupied by an dwelling unit .
Upon application, the Building and Zoning Administrator  may permit the
combination, in whole or in part, of nonconforming lots of record into building
sites less than the size requirements established by this Ordinance, provided
that the combination of lots reduces the degree of nonconformity and results in
a parcel which is capable of accommodating a structure that is in conformance
with the building area, setback , and side yard requirements of this Ordinance.
SECTION 2603   NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND.
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, lawful
use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this
Ordinance as enacted or amended such use  may be continued, so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   a.   No such nonconforming use  shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this Ordinance;
   b.   No such nonconforming use  shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel  occupied by such use at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance;
   c.   If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of
more than thirty (30) days, any subsequent use of such land  shall conform to
the regulations specified by this Ordinance for the district in which such land
is located.
   d.   Where non-conforming off-street parking , landscaping , signage,
fences, and other similar land uses exist, those uses shall be made to conform
to the terms of this Ordinance when any use , principal or accessory, is
expanded either by expansion of the main building or the addition of an
accessory building , necessitating site plan changes.
SECTION 2604   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment
of this Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this Ordinance by
reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage , height, yards , or other
characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure
 may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
   a.   No such structure  may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases
its nonconformity. Such structures may be enlarged or altered in a way which
does not increase it nonconformity.
   b.   Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more
than sixty (60) percent of its replacement costs, exclusive of the foundation,
it shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
   c.   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is removed.
   d.   Any nonconforming structure or any structure or portion thereof
containing a nonconforming use , may be altered if such alteration serves to
decrease the nonconforming nature of the structure or use . The Zoning Board of
Appeals  shall determine if a proposed alteration will decrease the degree of
nonconformity.
SECTION 2605   NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND LAND.
If a lawful use of a structure , or of structure and land in combination,
exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, that
would not be permitted in the district under the terms of this Ordinance, the
lawful use  may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions:
   a.   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Ordinance
in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located.
   b.   Any nonconforming use  may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which
existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, but no such use
 shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
   c.   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure , or structure and land in combination, may be changed to another
nonconforming use of the same or a more restricted classification provided that
the Board of Appeals , either by general rule or by making findings in the
specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more
appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use . In permitting
such change, the Board of Appeals  may require conditions and safeguards in
accord with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance. Where a nonconforming use
of a structure , land , or structure and land in combination is hereafter
changed to a more conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to a less
conforming use .
   d.   Any structure , or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use , shall thereafter conform
to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the
nonconforming use  may not thereafter be resumed.
   e.   When a nonconforming use of a structure , or structures and land in
combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for six (6) consecutive months
or for eighteen (18) months during any three-year (3-year) period, the
structure , or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used
except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is
located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be excepted from this
provision.
   f.   Where nonconformity use status applies to a structure and land in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land .
SECTION 2606   NONCONFORMING SITES.
The intent of this Section is to permit improvements and minor modifications,
as described in
Article XXIII, Landscape Standards and
Article XXIV, Site Plan Review, to a conforming use and building which does not
meet all of the various site improvement related regulations of this Zoning
Ordinance. The purpose is to allow gradual compliance with the site related
requirements for sites which predate the various Zoning Ordinance standards for
landscaping , paving and other non safety site related items.
Such improvements or expansions may be permitted without a complete upgrade of
all site elements under the following conditions:
   a.   The applicant is proposing reasonable site improvements in relation to
the scale and construction cost of the building improvements or expansion.
   b.   The applicant has addressed safety related site issues.
   c.   The applicant has upgraded the site landscaping consistent with Section
2302.
   d.   The improvements or minor expansion will not increase noncompliance
with site requirements.
   e.   A sketch plan shall be submitted in accordance with Section 2403.
SECTION 2607   REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use , work may
be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or
on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to
an extent not exceeding fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the
building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the
time of passage or amendment of this Ordinance shall not be increased.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of
such official.
SECTION 2608   USES UNDER EXCEPTION PROVISIONS NOT NONCONFORMING USES.
Any use for which a special exception is permitted as provided in this
Ordinance shall not be deemed a nonconforming use , but shall , without further
action, be deemed a conforming use in such district .
SECTION 2609   CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIP.
There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or management of any existing
nonconforming uses of land , structures and land in combination.
SECTION 2610   ACQUISITION OF NONCONFORMING USES.
The City Council  may acquire, by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, private
property , or an interest in private property , for the purpose of removing
nonconforming uses. The cost and expense, or a portion thereof, of acquiring
the private property  may be paid from general funds or assessed to a special
district in accordance with the applicable statutory provisions relating to the
creation and operation of special assessment districts. The elimination of
nonconforming uses and structures in a zoned district as provided is declared
to be for a public purpose for a public use . The City Council  may institute
and prosecute proceedings for the condemnation of nonconforming uses and
structures under the power of eminent domain in accordance with the provisions
of the City Charter relative to condemnation, or in accordance with Public Act
149 of 1911, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 213.21 to 213.41, or any other
applicable statute.
ARTICLE XXVII: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
Sec. 2700   Enforcement
Sec. 2701   Duties of Building and Zoning Administrator
Sec. 2702   Plot Plan
Sec. 2703   Permits
Sec. 2704   Certificates
Sec. 2705   Final Inspection
Sec. 2706   Fees
Sec. 2707   Violations
Sec. 2708   Public Nuisance Per Se
Sec. 2709   Fines, Imprisonment
Sec. 2710   Each Day a Separate Offense
Sec. 2711   Rights and Remedies are Cumulative
SECTION 2700   ENFORCEMENT.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the
Building and Zoning Administrator or by such deputies of his or her department
as the Building and Zoning Administrator  may delegate to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 2701   DUTIES OF BUILDING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
The Building and Zoning Administrator  shall have the power to grant zoning
compliance and occupancy permits, to make inspections of buildings or premises
necessary to carry out his or her duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance.
It shall be unlawful for the Building and Zoning Administrator to approve any
plans or issue any permits or certificates of occupancy for any excavation or
construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them to
conform with this Ordinance.
Under no circumstances is the Building and Zoning Administrator permitted to
make changes to this Ordinance nor to vary the terms of this Ordinance in
carrying out his or her duties as Building and Zoning Administrator .
The Building and Zoning Administrator shall not refuse to issue a permit when
conditions imposed by this Ordinance are complied with by the Applicant despite
violations of contracts, such as covenants or private agreements which may
occur upon the granting of said permit.
SECTION 2702   PLOT PLAN.
The Building and Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector shall require that
all applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans and
specifications including a plot plan, drawn to an engineers scale, showing the
following:
   a.   The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot.
   b.   The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures to be
erected , altered, or moved, and of any buildings or other structures already
on the lot.
   c.   The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures
upon it, including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the
building is intended to accommodate.
   d.   Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be
essential for determining whether the provisions of this Ordinance are being
observed.
SECTION 2703   PERMITS.
The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit:
   a.   Permits Not To Be Issued: No building permit or zoning compliance shall
be issued for the erection, alteration  or use  of any building or structure
or part thereof, or for the use  of any land , which is not in accordance with
all provisions of this Ordinance.
   b.   Permits for New Use of Land: No land  heretofore vacant shall
hereafter be used or an existing use  of land  be hereafter changed to a use
of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first
obtained for the new or different use .
   c.   Permits for New Use of Building: No building or structure , or part
thereof, regulated by the Building Code shall  be changed to or occupied  by a
use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first
obtained for the new or different use .
   d.   Permits Required: No building or structure , or part thereof, shall  be
hereafter erected , altered, moved or repaired unless a building permit shall
have been first issued for such work. The terms “altered” and “repaired” shall
include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, type,
class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress,
or other changes affecting or regulated by the City of Grand Blanc, Building
Code, Housing Law, or this Ordinance, except for minor repairs or changes not
involving any of the aforesaid features. A Zoning Compliance Permit must be
obtained for certain buildings or structures, listed below, where a building
permit is not required by the Building Code. The permit shall be approved
before the building or structure  is erected , altered, moved or repaired. Such
buildings and structures include:
      1.   Fences
      2.   Retaining Walls
      3.   Detached Accessory Structures
      4.   Swimming Pools
(Amended 7-9-2003)
SECTION 2704   CERTIFICATES.
No land , building, or part thereof, shall be occupied by or for any use unless
and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such use . The
following shall apply in the issuance of any certificate:
   a.   Certificates Not to Be Issued: No certificates of occupancy shall  be
issued for any building, structure , or part thereof, or for the use  of any
land , which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this Ordinance.
   b.   Certificates Required: No building or structure , or parts thereof,
which is hereafter erected , or altered, shall  be occupied  or used or the
same caused to be done, unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have
been issued for such building or structure .
   c.   Certificates of Zoning Ordinance Compliance: Certificates of Occupancy
as required by the City Building Code for new buildings or structures, or parts
thereof, or for alterations  to or changes of use  of existing buildings or
structures, shall not automatically constitute Zoning Ordinance approval as
required by this ordinance. Compliance with the City of Grand Blanc Zoning
Ordinance shall  occur within six (6) months after the Building Occupancy
Certificate of Compliance has been issued. A Certificate of Zoning Ordinance
Approval must be obtained in addition to the Building Occupancy Permit in order
to assure compliance with this Zoning Ordinance.
   d.   Certificates for Existing Buildings: Certificates of occupancy shall
be issued for existing buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or existing
uses of land  if, after inspection, it is found that such buildings,
structures, or parts thereof, or such use  of land , are in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
   e.   Record of Certificates: A record of all certificates issued shall  be
kept on file in the office  of the Building and Zoning Administrator , and
copies shall be furnished upon request to any person  having a proprietary or
tenancy interest in the property  involved.
   f.   Certificates for Dwelling Accessory Buildings: Buildings or structures
accessory to dwellings shall not require separate certificates of occupancy,
but may  be included in the certificate of occupancy for the dwelling when
shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as such dwellings.
   g.   Final Site Plan  Review: Following completion of site work and building
construction, the applicant shall  apply for a Certificate of Occupancy or a
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy from the Building and Zoning Administrator .
The Certificate of Occupancy shall  not be issued to the applicant until all
escrows and City of Grand Blanc invoices are paid in full.
(Ord. 2512-03, passed 1-14-2026)
SECTION 2705   FINAL INSPECTION.
The holder of every building permit for the construction, erection, alteration
, repair, or moving of any building, structure , or part thereof, shall notify
the Building and Zoning Administrator immediately upon the completion of the
work authorized by such permit for a final inspection and Certificate of
Occupancy.
SECTION 2706   FEES.
Fees for inspection and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies
thereof required or issued under the provisions of this Ordinance may be
collected by the Building and Zoning Administrator in advance of issuance. The
amount of such fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council .
SECTION 2707   VIOLATIONS.
Any person , firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall
be subject to a fine of not more than Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars and the
costs of prosecution, or in default of the payment thereof, shall be punished
by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days
for each offense, or by both, such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of
the court, together with the costs of such prosecution.
SECTION 2708   PUBLIC NUISANCE PER SE.
Any building or structure which is erected , altered or converted, or any use
of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time of passage
of this Ordinance and in violation of any of the provisions thereof, is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any
court of competent jurisdiction.
SECTION 2709   FINES, IMPRISONMENT.
The owner of any building, structure or premises , or part thereof, where any
condition in violation of this Ordinance shall exist or shall be created, and
who has assisted knowingly in the commission of such violation shall be guilty
of a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be liable to the
fines and imprisonment herein provided.
SECTION 2710   EACH DAY A SEPARATE OFFENSE.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a
violation occurs or continues.
SECTION 2711   RIGHTS AND REMEDIES ARE CUMULATIVE.
The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any
other remedies provided by law .
ARTICLE XXVIII: ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
Section
Sec. 2800   Initiation of Amendments
Sec. 2801   Application Procedure
Sec. 2802   Amendment Procedure; Public Hearing and Notice
Sec. 2803   Amendments Required to Conform to Court Decree
Sec. 2804   Criteria for Amendment of the Official Zoning Map
Sec. 2805   Criteria for Amendment to the Zoning Ordinance Text
Sec. 2806   Restrictions on Resubmittal of a Rezoning Request
SECTION 2800   INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS.
The City Council  may , from time to time, amend, modify, supplement or revise
the zoning district boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map or the
provisions of this Ordinance. Amendments to the provisions of this Ordinance
may be initiated by the City Council , the Planning Commission , the Board of
Zoning Appeals, the Building and Zoning Administrator or by petition of one or
more residents or land owners. Amendments to the Official Zoning Map may be
initiated by the City Council , the Planning Commission , or by the owner or
owners of the subject site. All proposed amendments to the provisions of this
Ordinance or the Official Zoning Map shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for public hearing and recommendation to the City Council prior to
action by the City Council .
SECTION 2801   APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
An amendment to this Ordinance or the Official Zoning Map, except those
initiated by the City, shall be initiated by submission of a completed
application form and fee. The following information shall accompany the
application form:
   a.   A legal description and street address of the subject property ,
together with a map identifying the subject property in relation to surrounding
properties.
   b.   The name and address of the owner of the subject site, and a statement
of the applicant’s interest in the subject site if not the owner in fee simple
title.
   c.   The existing and proposed zoning district designation of the subject
property .
   d.   The land  use classification for the subject site as illustrated on the
City’s Master Plan .
   e.   In the case of an amendment to this Ordinance, other than an amendment
to the Official Zoning Map, a general description of the proposed amendment and
rationale for the change shall accompany the application form.
   f.   A written description of how the requested rezoning meets Sec. 2804
“Criteria for Amendment of the Official Zoning Map”, or Sec. 2805 “Criteria for
Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance Text”.
SECTION 2802   AMENDMENT PROCEDURE; PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE.
   a.   Upon initiation of an amendment, a work session and public hearing to
consider the proposed amendment shall be scheduled before the Planning
Commission . Notice of the hearing shall be given as required by the City or
Public Act 110 of 2006, the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101
et seq., as amended).
   b.   Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission  shall identify
and evaluate all factors relevant to the petition and shall report its findings
and recommendation to the City Council . The Planning Commission shall consider
the criteria listed in Section 2804 for a requested amendment to the Official
Zoning Map, and the criteria listed in Section 2805 for requested amendments to
the standards and regulations in the text.
   c.   Following receipt of the findings and recommendation of the Planning
Commission , the City Council  shall act on the proposed amendment. In the case
of an amendment to the text of this Ordinance, the City Council  may modify or
revise the proposed amendment recommended by the Planning Commission prior to
enactment. In the case of an amendment to the Official Zoning Map, the City
Council shall approve or deny the amendment, based on its consideration of the
criteria in Section 2804.
SECTION 2803   AMENDMENTS REQUIRED TO CONFORM TO COURT DECREE.
Any amendment for the purpose of conforming to a decree of a court of competent
jurisdiction shall be adopted by the City Council and published, without
necessity of a public hearing or referral thereof to any other board or agency.
SECTION 2804   CRITERIA FOR AMENDMENT OF THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
In considering any petition for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map, the
Planning Commission and City Council  shall consider the following criteria in
making its findings, recommendations and decision:
   a.   Consistency with the goals, policies and future land  use map of the
Grand Blanc Master Plan . If conditions upon which the Master Plan was
developed (such as market factors, demographics, infrastructure, traffic and
environmental issues) have changed significantly since the Master Plan was
adopted, as determined by the City, the Planning Commission and Council shall
consider the consistency with recent development trends in the area.
   b.   Compatibility of the site’s physical, geological, hydrological and
other environmental features with the host of uses permitted in the proposed
zoning district .
   c.   Evidence the applicant cannot receive a reasonable return on investment
through developing the property with at least one (1) of the uses permitted
under the current zoning.
   d.   The compatibility of all the potential uses allowed in the proposed
zoning district with surrounding uses and zoning in terms of land suitability,
impacts on the environment, density , nature of use , traffic impacts,
aesthetics, infrastructure and potential influence on property values.
   e.   The capacity of the City’s infrastructure and services sufficient to
accommodate the uses permitted in the requested district without compromising
the “health, safety and welfare”.
(Amended 2-14-1996)
   f.   The apparent demand for the types of uses permitted in the requested
zoning district in the Grand Blanc area in relation to the amount of land
currently zoned and available to accommodate the demand.
   g.   The request has not previously been submitted within the past one (1)
year, unless conditions have changed or new information has been provided.
   h.   Other factors deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission and City
Council .
SECTION 2805   CRITERIA FOR AMENDMENT TO THE ZONING ORDINANCE TEXT.
The Planning Commission and City Council  shall consider the following criteria
to determine the appropriateness of amending the text, standards and
regulations of the Zoning Ordinance.
   a.   Documentation has been provided from City Staff or the Board of Zoning
Appeals indicating problems and conflicts in implementation of specific
sections of the Ordinance.
   b.   Reference materials, planning and zoning publications, information
gained at seminars or experiences of other communities demonstrate improved
techniques to deal with certain zoning issues, or that the City’s standards are
outdated.
   c.   The City Attorney recommends an amendment to respond to significant
case law .
   d.   The amendment would promote implementation of the goals and objectives
of the City’s Master Plan .
   e.   Other factors deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission and City
Council .
SECTION 2806   RESTRICTIONS ON RESUBMITTAL OF A REZONING REQUEST.
An application for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map (i.e. a rezoning
request) that has been denied, shall not be reconsidered for one (1) year,
unless the applicant demonstrates that conditions have changed.
ARTICLE XXIX: BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Section
Sec. 2900   Creation and Membership
Sec. 2901   Meetings
Sec. 2902   Appeal
Sec. 2903   Jurisdiction
Sec. 2904   Standards for Variances and Appeals
Sec. 2905   Orders
Sec. 2906   Notice
Sec. 2907   Miscellaneous
SECTION 2900   CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
There is hereby established a Board of Zoning Appeals, which shall perform its
duties and exercise its power as provided in Public Act 110 of 2006, the
Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3601 et seq., as amended, and in
such a way that the objectives of the Article shall be served, public safety
served, and substantial justice done. The members of the Board of Zoning
Appeals may be the City Council or a separate Board.
The City Council  may appoint a Board of Zoning Appeals consisting of not less
than six (6) members, each to be appointed for a term of three (3) years.
Appointments of the first members shall be for terms of one (1), two (2), and
three (3) years, respectively, so as nearly as possible to provide for the
appointment of an equal number of members each year. After the initial
appointments, each member shall hold office for the full three (3) year term.
In the event the City Council serves as the Board of Zoning Appeals, the
members shall serve for the term of their Council office . The Mayor may serve
as Chairperson but shall not vote except in the case of tie and the City Clerk
shall serve as Secretary.
SECTION 2901   MEETINGS.
All meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such times as the Board may determine. All hearings
conducted by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be open to the public. The
Secretary, or his or her representative, shall keep minutes of the proceedings,
recording the vote of each member upon each question, and indicating absences
and abstentions, and shall keep records of hearings and other official action.
Five (5) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of its
business. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to subpoena and
require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, and compel testimony and
the production of books, papers, files, and other evidence pertinent to the
matters before it.
SECTION 2902   APPEAL.
An appeal may be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals by any person , firm or
corporation, or by any officer, department, board or bureau affected by a
decision of the Building and Zoning Administrator .
Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the Board
of Zoning Appeals, by filing with the Building and Zoning Administrator and
with the Board of Zoning Appeals, a Notice of Appeal, specifying the grounds
thereof. The Building and Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the
Board of Zoning Appeals all the documents and records pertaining to the action
being appealed. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from unless the Building and Zoning Administrator certifies to
the Board of Zoning Appeals, after notice of appeal has been filed with the
Building and Zoning Administrator , that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property , in which case, the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than
by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of record.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall select a reasonable time and place for the
hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and shall
render a decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. Any person  may
appear and testify at the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent
or attorney.
A fee, as established by the City Council , shall be paid to the City Clerk at
the time the notice of appeal is filed.
SECTION 2903   JURISDICTION.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not have the power to alter or change the
zoning district classification of any property , or to make any change in terms
of this Ordinance, but shall have power to act on those matters where this
Ordinance provides for an administrative review, interpretation, or exception
permit and to authorize a variance as defined in this Section and laws of the
State of Michigan. Said powers include:
   a.   Administrative Review: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is error of law  in any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by the Building and Zoning Administrator  in the enforcement of the Zoning
Ordinance.
   b.   Variance: To authorize, upon an appeal, a variance  from the strict
application of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance where, by reason of
exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, or area of a specific piece of
property  at the time of enactment of this Ordinance, or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional
conditions of such property , the strict application of the regulations enacted
would result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to or
exceptional undue hardship upon the owner  of such property , provided such
relief may  be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance.
In granting or denying a variance , the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach
thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, site design,
operations and other features of the proposed structure  or uses as it deems
reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this Ordinance. In granting or
denying a variance , the Board of Zoning Appeals shall  state the grounds upon
which it justifies the granting or denying of a variance .
(Amended 2-14-1996; amended 6-10-1998)
SECTION 2904   STANDARDS FOR VARIANCES AND APPEALS.
Variances and appeals shall be granted only in accordance with Public Act 110
of 2006, the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 et seq., as
amended, and based on the findings set forth in this section.
   a.   Criteria Applicable to Dimensional (area or non-use ) Variances. A
dimensional variance  is an approved deviation from any dimensional standard or
requirement of this Ordinance, such as, but not limited to, lot-area , lot
width , building or structure  height, building size, setback , parking,
lighting or landscaping . . The extent to which the following criteria apply to
a specific case shall  be determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals, however,
all elements of the practical difficulties test must be, found by the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
(Amended 6-10-1998)
      1.   Practical Difficulties: All of the following must be met for the
Board of Zoning Appeals to find there is a practical difficulty:
         (a)   Compliance with the strict letter of the restrictions governing
area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk , density , or other dimensional
provisions would unreasonably prevent the use  of the property   for a
permitted purpose, or render conformity with such restrictions unnecessarily
burdensome. The showing of mere inconvenience is insufficient to justify a
variance .
         (b)   Granting of a requested variance or appeal would do substantial
justice to the applicant as well as to other property owners in the district;
or, as an alternative, granting of lesser variance than requested would give
substantial relief to the owner of the property involved and be more consistent
with justice to other property owners.
         (c)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applicable to the property involved or to the intended use of the
property that do not apply generally to other properties or other similar uses
in the same zoning district.
         (d)   The conditions resulting in a variance request cannot be self-
created.
      2.   Public Safety and Welfare: The requested variance  or appeal can be
granted in such fashion that the spirit of these regulations will be observed
and public safety and welfare secured.
      3.   No Safety Hazard or Nuisance: The granting of a variance or appeal
will not increase the hazard of fire or otherwise endanger public safety or
create a public nuisance.
      4.   Relationship to Adjacent Land Uses: The development permitted upon
granting of a variance  shall relate harmoniously in a physical and economic
sense with adjacent land uses  and will not alter the essential character of
the neighborhood. In evaluating this criterion, consideration shall be given to
prevailing shopping patterns, convenience of access for patrons, continuity of
development, and the need for particular services and facilities in specific
areas of the City.
   b.   Criteria Applicable to Use Variances. A use  variance  is requested
when the use  proposed by an applicant is not listed as either permitted or as
a special land use  in the district  in which the property  is located. In
granting a use  variance , the Board of Zoning Appeals shall  determine that
all of the following factors are present, or require conditions to ensure the
criteria below are met.
(Amended 6-10-1998)
      1.   Criteria for Dimensional Variance. The request meets all of the
criteria for a dimensional variance  listed in
Section 2904, a.
(Amended 6-10-1998)
      2.   Conformance with Master Plan. The proposed use  is consistent with
the uses called for in the Master Plan  for the subject property , or that
conditions on site design and operations ensure such use  is compatible with
the planned uses in the vicinity.
(Amended 6-10-1998)
      3.   Compatibility with Surrounding Land Uses. The proposed use  is
compatible with existing or planned uses on surrounding properties. The Zoning
Board of Appeals  may  require a sketch plan or site plan , as applicable, and
may request a recommendation from the Planning Commission , to assist with this
finding.
(Amended 6-10-1998)
      4.   Unreasonable Current Zoning Designation. The applicant has
demonstrated that the site can not reasonably be used for any of the uses
allowed within the current zoning district  designation. The Zoning Board of
Appeals  may  require submission of documentation from real estate  or market
experts, or a certified appraiser, to substantiate this finding.
(Amended 6-10-1998)
      5.   Capacity of Roads, Infrastructure and Public Services. The capacity
and operations of public streets, utilities, other facilities and services will
not be significantly compromised.
(Amended 6-10-1998)
      6.   Unnecessary Hardship. An unnecessary hardship exists on the subject
site due to very unique circumstances.
(Amended 6-10-1998)
      7.   Minimum Variance Necessary. The variance  requested is the minimum
necessary to permit reasonable use  of the land .
(Amended 6-10-1998)
   c.   Criteria Applicable to Appeals: The Board of Zoning Appeals shall
reverse an order of an Enforcement Official only if it finds that the action or
decision appealed:
(Amended 6-10-1998)
      1.   was arbitrary or capricious, or
      2.   was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or
      3.   constituted an abuse of discretion, or
      4.   was based on erroneous interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance or
zoning law .
      5.   Appeals from Denial of Board of Zoning Appeals of Zoning Appeals may
be taken to Genesee County Circuit Court.
   d.   Interpretations and Exceptions: To hear and decide, in accordance with
the provisions of this Ordinance, requests for exceptions, for interpretations
of the Zoning Map, and for situations on which this Ordinance specifically
authorizes the Board of Zoning Appeals to act. Any exception shall  be subject
to such conditions as the Board of Zoning Appeals may  require to preserve and
promote the character of the zoning district  in question and otherwise promote
the purpose of this Ordinance, including the following:
(Amended 6-10-1998)
      1.   Interpret the provisions of this ordinance in such a way as to carry
out the intent and purpose of the Master Plan . Interpret boundaries of the
Zoning Map where the actual alignment of streets or natural features used to
separate zoning districts varies from the alignment shown on the Zoning Map, or
where the zoning district boundary does not follow exact property lines .
(Amended 6-10-1998)
      2.   Permit the modification of the automobile  parking space or loading
space requirements where, in the particular instance, such modification will
not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such requirements.
      3.   Permit modification of obscuring wall requirements only when such
modification will not adversely affect or be detrimental to surrounding or
adjacent development .
(Amended 6-10-1998)
      4.   Permit, upon proper application, a temporary use not otherwise
permitted by Section 332 for a maximum of twelve (12) months. The Zoning Board
of Appeals  may grant one (1) twelve-month extension if requested in writing by
the operator or land  owner prior to expiration of the original approval.
(Amended 6-10-1998)
   The Board of Zoning Appeals, in granting permits for the above temporary
uses , shall do so under the following conditions:
      1.   The granting of the temporary use  shall in no way constitute a
change in the basic uses permitted in the district nor on the property wherein
the temporary use is permitted.
      2.   The granting of the temporary use  shall be granted in writing,
stipulating all conditions as to time, nature of development permitted and
arrangements for removing the use at the termination of said temporary permit.
      3.   All setbacks, land coverage, off-street parking , lighting and other
requirements to be considered in protecting the public health, safety, peace,
morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the
City, shall be made at the discretion of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
      4.   In classifying uses as not requiring capital improvement, the Board
of Zoning Appeals shall determine that they are either demountable structures
related to the permitted use of the land ; recreation developments, such as,
but not limited to: golf-driving ranges and outdoor archery courts; or
structures which do not require foundations, heating systems or sanitary
connections.
      5.   The use  shall be in harmony with the general character of the
district .
      6.   No temporary use permit shall be granted without first giving notice
to owners of adjacent property and all owners of record listed in the latest
assessment roll of the City located within three hundred (300) feet of the area
of the request of the time and place of a Public Hearing to be held as further
provided for in this Ordinance. Further, the Board of Zoning Appeals of Zoning
Appeals shall seek the review and recommendation of the Planning Commission
prior to the taking of any action.
   e.   Votes required: The concurring votes of four (4) members of the Board
of Zoning Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision, or determination of Applicant in matter upon which is authorized by
this Ordinance to render a decision. Nothing contained herein shall be
construed to give or grant to the Board of Zoning Appeals the power or
authority to alter or change this Ordinance or the Zoning Map.
(Ord. 2412-06, passed 1-8-2025)
SECTION 2905   ORDERS.
In exercising the above powers, the Board of Zoning Appeals may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such an order, requirement, decision,
or determination as ought to be made, and to that end, shall have all the
powers of the Building and Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken.
SECTION 2906   NOTICE.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall make no determination, except in a specific
case, and after a public hearing. It shall, by general rule4 or in specific
cases, determine the interested parties who, in the opinion of the Board of
Zoning Appeals, may be affected by any matter brought before it, in all cases
including all owners of record of real property within three hundred (300) feet
of the premises in question and all occupants of single and two-family
dwellings within three hundred (300) feet, such notices to be delivered
personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners and tenants at the
address given in the last assessment roll. The Board of Zoning Appeals may
require any party applying to the Board of Zoning Appeals for relief to give
notice to such other interested parties as it shall prescribe.
SECTION 2907   MISCELLANEOUS.
No order of the Board of Zoning Appeals permitting the erection of a building
shall be valid for a period longer than one (1) year, unless a building permit
for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period, and such
erection or alteration is started and completed in accordance with the terms of
such permit.
No order of the Board of Zoning Appeals permitting a use of a building or
premises  shall be valid for a period longer than one (1) year unless such use
is established within such period; provided, however, that where such use
permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such
order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for said erection
or alteration is obtained within such period, and such erection or alteration
is started and completed in accordance with the terms of such permit.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not have any jurisdiction to consider any
decision by the City Council regarding a request for Special Land Use Approval.
PART FOURTEEN: BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE
   TITLE TWO - Building Standards
      
Chap. 1410. Michigan Building Code.
      
Chap. 1412.    Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act.
      
Chap. 1414.    Property Maintenance Code.
      
Chap. 1416.    Electrical Code, Mechanical Code and Plumbing Code.
   TITLE FOUR - Miscellaneous Building Regulations
      
Chap. 1440. Flood Damage Prevention.
      
Chap. 1456. Licensing of Residential Builders.
      
Chap. 1460. Numbering of Buildings.
      
Chap. 1480. Signs.
      
Chap. 1484. Smoke Detectors. (Repealed)
      
Chap. 1486. Telecommunications Systems and Services.
      
Chap. 1488. Blight.
      TITLE SIX - Housing
      
Chap. 1490. Supplied Facilities, Maintenance and Occupancy of Dwellings and
Dwelling Units. (Repealed)
TITLE TWO: BUILDING STANDARDS
      
Chap. 1410. Michigan Building Code.
      
Chap. 1412.    Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act.
      
Chap. 1414.    Property Maintenance Code.
      
Chap. 1416.    Electrical Code, Mechanical Code and Plumbing Code.
CHAPTER 1410: MICHIGAN BUILDING CODE
Section
1410.01   Enforcing agency designated
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of technical codes by reference, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k)
   State Construction Code, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 et seq.
§ 1410.01 ENFORCING AGENCY DESIGNATED.
   Pursuant to § 8b(6) of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction
Code Act, Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. § 125.1508b(6), the city
hereby elects to administer and enforce Public Act 230 of 1972 and the Michigan
Building Code, being Mich. Admin. Code R 408.30401 et seq. The city shall also
administer and enforce the respective provisions of the Michigan Residential,
Rehabilitation and Uniform Energy Codes, being Mich. Admin. Code R 408.30500 et
seq, R 408.30551 et seq. and R 408.31059, respectively, and all applicable laws
and ordinances. A government official registered in accordance with Public Act
407 of 2016 shall be appointed to receive all fees, issue permits, plan
reviews, notices, orders, and certificates of use and occupancy. All personnel
performing plan reviews and inspections shall be registered in accordance with
Public Act 407 of 2016.
(Ord. 2013-02, passed 5-8-2013)
CHAPTER 1412: STILLE-DEROSSETT-HALE SINGLE STATE
CONSTRUCTION CODE ACT
Section
1412.01   Adoption by reference
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of technical codes by reference, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k)
   State Construction Code, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 et seq.
§ 1412.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   (a)   Adoption by reference. The Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State
Construction Code Act, Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 et
seq., and all future amendments and revisions, as of the effective date are
hereby incorporated and adopted by reference.
   (b)   Reference. References in the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State
Construction Code Act to a “government” or “government unit” shall  mean the
City of Grand Blanc.
(Ord. 2013-03, passed 5-8-2013)
CHAPTER 1414: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
1414.01   Adoption by reference
1414.02   Amendments
§ 1414.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Grand Blanc, in the State of Michigan for
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property ,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and
the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property
Maintenance Code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
1414.02.
(Ord. 04-06, passed 1-12-2005)
§ 1414.02 AMENDMENTS.
   The following sections are hereby revised:
   Section 101.1. Insert: City of Grand Blanc
   Section 101.2. Delete section and insert the following:
   “The provisions of this code shall apply to 3-unit or more multiple family
rental properties and constitute minimum requirements and standards for
premises , structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space,
heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from
fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the
responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing
structures and premises , and for administration, enforcement and penalties.”
   Section 105.5. Insert: [Fees to be set by Resolution of City Council]
   Section 111.2. Delete the first sentence and insert the following:
   “The members of the board of appeals shall be the same as the City Council.”
   Section 111.2.1. Delete second sentence.
   Section 111.6.1. Delete second sentence and insert the following:
   “Copies shall be provided to the code official and, upon request, copies
shall be furnished to the appellant.”
   Section 202. Insert the following definition:
   “MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING. A group of three (3) or more dwelling units.”
   Section 202. Delete the definition for “INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE”.
   Section 302.4. Delete this section.
   Section 302.8. Delete this section.
   Section 304.3. Delete this section.
   Section 305.1. Delete the third sentence and insert the following:
   “Every owner of a structure, multiple family dwelling, rooming house,
housing units, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or
public areas of the structure and exterior property.”
   Section 304.14. Insert: [April 15 to October 15]
   Section 308.3. Delete this section.
   Section 308.4. Delete first sentence and insert the following:
   “The owner of a multiple family dwelling shall be responsible for
extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior
property.”
   Section 401.2. Delete first sentence and insert the following:
   “The owner of the multiple family dwelling shall provide and maintain light,
ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements.”
   Section 404.1. Delete this section and insert the following:
   “Dwelling units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory units shall
be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces.”
   Section 404.3. Delete exceptions one (1) and two (2) of this section.
   Section 503.1. Delete section and insert the following:
   “Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving rooming units or dormitory units or
housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing not more than one flight of
stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway”.
   Section 602.3. Insert: [September 15 to May 15]
   Section 602.4. Insert: [September 15 to May 15]
(Ord. 04-06, passed 1-12-2005)
CHAPTER 1416: ELECTRICAL CODE, MECHANICAL CODE AND PLUMBING CODE
Section
General Provisions
1416.01   Adoption of Electrical Code
1416.02   Michigan Mechanical Code; enforcing agency designated
1416.03   Michigan Plumbing Code; enforcing agency designated
Designation of Enforcement Agency
1416.10   Agency designated
1416.11   Enforcement
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of technical codes by reference, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k)
   State Construction Code, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1416.01 ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE.
   A certain code, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
of Grand Blanc, being marked and designated as “NFPA 70, National Electrical
Code with Michigan Amendment, 2008 Edition”, as amended, be and is hereby
adopted as the Electrical Code of the City of Grand Blanc in the State of
Michigan; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
the said NFPA 70, National Electric Code, 2008 Edition are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section.
(Ord. 2013-04, passed 5-8-2013)
§ 1416.02 MICHIGAN MECHANICAL CODE; ENFORCING AGENCY DESIGNATED.
   Pursuant to § 8b(6) of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction
Code Act, Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. § 125.1508b(6), the city
hereby elects to administer and enforce Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 125.1501 through 125.1531 and the Michigan Mechanical Code, being Mich.
Admin. Code, R 408.30901a. The city shall also administer and enforce the
respective provisions of the Michigan Residential, Rehabilitation, and Uniform
Energy Codes, being Mich. Admin. Code, R 408.30500 et seq., R 408.30551 et seq.
and R 408.31059, respectively, and all applicable laws and ordinances. A
government official registered in accordance with Public Act 407 of 2016 shall
be appointed to receive all fees, issue permits, plan reviews, notices, orders
and certificates of use and occupancy. All personnel performing plan reviews
and inspections shall be registered in accordance with Public Act 407 of 2016.
(Ord. 2013-05, passed 5-8-2013)
§ 1416.03 MICHIGAN PLUMBING CODE; ENFORCING AGENCY DESIGNATED.
   Pursuant to § 8b(6) of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction
Code Act, Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. § 125.1508b(6), the city
hereby elects to administer and enforce the Public Act 230 of 1972, being
M.C.L.A. § 125.1508b(6) and the Michigan Plumbing Code, being Mich. Admin.
Code, R 408.30701 et seq. The city shall also administer and enforce the
respective provisions of the Michigan Residential, Rehabilitation and Uniform
Energy Codes, being Mich. Admin. Code, R 408.30500 et seq., R 408.30551 et seq.
and R 408.31059, respectively, and all applicable laws and ordinances. A
government official registered in accordance with Public Act 407 of 2016 shall
be appointed to receive all fees, issue permits, plan reviews, notices, orders,
and certificates of use and occupancy. All personnel performing plan reviews
and inspections shall be registered in accordance with Public Act 407 of 2016.
(Ord. 2013-06, passed 5-8-2013)
DESIGNATION OF ENFORCEMENT AGENCY
§ 1416.10 AGENCY DESIGNATED.
   Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Mechanical, Electrical and
Plumbing Codes, in accordance with §§ 8b and 23 of Public Act 230 of 1972,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 through 125.1531, as amended, the mechanical,
electrical and plumbing code officials of the city are hereby designated as the
enforcing agencies to discharge the responsibility of the city under Public Act
230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 through 125.1531, as amended. The city
assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act
throughout its corporate limits.
(Ord. 10-12-01, passed 10-10-2012)
§ 1416.11 ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Failure to comply with the Michigan Mechanical, Electrical or Plumbing
Codes shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Each day that there is such
a failure to comply will constitute a separate offense.
   (b)   Violation of the State Mechanical, Electrical or Plumbing Codes shall
be deemed to be a nuisance per se. Any person or anyone acting on behalf of any
such person who shall violate any provisions of said codes, or who shall fail
to comply with any requirements thereof, shall be in violation of a municipal
civil infraction as provided in the city’s code of ordinances §
202.99. A violator shall also be subject to such additional sanctions, remedies
and judicial orders as are authorized under state  law , including costs and
attorney fees.
(Ord. 10-12-01, passed 10-10-2012)
TITLE FOUR: MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
Chap. 1440. Flood Damage Prevention.
      
Chap. 1456. Licensing of Residential Builders.
      
Chap. 1460. Numbering of Buildings.
      
Chap. 1480. Signs.
      
Chap. 1484. Smoke Detectors. (Repealed)
      
Chap. 1486. Telecommunications Systems and Services.
      
Chap. 1488. Blight.
CHAPTER 1440: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
1440.01   Authority
1440.02   Intent
1440.03   Definitions
1440.04   Delineation of the flood hazard overlay zone
1440.05   Zoning/building permits
1440.06   Flood hazard area zone variance
1440.07   Permit application information
1440.08   General standards for flood hazard reduction
1440.09   Specific base flood elevation standards
1440.10   Premanufactured unit standards
1440.11   Flood plain management administrative duties
1440.12   Floodway protection standards
1440.13   Mapping disputes
1440.14   Disclaimer of liability
Statutory reference:
   Drains and drainage; flood control projects, see M.C.L.A. §§ 280.429,
280.431
   Flood control in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4a, 117.4e
   Municipal bond issues, see M.C.L.A. § 141.2101 et seq.
§ 1440.01 AUTHORITY.
   The State Legislature has, in M.C.L.A. § 125.3201, as amended, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare of their residents.
(Ord. 220, passed 2-13-1991)
§ 1440.02 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this chapter to significantly reduce hazards to persons
and damage to property as a result of flood conditions in the city, and to
comply with the provisions and requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 through 4138, as constituted in accordance
with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, being Title XIII of Pub. Law No.
90-448, as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 et seq., and subsequent enactments and
rules and regulations promulgated in furtherance of this program by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, as published in the Federal Register, Vol. 41, No.
207, Tuesday, October 26, 1976, and redesignated at 44 FR 31177, May 31, 1979.
Further, the intent of this chapter includes:
   (a)   The protection of human life, health and property from the dangerous
and damaging effects of flood conditions;
   (b)   The minimization of public expenditures for flood control projects,
rescue and relief efforts in the aftermath of flooding, repair of flood damaged
public facilities and utilities, and the redevelopment of flood damaged homes,
neighborhoods and commercial and industrial areas;
   (c)   The prevention of private and public economic loss and social
disruption as a result of flood conditions;
   (d)   The maintenance of stable development patterns not subject to the
blighting influences of flood damage;
   (e)   To ensure that the public has access to information indicating the
location of land areas subject to periodic flooding; and
   (f)   To preserve the ability of flood plains to carry and discharge a base
flood .
(Ord. 220, passed 2-13-1991)
§ 1440.03 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO zone on a community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) , with base flood  depths from one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of the flooding
is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may  be evident.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land  in the flood plain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   DEVELOPMENT.  Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate ,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, and mining,
dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land  areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or run-off of surface waters
from any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Land  which, on the basis of available flood plain
information, is subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given
area.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community issued by
the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazards have been designated as Zone A.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Hazard
Boundary - Floodway  Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood .
   FLOOD PLAIN. Any land  area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas designated in the Flood Insurance Study  which must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood .
   HARMFUL INCREASE. An unnaturally high stage on a river, stream or lake which
causes or may  cause damage to property , threat to life, personal injury, or
damage to land  or water resources.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction is
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
   ORDINARY REPAIR/REPLACEMENT. To restore to sound or good condition, after
damage, injury or decay, not exceeding 49% of the total value of the structure
being repaired, i.e. re-roofing, re-siding, window replacement and those other
items as determined by the Building and Zoning Administrator.
   PREMANUFACTURED STRUCTURE. A structure , transportable in one or more
sections, which may  or may not be built on a permanent chassis and designed to
be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground,
gas or liquid storage facility, deck, fence, pool, premanufactured structure
or any other significant obstruction of the floodway .
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure , the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either:
         A.   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
         B.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
      (2)   For purposes of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, roof or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not the alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure . The term does not, however,
include either any project for improvement of a structure  to comply with
existing state  or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a
structure  listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State
Inventory of Historic Places, or any ordinary repair or replacement , as
defined.
(Ord. 220, passed 2-13-1991)
§ 1440.04 DELINEATION OF THE FLOOD HAZARD OVERLAY ZONE.
   (a)   The flood hazard area zone shall overlay existing zoning districts
delineated on the official city’s Zoning Map. The boundaries of the flood
hazard area zone shall coincide with the boundaries of the areas indicated as
within the limits of the 100-year flood in the report entitled “The Flood
Insurance Study of the City of Grand Blanc,” dated July 2, 1980, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps.
Within the flood hazard area zone a regulatory floodway shall be designated.
The boundaries of the regulatory floodway shall coincide with the floodway
boundaries indicated on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map. The Study and
accompanying maps are adopted by reference, appended and declared to be a part
of this chapter. The term flood hazard area shall mean the Flood Hazard Area
Zone, and the term floodway shall mean the designated regulatory floodway .
   (b)   Where there are disputes as to the location of a flood hazard area
zone boundary, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall resolve the dispute in
accordance with the National Flood Insurance Program.
   (c)   In addition to other requirements of this chapter, compliance with the
requirements of this section shall be necessary for all development occurring
within the flood hazard area zone.
(Ord. 220, passed 2-13-1991)
§ 1440.05 ZONING/BUILDING PERMITS.
   Development , new construction , “substantial improvement ” or the placement
of premanufactured units, within a flood hazard area , shall not occur except
upon issuance of a variance by the Board of Zoning Appeals, and compliance with
the following standards:
   (a)   All of the requirements of this chapter shall be met;
   (b)   The requirements of the underlying zoning districts and applicable
general provisions of the Zoning Code shall be met;
   (c)   All necessary development permits shall have been issued by
appropriate local, state and federal authorities, including a flood plain
permit, approval, or letter of no authority from the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources under authority of Public Act 451 of 1994, the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.101 to
324.90106, as amended. Where a development permit cannot be issued prior to the
issuance of a Board of Zoning Appeals variance, a letter from the issuing
agency indicating intent to issue contingent only upon proof of said variance,
shall be acceptable.
   (d)   Building permits for ordinary repair/replacement s shall not require
the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 220, passed 2-13-1991)
§ 1440.06 FLOOD HAZARD AREA ZONE VARIANCE.
   (a)   A variance shall not be granted within a regulatory floodway where the
result would be any increase in flood levels during a base flood discharge,
except upon certification by a registered professional engineer or the
Department of Natural Resources, that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development will not harmfully increase the water service elevation of a base
flood . In determining whether a harmful increase will occur, compliance with
Public Act 451 of 1994, the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.101 to 324.90106, shall be required, provided that the
allowable increase, including the increase used as the design standard for
delineating the floodway , shall not exceed one foot.
   (b)   A variance shall be granted only upon:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
an exceptional hardship; and
      (3)   A determination that the granting of the variance will not result
in flood heights in excess of those permitted by this chapter, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nuisances, fraud on, or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
   (c)   The variance granted shall be the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief to the applicant.
   (d)   The city’s Board of Zoning Appeals may attach conditions to the
granting of a variance to ensure compliance with the standards contained in
this chapter.
   (e)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the Michigan Historic Markers listing of historic sites, or any other state
register of historic places, without regard to the requirements of this section
governing variances in flood hazard areas.
(Ord. 220, passed 2-13-1991)
§ 1440.07 PERMIT APPLICATION INFORMATION.
   The following information shall be submitted as part of an application for
permission to commence any type of construction or development within a flood
hazard area zone:
   (a)   The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest supporting
floor member, including the basement, of all structures;
   (b)   Where floodproofing will be employed, the elevation in relation to
mean sea level to which a structure will be floodproofed;
   (c)   Where floodproofing will be employed, a certificate from a registered
professional engineer or architect that floodproofing criteria of this chapter
will be met;
   (d)   Where it can be determined that development or construction is
proposed within zones A1-30 on the FIRM or the regulatory floodway ,
certification as required by this chapter must be provided;
   (e)   A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development or construction;
   (f)   Proof of development permission from appropriate local, state and
federal agencies as required by §
1440.05, including a flood plain permit approval, or a letter from the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources, claiming no authority;
   (g)   Base flood elevation data where the proposed development or
construction is subject to Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101
through 560.293, as amended, or greater than five acres in size; and
   (h)   Any additional information which may be reasonably necessary to
determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 220, passed 2-13-1991)
§ 1440.08 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
   (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements within a flood
hazard area , including the placement of prefabricated buildings and mobile
homes, shall :
      (1)   Be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure ;
      (2)   Be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage; and
      (3)   Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (b)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
   (c)   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from
systems into flood waters. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to
avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system during
flooding.
   (d)   All public utilities and facilities shall be designed, constructed and
located to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
   (e)   Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
   (f)   The Building and Zoning Administrator or his or her designee shall
review development proposals to determine compliance with the standards in this
section. Compliance with the standards of this chapter shall be required to be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect.
   (g)   Land shall not be divided in a manner creating parcels or lots which
cannot be used in conformance with the requirements of this section.
   (h)   The flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse
not subject to state or federal regulations designed to ensure flood-carrying
capacity shall be maintained.
   (i)   Available flood hazard data from federal, state or other sources shall
be reasonably utilized in meeting the standards of this section. Data furnished
by the Federal Insurance Administration shall take precedence over data from
other sources.
(Ord. 220, passed 2-13-1991)
§ 1440.09 SPECIFIC BASE FLOOD ELEVATION STANDARDS.
   (a)   On the basis of the most recent available base flood elevation data
the following standards shall apply in the flood hazard area zone:
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest portion of all horizontal structural members
supporting floors, excluding footings, pile caps, piling, non-structural slabs,
girders and grade beams, located at or above the base flood level. All basement
floor surfaces shall be located at or above the base flood level.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-
residential structures shall have either:
         A.   The lowest portion of all horizontal structural members
supporting floors located at or above the base flood level;
         B.   Be constructed such that below base flood level, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect
shall certify that the standards of this division (a)(2)B. are satisfied, and
that the floodproofing methods employed are adequate to withstand the flood
depths, pressures and velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors
associated with a base flood in the location of the structure . Such
certification shall be submitted on the form provided by the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources, and shall indicate the elevation to which the
structure is floodproofed; or
         C.   All basement floor surfaces shall also be located at or above the
base flood level.
   (b)   The most recent base flood elevation data received from the Federal
Insurance Administration shall take precedence over data from other sources.
(Ord. 220, passed 2-13-1991)
§ 1440.10 PREMANUFACTURED UNIT STANDARDS.
   (a)   All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or
lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties in accordance with
the following specifications.
      (1)   Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners on
the structure , with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations,
except that on structures less than 50 feet in length one tie per side shall be
required.
      (2)   Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the structure with
five additional ties per side at intermediate points, except that on structures
less than 50 feet in length four ties per side shall be required.
      (3)   All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying
a force of 4,800 pounds.
      (4)   All additions to premanufactured structure s shall be similarly
anchored.
   (b)   An evacuation plan indicating alternative vehicular access and escape
routes shall be filed with the City Emergency Disaster Coordinator for mobile
home parks and mobile home subdivisions.
   (c)   Mobile homes within Zones A1-30 on the Flood Insurance Rate Map  shall
be located in accordance with the following standards.
      (1)   All mobile homes shall be placed on stands or lots which are
elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile
home will be at or above the base flood level.
      (2)   Adequate surface drainage away from all structures and access for a
mobile home hauler shall be provided.
      (3)   In the instance of elevation on pilings, lots shall be large enough
to permit steps, piling foundations shall be placed on stable soil no more than
ten feet apart. Reinforcement shall be provided for piers more than six feet
above ground level.
      (4)   In mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions which exist at
the time this section is adopted, where repair, reconstruction or improvement
of streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the
streets, utilities and pads before the repair, the standards in divisions (c)
(1), (c)(2) and (c)(3) above shall be complied with.
(Ord. 220, passed 2-13-1991)
§ 1440.11 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES.
   (a)   With regard to the National Flood Insurance Program, and the
regulation of development within the flood hazard area zone as prescribed in §§
1440.05 through
1440.09, the duties of the City Clerk shall include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Notification to adjacent communities and the Department of Natural
Resources of the proposed alteration or relocation of any watercourse, and the
submission of such notifications to the Federal Insurance Administration;
      (2)   Recording of all certificates of floodproofing, and written
notification to all applicants to whom variances are granted in a flood hazard
zone indicating the terms of the variance, the increased danger to life and
property and that the cost of flood insurance will increase commensurate with
the increased flood risk, and may reach amounts in excess of $25 for $100 of
insurance coverage per year. A record of all variance notifications and
variance actions shall be maintained together with the justification for each
variance; and
      (3)   All records pertaining to the Flood Insurance Program.
   (b)   With regard to the National Flood Insurance Program, and the
regulation of development within the flood hazard zone as prescribed in §§
1440.05 through
1440.08, the duties of the Building/Zoning Department shall include, but are
not limited to:
      (1)   Verification and recording of the actual elevation in relation to
mean sea level of the lowest supporting floor member, including the basement,
of all new or substantially improved structures constructed within the hazard
area, and in the case of floodproofed structures, the elevation to which the
structure was floodproofed;
      (2)   All maps pertaining to the National Flood Insurance Program, which
shall be open for public inspection; and
      (3)   To obtain and utilize the best available flood hazard data for
purposes of administering this chapter in the absence of data from the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(Ord. 220, passed 2-13-1991)
§ 1440.12 FLOODWAY PROTECTION STANDARDS.
   (a)   New construction , substantial improvements and all other development
, including fill, shall be prohibited within zones numbered A1-30 on the FIRM,
except where it is demonstrated to the Zoning Administrator that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development , when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development , will not harmfully increase the water surface
elevation of a base flood . In determining whether a harmful increase will
occur, compliance with Public Act 451 of 1994, the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.101 to 324.90106, as
amended, shall be required, provided that the allowable increase shall not
exceed one foot. The provisions of this section shall not apply within the
regulatory floodway . The provisions of division (b) below shall be applied to
land situated within the regulatory floodway .
   (b)   All development occurring within the regulatory floodway  shall comply
with the following standards.
      (1)   Encroachments, including fill, new construction , substantial
improvements and other development , shall be prohibited.
      (2)   The placement of premanufactured units shall be prohibited, except
in mobile home parks and subdivisions which exist at the time this chapter is
adopted.
      (3)   Development or new construction , in the regulatory floodway ,
which may be permitted under the variance provisions of this chapter, shall
also meet the applicable requirements of §§
1440.05 through
1440.10.
   (c)   The uses of land permitted in an underlying zoning district shall not
be construed as being permitted within the regulatory floodway , except upon
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 220, passed 2-13-1991)
§ 1440.13 MAPPING DISPUTES.
   (a)   Where disputes arise as to the location of the flood hazard area
boundary or the limits of the floodway , the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
resolve the dispute and establish the boundary. In all cases, the decision of
the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be based upon the most current flood plain
studies issued by the Federal Insurance Administration. Where Federal Insurance
Administration information is not available, the best available flood plain
information shall be utilized.
   (b)   Where a dispute involves an allegation that the boundary is incorrect
as mapped and Federal Insurance Administration flood plain studies are being
questioned, the Board of Appeals shall modify the boundary of the flood hazard
area or the floodway only upon receipt of an official letter of map amendment
issued by the Federal Insurance Administration.
   (c)   All parties to a map dispute may submit technical evidence to the
Board of Appeals.
(Ord. 220, passed 2-13-1991)
§ 1440.14 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may
be increased by human-made or natural causes such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. Approval of the use of land under this chapter
shall not be considered a guarantee or warranty of safety from flood damage.
This chapter does not imply that areas outside the flood hazard area will be
free from flood damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
(Ord. 220, passed 2-13-1991)
CHAPTER 1456: LICENSING OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDERS
Section
1456.01   Definitions
1456.02   Engaging in business or acting in the capacity of a residential
builder or residential maintenance and alteration contractor or salesperson
without a license
1456.03   Action for collection of compensation for performance of act or
contract; alleging and proving licensure
1456.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   State Construction Code, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 et seq.
§ 1456.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDER. A person engaged in the construction of a residential
structure  or a combination residential and commercial structure who, for a
fixed sum, price, fee, percentage, valuable consideration or other
compensation, other than wages  for personal labor only, undertakes with
another or offers to undertake or purports to have the capacity to undertake
with another, for the erection, construction, replacement, repair or alteration
of, or an addition to, subtraction from, improvement of, wrecking of, or
demolition of, a residential structure  or a combination residential and
commercial structure; a person who manufactures, assembles, constructs, deals
in, or distributes a residential or a combination residential and commercial
structure which is prefabricated, preassembled, precut, packaged or is shell
housing; or a person who erects a residential structure  or a combination
residential and commercial structure, except for the person’s own use and
occupancy on the person’s property .
   RESIDENTIAL MAINTENANCE AND ALTERATION CONTRACTOR. A person who, for a fixed
sum, price, fee, percentage, valuable consideration, or other compensation,
other than wages  for personal labor only, undertakes with another for the
repair of, alteration of, or an addition to, subtraction from, improvement of,
wrecking of, or demolition of a residential structure  or a combination
residential and commercial structure, or the building of a garage, or the
laying of concrete on residential property , or who engages in the purchase,
substantial rehabilitation or improvement and resale of a residential structure
, engaging in that activity on the same structure more than twice in one
calendar  year, except in the following instances:
       (1)   If the work is for the person’s own use and occupancy;
      (2)   If the rehabilitation or improvement work of residential-type
property or a structure is contracted for, with, or hired entirely to be done
and performed for the owner by a person licensed under this chapter; and
      (3)   If work is performed by a person employed by the owner to perform
work for which the person is licensed by the state .
   RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE. A premises  used or intended to be used for a
residence  purpose and related facilities appurtenant to the premises , used or
intended to be used as an adjunct of residential occupancy.
   SALESPERSON. An employee or agent, other than a qualifying officer, of a
licensed residential builder  or residential maintenance and alteration
contractor , who, for a salary, wage, fee, percentage, commission or other
consideration, sells or attempts to sell, negotiates or attempts to negotiate,
solicits for or attempts to solicit for, obtains or attempts to obtain a
contract or commitment for, or furnishes or attempts or agrees to furnish, the
goods and services of a residential builder  or a residential maintenance and
alteration contractor , except a person working for a licensed residential
builder  or a maintenance and alteration contractor who makes sales which are
occasional and incidental to the person’s principal employment.
   WAGES. Money paid or to be paid on an hourly or daily basis by an owner ,
lessor, or occupant  of a residential structure  or a combination residential
and commercial structure as consideration for the performance of personal labor
on the structure by a person who does not perform or promise to perform the
labor for any other fixed sum, price, fee, percentage, valuable consideration,
or other compensation and who does not furnish or agree to furnish the material
or supplies required to be used in the performance of the labor or an act
defined in this section.
(Ord. 242, passed 3-18-1998)
§ 1456.02 ENGAGING IN BUSINESS OR ACTING IN THE CAPACITY OF A RESIDENTIAL
BUILDER OR RESIDENTIAL MAINTENANCE AND ALTERATION CONTRACTOR OR SALESPERSON
WITHOUT A LICENSE.
   A person may engage in the business of or act in the capacity of a
residential builder or a residential maintenance and alteration contractor or
salesperson in this state without having a license, if the person is one of the
following:
   (a)   An authorized representative of the United States government, this
state , or a county , township, city, village or other political subdivision of
this state ;
   (b)   An owner of property , with reference to a structure on the property
for the owner ’s own use and occupancy;
   (c)   An owner of rental property , with reference to the maintenance and
alteration of that rental property ;
   (d)   An officer of a court acting within the terms of the officer’s office;
   (e)   A person other than the salesperson who engages solely in the business
of performing work and services under contract with a residential builder or a
residential maintenance and alteration contractor licensed under this chapter;
   (f)   A person working on one undertaking or project by one or more
contracts, the aggregate contract price for which labor, material, and any
other item is less than $1,200. This exemption does not apply if the work of
construction is only part of a larger or major operation, whether undertaken by
the same or a different residential builder or a residential maintenance and
alteration contractor , or in which a division of the operation is made in
contracts of amounts less than $600, to evade this act;
   (g)   An electrical contractor who is licensed under Public Act 407 of 2016,
as amended, being M.C.L.A.§§ 339.5701 to 339.5739. This exemption applies only
to electrical installation, electrical maintenance, or electrical repair work
performed by the electrical contractor;
   (h)   A plumbing contractor licensed under Public Act 407 of 2016, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 339.6101 to 339.6133. This exemption applies only to
plumbing installation, plumbing maintenance, or plumbing repair work performed
by the plumbing contractor; and
   (i)   A mechanical contractor who is licensed under the Mechanical
Contractors Act. This exemption applies only to mechanical installation,
mechanical maintenance, or mechanical repair work performed by the mechanical
contractor.
(Ord. 242, passed 3-18-1998)
§ 1456.03 ACTION FOR COLLECTION OF COMPENSATION FOR PERFORMANCE OF ACT OR
CONTRACT; ALLEGING AND PROVING LICENSURE.
   A person or qualifying officer for a corporation or member of a residential
builder or a residential maintenance and alteration contractor  shall not bring
or maintain an action in the jurisdiction of this city for the collection of
compensation for the performance of an act or contract for which a license is
required by this chapter without alleging and proving that the person was
licensed under this chapter during the performance of the act or contract, nor
shall any person perform construction as a residential maintenance and
alteration contractor without being licensed under this chapter during the
performance of the act or contract.
(Ord. 242, passed 3-18-1998)
§ 1456.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1460: NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
Section
1460.01   Intent
1460.02   Responsibility of owners
1460.03   Location; exceptions
1460.04   Size, type and color of numbers
1460.05   Multi-family dwellings
1460.06   Maintenance
1460.07   Enforcement by Police Department
1460.99   Penalty
§ 1460.01 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this chapter to safeguard the public health and welfare
by regulating the size and placement of building numbers so that such numbers
are readily visible from the exterior of the building.
(Ord. 130, passed 10-10-1979)
§ 1460.02 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS.
   The owners of all buildings in the city shall cause the correct building
numbers to be placed thereon in the manner specified in this chapter.
(Ord. 130, passed 10-10-1979)
§ 1460.03 LOCATION; EXCEPTIONS.
   The identifying numbers on all buildings shall be placed on, at, or as near
as practical to, the front door, or directly over the garage door, and shall be
facing the street and in such a position as to be readily visible from the
street on which the building fronts. No portion of the numbers shall be less
than three feet from ground level. Exceptions to the location may be granted by
the Building and Zoning Administrator but the same must be done in writing.
(Ord. 130, passed 10-10-1979)
§ 1460.04 SIZE, TYPE AND COLOR OF NUMBERS.
   Building numbers shall be not less than five inches in height and shall be
block letters of a color which contrasts with the immediate background on which
they are mounted.
(Ord. 130, passed 10-10-1979)
§ 1460.05 MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, multi-family
dwellings shall comply with the following:
   (a)   Identification. Multi-family dwellings shall  be identified by one
placard containing the building number and apartment numbers of each family
dwelling in the building. The placard shall be a color which contrasts with the
immediate background on which it is mounted. Multi-family dwellings requiring
more than one placard are described in division (c) below.
   (b)   Location. The identification placard shall  be at least seven feet
above ground level, mounted flush on the building and facing the street  on
which the building fronts.
   (c)   Buildings with four or more family units. A building with four or more
family units shall  have two such placards placed at opposite corners of the
building, which placards shall face the street  on which the building fronts.
   (d)   Numbering. Whenever possible, buildings shall  be numbered instead of
lettered.
(Ord. 130, passed 10-10-1979)
§ 1460.06 MAINTENANCE.
   All numbers and placards shall be maintained in a neat, attractive manner.
(Ord. 130, passed 10-10-1979)
§ 1460.07 ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   The Police Department shall enforce this chapter. Existing structures
shall be required to be in compliance within six months of the adoption of this
chapter.
   (b)   New structures shall be brought into compliance upon completion.
(Ord. 130, passed 10-10-1979)
§ 1460.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1480: SIGNS
Section
1480.01   Purpose and intent
1480.02   Definitions
1480.03   Exempt signs
1480.04   Prohibited signs
1480.05   General requirements for permitted signs, all districts
1480.06   Specific sign requirements
1480.07   Legal nonconforming signs
1480.08   Permits
1480.09   Compliance with Building Code
1480.10   Inspections; maintenance and removal
1480.11   Exceptions
1480.12   Enforcement by the Building Department
1480.13   Interpretation
1480.14   Appeals; duties of Council
1480.15   Costs of enforcement
1480.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Defacing on private property, see M.C.L.A. § 750.385
   Posting without permission, see M.C.L.A. §§ 752.821 et seq.
§ 1480.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The intent of this chapter is to regulate signs, to minimize outdoor
advertising, and to protect public safety, health and welfare; minimize
abundance and size of signs to reduce visual clutter, motorist distraction, and
loss of visibility; promote public convenience; preserve property values; and
enhance the aesthetic appearance and quality of life within the city. The
requirements contained herein are intended to be content neutral. The following
objectives are accomplished by establishing the minimum amount of regulations
necessary concerning the size, placement, construction, illumination and other
aspects of signs in the city in order to:
   (a)   Protect the public right to receive messages and other types of
information protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution;
   (b)   Maintain and improve the image of the city by encouraging signs of
consistent size and rigid materials which are compatible with and complementary
to related buildings and uses, and harmonious with their surroundings;
   (c)   Recognize that the proliferation of signs is unduly distracting to
motorists and non-motorized travelers, reduces the effectiveness of signs
directing and warning the public, causes confusion reduces desired uniform
traffic flow, and creates potential for accidents;
   (d)   Recognize that the principal intent of commercial signs, to meet the
purpose of these requirements and serve the public interest, should be for
identification of an establishment on the premises , and not for advertising
special events, brand names or off-premises activities, as these can be
advertised more appropriately by other methods;
   (e)   Eliminate potential conflicts between business signs and traffic
control signs, which could create confusion and hazardous consequences;
   (f)   Enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities without
excessive difficulty and confusion by restricting the number and placement of
signs;
   (g)   Prevent placement of signs which will conceal or obscure signs of
adjacent uses;
   (h)   Prevent off-premises signs from conflicting with other land uses;
   (i)   Prevent signs that are potentially dangerous to the public due to
structural deficiencies or disrepair; and
   (j)   Limit portable commercial signs in recognition of their significant
negative impact on traffic safety and aesthetics.
(Ord. 1707-01, passed 7-12-2017; Ord. 1906-01, passed 7-24-2019)
§ 1480.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of the following regulations, the following definitions
shall apply:
   ABANDONED SIGN. See OBSOLETE SIGN.
   AWNING OR CANOPY SIGN. A sign affixed flat against the surface of an awning.
An AWNING or CANOPY is a retractable or fixed shelter on a supporting framework
that projects from the exterior wall of a building.
   BANNER SIGN. A sign made of fabric, plastic or other non-rigid material
without an enclosing structural framework.
   BILLBOARD. A sign which contains a message unrelated to a business, activity
or service conducted on the premises , or to a commodity not sold or offered
upon the premises  where such sign is located.
   CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGNS. A sign on which the message is changed
mechanically, electronically or manually, including time/temperature signs.
   CORNER PARCEL. A lot at the intersection of two public streets.
   DAY. For the purpose of these regulations, a calendar  day rather than a
business day.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign which gives directions, instructions or facility
information for the use on the lot on which the sign is located, such as
parking or exit and entrance signs. DIRECTIONAL SIGNS shall  be limited to
traffic control functions.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. A permanently affixed sign which is erected upon or
supported by the ground on one or more poles, uprights or braces with a
mounting structure width less than 50% of the sign face width, including pole
or pylon signs.
   GROUND OR MONUMENT SIGN. A three-dimensional, self-supporting, base-mounted
freestanding sign with a base width that is at least 50% of the sign face
width, consisting of two or more sides extending up from the base.
   GOVERNMENT SIGN. A sign constructed, placed or maintained by the federal,
state  or local government or a sign that is required to be constructed, placed
or maintained by the federal, state  or local government either directly or to
enforce a property  owner ’s rights.
   MARQUEE SIGN. A sign affixed flat against the surface of a marquee. A
MARQUEE is a permanent structure constructed of rigid materials that project
from the exterior wall of a building.
   MOTOR VEHICLE SIGN. A sign measuring more than two square feet in size that
is mounted, placed, written or painted on a vehicle or trailer, whether motor-
driven or not.
   OBSOLETE SIGN. A sign that no longer advertises a valid business, product,
service, activity, owner  or lessor or is vacated for 60 days or a sign support
structure with no signage for more than six months.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. See BILLBOARD SIGN.
   POLE OR PYLON SIGN. See FREESTANDING SIGN.
   PORTABLE SIGN. A sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently
attached to the ground, a structure or a building, including signs with wheels,
A-frame signs, signs mounted on vehicles for advertising purposes, hot-air and
gas filled balloons, pennants, streamers, ribbons, pinwheels, non-governmental
flags and searchlights.
   POSTER PANEL SIGNS. A sign that is located outside of a business on a daily
basis for the purpose of providing the public with information about the
business (e.g., products and services offered, daily specials and the like).
POSTER PANEL SIGNS include sandwich signs and “A” frame signs.
   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign, other than a wall sign, that is affixed to any
building or wall and whose leading edge extends more than 12 inches beyond such
building or wall.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign erected on or above any portion of the roof of a building.
   SIGN. A name, identification, description, display or illustration, which is
affixed to, painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, or
other outdoor surface which directs attention to or is designed or intended to
direct attention to the sign face or to an object, product, place, activity,
person, institution, organization or business. SIGNS located completely within
an enclosed building, and not exposed to view from a street , must not be
considered a sign. Each display surface of a sign or sign face must be
considered to be a sign.
   SIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE. The Planning Commission of the City of Grand Blanc.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign, banner or other advertising device constructed of
cloth, canvas, fabric, plastic or other light temporary material, with or a
without structural frame, that is not permanently attached to the ground or a
structure or any other sign intended for a limited period of display but not
including decorative display for holidays or public demonstration.
   TENANT. An occupant  of land  or premises  who occupies, uses, and enjoys
real property  for a fixed time, usually through a lease arrangement with the
property  owner  and with the owner ’s consent.
   UMBRELLA SIGN. A sign or other advertising printed or otherwise attached to
an umbrella, including umbrellas used in outdoor seating areas.
   WALL SIGN. A sign painted or attached directly to and parallel to the
exterior wall of a building and which projects from that surface less than 12
inches at all points.
   WINDOW SIGN. A sign installed inside a window and intended to be viewed from
the outside.
(Ord. 1707-01, passed 7-12-2017; Ord. 1906-01, passed 7-24-2019; Ord. 2511-01,
passed 12-10-2025)
§ 1480.03 EXEMPT SIGNS.
   The following signs are permitted in all districts on premises with
permission of the landowner without a written sign permit, and provided they
are not located in the public right-of-way or in conflict with the provisions
of §
1480.05(g)(5):
   (a)   Directional signs, not exceeding six square feet in area;
   (b)   Enclosed signs. Any sign that is located completely within a building
and is not visible from the outside;
   (c)   Flags, A flag that has been adopted by the federal government, the
state or the local government may be displayed as provided under the law that
adopts or regulates its use provided there are not more than three flags per
lot and the maximum size of each flag is 50 square feet at a maximum of 30 feet
in height;
   (d)   Legal nonconforming signs existing on the effective date of the
adoption of the chapter. Removal of the sign shall constitute an elimination of
the nonconforming status;
   (e)   Permanent signs on vending machines, gas pumps and ice containers
indicating the contents, provided that the sign on each device does not exceed
three square feet in area a limit of one sign per vending machine, gas pump or
ice container;
   (f)   Public signs of a non-commercial nature and in the public interest,
erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the performance of his or
her public duty, such as safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic
signs, memorial plaques, public awareness signs, public park signs, wayfinding
signs or signs of a historical interest, and the like;
   (g)   Regulatory, directional and street signs erected by a public agency in
compliance with Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices Manual, and
the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards and Michigan Barrier Free Manual;
and
   (h)   Traffic control signs including directional, warning or informational
signs when authorized by a public agency having appropriate jurisdiction which
conforms to the requirements of the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
(Ord. 1707-01, passed 7-12-2017; Ord. 1906-01, passed 7-24-2019; Ord. 2211-01,
passed 12-14-2022)
§ 1480.04 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   Any sign not expressly permitted is prohibited in all districts, including,
but not limited to, the following:
   (a)   Spinners, balloons, strings of light bulbs, rope lights, flashing
lights, pennants, or streamers, other than those of a governmental or
educational institution, or not used for the purpose of commercial
advertisement or attraction, hung overhead to draw attention to a business or
its merchandise on display;
   (b)   Billboards;
   (c)   No sign shall contain any moving or animated parts nor have the
appearance of having any moving or animated parts. No sign shall employ any
flashing, moving, oscillating, blinking or variable intensity light or
intermittent lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic
signals, or police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles, or lights so bright as
to be blinding or distracting to a vehicle driver. However, variable time and
temperature signs may be permitted, provided each message shall not change more
often than once every three seconds;
   (d)   Electronic changeable message signs, unless specifically provided for
elsewhere in this chapter;
   (e)   Signs located in the right-of-way of public streets or highways,
attached to a utility pole, fence or affixed to a tree except as may otherwise
be permitted by this chapter;
   (f)   Obsolete signs;
   (g)   Signs held by pedestrians and intended to advertise a business or
other commercial activity;
   (h)   Pole or pylon signs;
   (i)   Portable signs, except where expressly allowed in this chapter;
   (j)   Any type of signage including logos shall not be permitted on a public
or private radio, television, cellular phone or water towers with the exception
of the name of the municipality ;
   (k)   A sign that would interfere with, mislead, or confuse a vehicle
driver, including signs that simulate or could in any way be confused with the
lighting of emergency vehicles or traffic signals;
   (l)   Any sign which obstructs the ingress or egress from a required door,
window or other required exit;
   (m)   Signs that obstruct any approved traffic control device, road sign, or
signal from view; interfere with site distance necessary for traffic safety; or
distract from visibility of existing traffic signs or devices;
   (n)   Any sign not attached to a building and erected within ten feet of a
fire hydrant;
   (o)   No commercial vehicle may be parked on a business premises or an
industrial lot for a time period exceeding 48 hours for the intended purpose of
advertising a product or serving as a business sign;
   (p)   Any sign or sign structure which:
      (1)   Is structurally unsafe;
      (2)   Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment;
      (3)   Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of blocking
views;
      (4)   Is capable of causing electric shock to a person who comes in
contact with it;
      (5)   Is unlawfully installed, erected or maintained;
      (6)   Is located in public street or utility right-of-way, except where
expressly permitted herein;
      (7)   Is not kept in good repair, such that it has broken parts, missing
letters, non-operational lights or has deteriorated, such that its structural
support or frame or sign panels are visibly bent, broken, dented or torn as to
constitute an unsightly, hazardous or harmful condition; or
      (8)   Does not meet applicable requirements of any adopted city building
code.
   (q)   Any sign installed, erected or maintained on city property , unless
approved and installed or erected by the city;
   (r)   Off-premises signs; and
   (s)   Roof signs.
(Ord. 1707-01, passed 7-12-2017; Ord. 1906-01, passed 7-24-2019)
§ 1480.05 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTED SIGNS, ALL DISTRICTS.
   (a)   Sign location. Unless otherwise provided in these regulations, no
sign, except those established by the city, state  or federal governments shall
be located in, project or overhang into any public right-of-way or dedicated
easement.
   (b)   Measuring sign area.
      (1)   Sign area shall be measured as the square footage of the sign face
and any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the
display or used to differentiate it from the background against which it is
placed.
   Measuring Sign Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/81a4271d56446f11fa2d50dcd7edb998d96b5529/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1937.png]
 
      (2)   When a sign consists solely of lettering or other sign elements
printed, painted or mounted on a window or a wall of a building without any
distinguishing border, panel or background that allow the normal exterior of
the building surface to be visible between the through the letters, the
calculation for sign area shall be measured by using the sum of the area of the
rectangles which would enclose each individual letter or symbol.
      (3)   Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all the faces shall
be included in determining the total area of the sign.
   (c)   Measuring sign height.
      (1)   The permitted height of all signs supported by the ground shall be
measured from the level of the natural grade adjacent to the sign to the
highest point of the sign.
      (2)   The permitted height shall not be measured from an area of ground
that has been built-up or constructed in a manner that has the effect of
allowing a higher sign height than permitted by these regulations (e.g., the
height of signs erected on a berm shall be measured from the finished grade
adjacent to the berm in the manner noted in the illustration).
   Measuring Sign Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/81a4271d56446f11fa2d50dcd7edb998d96b5529/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1939.png]
 
   (d)   Design and construction.
      (1)   Signs shall be designed to be compatible with the building and
landscaping used on the property to promote an overall unified and aesthetic
effect in accordance with the standards set forth herein.
      (2)   Monument signs must be landscaped with a combination of low
shrubbery and perennial/annual plantings.
      (3)   The maximum distance between parallel sign faces on a double-faced
sign shall be 20 inches.
      (4)   Every sign shall be constructed and maintained in a manner
consistent with the building code provisions and maintained in good structural
condition at all times. All signs shall be kept in an attractive appearance and
shall be neatly painted, stained, sealed or preserved including all metal parts
and supports.
      (5)   All signs erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or moved
shall be constructed in such a manner and of such materials so that they meet
the applicable Michigan Building Code.
      (6)   All portable signs shall be constructed and maintained by the owner
in such a manner and of such materials so that they withstand typical
environmental conditions.
   (e)   Illumination.
      (1)   Signs shall be illuminated only by steady, stationary, shielded
light sources directed solely at the sign (i.e., front lighted signs) or
internal to it (i.e., back lighted signs).
      (2)   Lights shall be shaded, shielded or directed so as not to project
onto adjoining properties or thoroughfares.
      (3)   Use of glaring undiffused lights or bulbs shall be prohibited.
Beacon lights are prohibited.
      (4)   Underground wiring shall be required for all illuminated signs not
attached to a building.
      (5)   If illumination is used in any residential district, it shall be
what is known as white and not colored light and must not spill over onto
adjacent properties.
   (f)   Location.
      (1)   Setbacks.
         A.   All signs, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, shall
be set back a minimum of ten feet from any public road right-of-way line. This
distance shall be measured from the nearest edge of the sign, measured at a
vertical line perpendicular to the ground to the right-of-way.
         B.   Side yard setbacks for signs shall be the same as that required
for the main structure or building.
      (2)   Measurement. The following guidelines shall  be used to determine
compliance with setback and distance measurements.
         A.   Two signs. The distance between two signs shall  be measured
along a straight horizontal line that represents the shortest distance between
the two signs.
         B.   Sign and property line. The distance between a sign and a
property  line shall  be measured along a straight horizontal line that
represents the shortest distance between the sign and the property  line.
         C.   Sign and other. The distance between a sign and a parking lot or
building shall  be measured along a straight horizontal line that represents
the shortest distance between the sign and the outer edge of the parking lot or
building.
   (g)   Construction requirements. The following construction requirements
apply to all permanent signs.
      (1)   Fastenings. All signs must be erected in such a manner and with
such materials to remain safe and secure during the period of use. All bolts,
cables and other parts of such signs shall  be kept painted and free from
corrosion. No sign may  be placed upon a tree or utility pole, except signs of
a unit of government or utility.
      (2)   Support location. No pole, cable or support of any nature shall  be
placed on any publicly owned property  road right-of-way, or proposed road
right-of-way.
      (3)   Sign safety.
         A.   All signs shall be erected so that any part including cables,
guys and the like shall have a minimum clearance of four feet from any
electrical conductor, electric light pole, road lamp, traffic light, or other
public utility pole or standard.
         B.   All signs shall be designed to comply with minimum wind pressure
and other requirements set forth in the adopted Building Code. Signs with
electrical connections shall comply with Electrical Code requirements,
including the application, inspection, and approval of an electrical permit.
      (4)   Sanitation. Property  surrounding any ground sign shall  be kept
clean, sanitary and free from obnoxious and offensive substances, free from
weeds, rubbish, and flammable material.
      (5)   Safety triangle. No sign shall  be located within, project into, or
overhang the triangular area formed at the intersection of any two road right-
of-way lines (existing or proposed) by a straight line drawn between said
right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of
intersection.
(Ord. 1707-01, passed 7-12-2017; Ord. 1906-01, passed 7-24-2019)
§ 1480.06 SPECIFIC SIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   The following requirements apply to permitted signs in all districts.
 
Type of     Districts  Max.       Max. Size  Max.     Permit   Additional
Sign        Permitted  Height     (square    Number   Required Requirements
                       (ft.)      feet)
                       Bottom of                               Area of awning
                       awning or                               sign counts
                       canopy     See size                     towards
                       must be at allowed                      permitted wall
Awnings and All        least 8    for wall   1 per    Yes      sign area;
Canopies               feet above signs in   parcel            lettering may
                       ground     division                     cover maximum
                       level or   (b) below                    of 1/3 of
                       sidewalk                                canopy or
                                                               awning
                                                               Banners
                                                               spanning a
                                                               public right-
                                                               of-way must be
                                                               approved by
                                                               City Council;
                                                               such signs
                                             2 per             shall not be
Banner      All        -          32 sq. ft. calendar Yes      erected or
                                             year              displayed more
                                                               than a
                                                               cumulative
                                                               total of 60
                                                               days in any
                                                               calendar year,
                                                               nor more than
                                                               30 consecutive
                                                               days
                                                               A directional
                                                               sign may
                                                               contain a logo
Directional                                                    of an on-
Signs       All        4 ft.      6 sq. ft.  -        No       premises
                                                               establishment,
                                                               but no
                                                               advertising
                                                               copy.
            OS-1, B-l,                                         Limited to
Portable    B-2, B-3,                                          total display
Signs       R-P, I-1,  6 ft.      32 sq. ft. 1        Yes      period of 90
            I-2, P-1                                           days, in any
                                                               calendar year
            R-l, R-2,                                          The sign is
Temporary   R- 3, R-T,                                         permitted up
Signs       LDMF,      6 ft.      6 sq. ft.           No       to 60 days, in
            HDMF, MHP                                          any calendar
                                                               year
            OS-1, B-l,                                         The sign is
Temporary   B-2, B-3,                                          permitted up
Signs       R-P, I-1,  10 ft.     32 sq. ft.          No       to 60 days, in
            I-2, P-1                                           any calendar
                                                               year
 
   (b)   Each lot or parcel is permitted one of the following sign options:
 
Type of Sign Districts      Max. Height  Max. Size      Permit   Additional
             Permitted      (ft)         (square feet)  Required Requirements
                                                                 The sign to be
                                                                 located at
                                                                 minimum
                                                                 setback
                                                                 required for
                                                                 main
Ground/      R-l, R-2, R-3,                                      buildings, a
Monument     R-T, LDMF,     5 ft.        24 sq. ft.     Yes      minimum of 20
Signs        HDMF, MHP                                           ft. setback
                                                                 from an
                                                                 adjacent
                                                                 residential
                                                                 lot, and
                                                                 located along
                                                                 a public
                                                                 right-of-way
                                                                 The sign is to
Ground/      OS-1, B-l, B-                                       be a minimum
Monument     2, B-3, R-P,   6 ft.        40 sq. ft.     Yes      of 15 ft. from
Signs        I-1, I-2, P-1                                       side or rear
                                                                 lot line
                                         Shall not               Wall signs
             R-l, R-2, R-3,              exceed 10% of           shall not
Wall Signs   R-T, LDMF,     -            wall surface   Yes      extend beyond
             HDMF, MHP                   or 36 sq. ft.,          the wall in
                                         whichever is            any direction.
                                         smaller
                                         Shall not               Wall signs
             OS-1, B-l, B-               exceed 10% of           shall not
Wall Signs   2, B-3, R-P,   -            wall surface   Yes      extend beyond
             I-1, I-2, P-1               or 80 sq. ft.,          the wall in
                                         whichever is            any direction
                                         smaller
 
   (c)   The following table summarizes regulations for permanent non-
residential signs in downtown Grand Blanc, on property  zoned central business
district overlay.
 
Type of Sign  Maximum Area  Height        Illumination  Number         Permit
                                                        Permitted      Required
Poster Panel
Signs         7 sq. ft. per 3.5 ft.
(Sandwich     side; 14 sq.  maximum       Not permitted 1 per tenant   No
signs, A-     ft. total
frames)
                                                        1 per tenant;
                                                        a second sign
                                                        is permitted
              10 sq. ft.    Minimum 8                   for a tenant
Projecting    per side; 20  feet above    Permitted     on a corner    Yes
Signs         sq. ft. total ground level                lot; area of
                            or sidewalk                 sign counts
                                                        towards
                                                        permitted wall
                                                        sign area
Rear Entry    10 sq. ft.    -             Permitted     1 per tenant   Yes
Signs
                            i) must not
              70% of the    exceed height
              marquee       of marquee
Marquee Signs structure, up structure     Permitted     1 per parcel   Yes
              to maximum of ii) at least
              100 sq. ft.   8 feet above
                            ground level
                            or sidewalk
 
   (d)   Specific sign regulations.
      (1)   Wall signs.
         A.   One wall sign shall be permitted per street frontage on each
parcel.
         B.   If a lot or parcel has more than one tenant , one wall sign shall
be permitted for each tenant having an individual means of public access that
shall not exceed 10% of the tenant portion of the building facade or 80 square
feet, whichever is smaller. Tenants occupying a corner space in a multi-tenant
structure on a site with multiple street frontages shall be permitted to have
one sign on each side of the building fronting a public right-of-way with a
maximum size of the two signs combined being 10% of the tenant portion of
either street facing facade, not both, or 80 square feet, whichever is smaller.
         C.   Where several tenants share a common entrance in a multi-tenant
structure, only one wall sign shall be permitted, with the total permitted sign
area being allocated among the tenants.
      (2)   Ground/ monument signs.
         A.   If a lot or parcel has more than one tenant , one ground sign
shall be permitted in addition to one wall sign per each tenant having an
individual means of public access.
         B.   A 10% increase in the maximum permitted monument sign area is
permitted if extensive landscaping and a decorative brick base consistent with
the materials of the principal building are provided.
      (3)   Awnings and canopies.
         A.   Awnings or canopies may project a maximum of six feet into the
public right-of-way. In no case shall the awning or canopy be less than three
feet from any street curb line.
         B.   Any lettering or logos on the awning or canopy shall be included
within the calculation of total permitted wall sign area.
         C.   Awnings and canopies shall not be illuminated or backlit.
However, building mounted lighting may illuminate the area above or below the
awning or canopy.
      (4)   Poster panel signs (i.e., sandwich signs, A-frame signs). Poster
panel signs, including sandwich signs and “A” frame signs, shall  be permitted
subject to the following.
         A.   The sign shall be located so that at least a five-foot wide
sidewalk is maintained between the sign and the building wall for pedestrian
traffic flow, safety and to maintain ADA compliance.
         B.   The sign is permitted only during operating business hours and
must be stored inside when the business is not open.
         C.   The sign shall be kept neatly painted, printed, stained, sealed,
protected or preserved including all metal parts and supports.
         D.   All portable signs shall be constructed and maintained by the
owner in such a manner and of such materials so that they withstand typical
environmental conditions.
      (5)   Projecting signs. Projecting signs are permitted subject to the
following.
         A.   Signs shall be illuminated only by steady, stationary, shielded
light sources directed solely at the sign. Use of glaring undiffused lights or
bulbs shall be prohibited.
         B.   Projecting signs may project a maximum of four feet into the
public right-of-way. In no case, shall the projecting sign be less than three
feet from any street curb line.
      (6)   Menu board signs.
         A.   Restaurants with drive-through service may have up to two menu
board signs for each drive-through lane.
         B.   The maximum height for such signs shall be eight feet and the
total area allowed for each drive-through lane shall not exceed 40 square feet.
         C.   Where such signs are not visible from a public street , they may
include electronic changeable messages; however, such messages shall not blink,
flash or contain videos or movements. Furthermore, the illumination of such
signs shall be shaded, shielded, directed or screened such that the light
intensity or brightness will not be objectionable to adjacent properties.
         D.   A sign permit shall be required.
(Ord. 1707-01, passed 7-12-2017; Ord. 1906-01, passed 7-24-2019; Ord. 2211-01,
passed 12-14-2022)
§ 1480.07 LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (a)   Legal nonconforming signs shall comply with this chapter when a change
in ownership, tenancy, business or organization occurs on the premises where
the sign is located, or when the advertising on the sign changes to denote a
change in ownership, tenancy, business or organization.
   (b)   Legal nonconforming signs which are removed, blown down, destroyed,
relocated, damaged or altered, or which are subject to a change of ownership,
shall be required to conform with this chapter.
   (c)   Prohibited signs (§
1480.04) shall be removed within six months of the effective date of this
chapter (Ordinance 213, passed April 11, 1990) by the owner or lessee, or the
Building Department representative shall cause the removal of such signs and
assess the owners and/or lessees of such signs and/or the owners of the
property on which such signs are located, the costs of removal.
   (d)   A tenant or land  owner cannot apply for a new sign permit on a parcel
with an existing nonconforming sign without first correcting the existing
nonconforming sign.
(Ord. 1707-01, passed 7-12-2017; Ord. 1906-01, passed 7-24-2019)
§ 1480.08 PERMITS.
   (a)   Required. No sign shall  be erected, structurally altered or
relocated, nor shall any sign which is blown down, destroyed, damaged or
removed be re-erected, without a permit issued by the Building Department
representative, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Where electrical
permits are required, they shall be obtained at the same time as the sign
permit.
   (b)   Applications. The permit application shall  contain the proposed
location of the sign structure, the name and address of the sign owner  and of
the sign erector, the name and address of the owner  of the business and of the
property  if different from that of the sign owner , drawings and/or sketches
showing the design and location of the sign, the estimated cost of construction
and such other pertinent information as the Building Department representative
may  require to ensure compliance with this chapter and with other ordinances
of the city.
   (c)   Fees. All sign fees shall  be regulated by Council, by resolution, at
a regularly scheduled Council meeting. Such resolution may  from time to time,
be amended pursuant to the governing rules of Council.
   (d)   Nullification. A sign permit shall  become null and void if the work
for which the permit was issued has not been completed within six months after
the date of the permit.
   (e)   Exceptions. The following operations shall not be considered as
creating a sign and, therefore, shall not require a sign permit:
      (1)   Changeable message signs. The changing of the message on an
approved changeable sign, on a theater marquee and on similar approved signs
which are specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy; and
      (2)   Maintenance. Painting, repainting, cleaning or other normal
maintenance or repair of a sign or a sign structure, unless a structural change
is made.
   (f)   Certificate of compliance. All permanent sign permits that are also
considered building permits shall  require a final inspection and the issuance
of a certificate of compliance from the Building Department.
(Ord. 1707-01, passed 7-12-2017; Ord. 1906-01, passed 7-24-2019)
§ 1480.09 COMPLIANCE WITH BUILDING CODE.
   All signs shall comply with the pertinent requirements of the city’s legally
adopted Building Code, as amended from time to time, except as modified in this
chapter.
(Ord. 1707-01, passed 7-12-2017; Ord. 1906-01, passed 7-24-2019)
§ 1480.10 INSPECTIONS; MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL.
   (a)   Inspections. Signs for which a permit is required may  be inspected
periodically by the Building Department representative for compliance with this
chapter and with other ordinances of the city.
   (b)   Maintenance. All signs and components thereof shall  be kept in good
repair and in safe, neat, clean and attractive condition.
   (c)   Removal. The Building Department representative may  order the removal
of any permanent sign and its supporting structure erected or maintained in
violation of this chapter. He or she shall  give 30 days’ notice, in writing,
to the owner  of such sign, or of the building, structure or premises  on which
such sign is located, to remove the sign and its supporting structure or bring
it into compliance. Any sign erected of a temporary nature shall require
written notice of only three days. Upon failure to comply with this notice, the
Building Department representative may remove the sign and its supporting
structure. The Building Department representative may remove a sign and its
supporting structure immediately and without notice if, in his or her opinion,
the condition of the sign and its supporting structure is such as to present an
immediate threat to the safety of the public. The cost of such removal by the
city shall be assessed against the owner  of such sign or the owner  of the
building, structure or premises .
   (d)   Abandoned signs. An abandoned sign and its supporting structure shall
be removed by the property  owner  or lessee of the premises  upon which the
sign is located. If the property  owner  or lessee fails to remove it within 60
days of the date the business becomes inactive, the Building Department
representative may  give the property  owner  30 days’ written notice to remove
it. Upon failure to comply with this notice, the Building Department
representative may remove the sign and its supporting structure at cost to the
property  owner . Where a successor to an inactive business agrees, within 30
days of the date of written notice by the Building Department representative to
maintain the sign as provided in this code, this removal requirement shall not
apply, provided that the existing sign and structure meets all current sign
codes.
(Ord. 1707-01, passed 7-12-2017; Ord. 1906-01, passed 7-24-2019)
§ 1480.11 EXCEPTIONS.
   Businesses without street frontage: if an applicant has no street frontage
for his or her lot or parcel, the Building Department representative, upon
request, may allow the applicant one additional sign which shall be on the
nearest major street , conditioned upon the applicant obtaining written
permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is to be erected
prior to the presentation of the application. The size of this sign may not
exceed 12 square feet if projecting or 40 square feet if ground/monument or
wall.
(Ord. 1707-01, passed 7-12-2017; Ord. 1906-01, passed 7-24-2019)
§ 1480.12 ENFORCEMENT BY THE BUILDING DEPARTMENT.
   The Building Department is hereby authorized and directed to enforce this
chapter. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Department
representative may enter, at reasonable times, any building, structure or
premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon him or her by this
chapter.
(Ord. 1707-01, passed 7-12-2017; Ord. 1906-01, passed 7-24-2019)
§ 1480.13 INTERPRETATION.
   Where there is any ambiguity or dispute concerning the interpretation of
this chapter, the decision of the Building Department representative shall
prevail, subject to an appeal as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 1707-01, passed 7-12-2017; Ord. 1906-01, passed 7-24-2019)
§ 1480.14 APPEALS; DUTIES OF COUNCIL.
   (a)   Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Building
Department representative may appeal to the Sign Review Committee by serving
written notice, and by paying the fee for appeals. The fee for appeals shall be
as established from time to time by Council. A public hearing shall then be
conducted at the next available meeting of the Committee. The Building
Department representative shall take no further action on the matter pending
the Committee’s decision, except in the case of an unsafe sign which presents
an immediate and serious danger to the public, as provided elsewhere in this
chapter.
   (b)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Committee may appeal to
Council by serving written notice to the Building Department and by paying the
appeal fee established by resolution of Council from time to time. The Building
Department shall , in turn, immediately transmit the notice to Council which
shall meet to hear the appeal within 30 days thereafter. The Building
Department shall take no further action on the matter pending Council’s
decision, except in the case of an unsafe sign which presents an immediate and
serious danger to the public, as provided elsewhere in this chapter.
   (c)   Council shall hold public hearings on all appeals and shall permit all
interested persons to offer oral or written testimony. After the close of the
hearing, Council, by a majority vote, is hereby authorized to affirm, annul or
modify the order or action of the Sign Review Committee.
   (d)   The following criteria shall be used to evaluate such requests:
      (1)   Variances may be granted for any one of the following conditions:
         A.   The applicant has demonstrated that a variance is needed due to a
practical difficulty on the site, such as varied topography, horizontal or
vertical road curvature, or the presence of structures or desired trees that
limit visibility of a sign on the premises compared to similar sites with
conforming signs in the same zoning district;
         B.   A variance is warranted due to the relatively large size of the
site, frontage or building in comparison to other establishments in the same
district; or
         C.   A variance would significantly improve the conformity of an
existing sign.
      (2)   Provided one of the conditions above is met, all of the following
criteria must be met to grant a variance:
         A.   The inability to conform to the provisions of this chapter is due
to a practical difficulty that includes more than mere inconvenience or mere
inability to attain a supposed higher financial return;
         B.   The variance granted is the minimum necessary to allow the
applicant to enjoy the same rights as other establishments in the same zoning
district, have a reasonable outlet for free speech and meet the intent of this
chapter; and
         C.   The variance will not adversely affect the health, safety and
welfare of the public.
(Ord. 1707-01, passed 7-12-2017; Ord. 1906-01, passed 7-24-2019)
§ 1480.15 COSTS OF ENFORCEMENT.
   Any costs or expenses incurred by the city in enforcing this chapter shall
be paid by the owner of the sign found to be in violation of this chapter, or,
upon default thereof, by the owner of the property upon which the sign is
located, if different from the owner of the sign. Upon failure of the owner of
the sign or the owner of the property to reimburse the city for costs and
expenses incurred in such enforcement, the owner of the property shall be
billed for such cost and expenses in the same manner as other taxes.
(Ord. 1707-01, passed 7-12-2017; Ord. 1906-01, passed 7-24-2019)
§ 1480.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
(Ord. 1707-01, passed 7-12-2017; Ord. 1906-01, passed 7-24-2019)
CHAPTER 1484: SMOKE DETECTORS
Editor's note:
   Chapter 1484 was repealed by Ordinance 2305-02, passed June 14, 2023.
CHAPTER 1486: TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS AND SERVICES
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, formerly a codification of Ordinance passed September 22,
1999, was repealed and re-enacted in its entirety upon the adoption of
Ordinance 02-02, passed October 9, 2002, codified herein.
Section
1486.01   Purpose
1486.02   Conflict
1486.03   Definitions
1486.04   Permit required
1486.05   Issuance of permit
1486.06   Construction/engineering permit
1486.07   Conduit or utility poles
1486.08   Route maps
1486.09   Repair of damage
1486.10   Establishment and payment of maintenance fee
1486.11   Modification of existing fees
1486.12   Savings clause
1486.13   Use of funds
1486.14   Annual report
1486.15   Cable television operators
1486.16   Existing rights
1486.17   Compliance
1486.18   Reservation of police powers
1486.19   Authorized city officials
1486.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Cables improperly located; insurance, see M.C.L.A. § 500.3123
   Construction and maintenance of facilities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 247.183 et seq.
   Television and radio generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.507 et seq.
§ 1486.01 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use of
public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002) (being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101 et seq., and
as further defined below, as the“Act”) and other applicable law , and to ensure
that the city qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees
charged to providers and complying with the Act .
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.02 CONFLICT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict
with the Act or other applicable law .
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.03 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
      ACT. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002), being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
      CITY. The City of Grand Blanc.
      CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Grand Blanc or its
designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or
function that is required by law  to be made by the City Council.
      CITY MANAGER. The City Manager  or his or her designee.
      PERMIT. A non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act  and this
chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the
city  for its telecommunications facilities .
   (b)   All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as
defined or as provided in the Act , including without limitation the following:
      AUTHORITY. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Authority created pursuant to § 3 of the Act .
      MPSC. The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of
Consumer and Industry Services, and shall  have the same meaning as the term
“Commission” in the Act .
      PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity or any other legal entity.
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area, on, below, or above a public roadway,
highway, street , alley, easement or waterway. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY does not
include a federal, state  or private right-of-way.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES or FACILITIES. The equipment or personal
property , such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits,
pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit,
carry, amplify or provide telecommunication services  or signals.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or facilities do not include antennas, supporting
structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary
equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed
commercial mobile service as defined in § 332(d) of Part I of Title III of the
Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. § 332 and
further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. part 20.3, and
service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device.
      TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDER, PROVIDER and TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES.
Those terms as defined in § 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public
Act 179 of 1991, being M.C.L.A. § 484.2102. TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDER does not
include a person  or an affiliate of that person  when providing a federally
licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in § 332(d) of Part I of
the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stats. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and
further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. part 20.3, or
service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose
of the Act  and this chapter only, a provider also includes all of the
following:
         A.   A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications
service;
         B.   Except as otherwise provided by the Act , a person who owns
telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way ; and
         C.   A person providing broadband internet transport access service.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (a)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act , a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the
city  for its telecommunications facilities  shall  apply for and obtain a
permit  pursuant to this chapter.
   (b)   Application. Telecommunications providers shall  apply for a permit
on an application forth approved by the MPSC  in accordance with § 6(1) of the
Act . A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with
the City Clerk, one copy with the City Manager  and one copy with the City
Attorney. Upon receipt, the City Clerk shall make one additional copy of the
application and distribute a copy to the Mayor. Applications shall be complete
and include all information required by the Act , including without imitation a
route map showing the location of the provider’s existing and proposed
facilities in accordance with § 6(5) of the Act .
   (c)   Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that
any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application
contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt
froth the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§
15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to § 6(5) of the Act , the telecommunications
provider shall  prominently so indicate on the face of each map.
   (d)   Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act , the
application shall  be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee
in the amount of $500.
   (e)   Additional information. The City Manager  may  request an applicant to
submit such additional information which the City Manager  deems reasonably
necessary or relevant. The applicant shall  comply with all such requests in
compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information
established by the City Manager . If the city  and the applicant cannot agree
on the requirement of additional information requested by the city , the city
or the applicant shall notify the MPSC  as provided in § 6(2) of the Act .
   (f)   Previously issued permits. Pursuant to § 5(1) of the Act , being
M.C.L.A. § 484.3105(1), authorizations or permits previously issued by the city
under § 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991,
M.C.L.A. § 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the city  to
telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of § 251 of the
Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall  satisfy the permit
requirements of this chapter.
   (g)   Existing providers. Pursuant to § 5(3) of the Act , within 180 days
from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act , a telecommunications
provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way  in the city  as of
such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit  under §
251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991, being
M.C.L.A. § 484.2251, shall  submit to the city  an application for a permit  in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to § 5(3) of the Act
, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this division
(g) is not required to pay the $500 application fee required under division (d)
above. A provider under this division (g) shall be given up to an additional
180 days to submit the permit  application if allowed by the Authority , as
provided in § 5(4) of the Act .
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.05 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (a)   Approval or denial. The authority  to approve or deny an application
for a permit  is hereby delegated to the City Manager . Pursuant to § 15(3) of
the Act , the City Manager  shall  approve or deny an application for a permit
within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application
for a permit  under §
1486.04(b) of this chapter for access to a public right-of-way  within the
city. Pursuant to § 6(6) of the Act , the City Manager  shall notify the MPSC
when the City Manager  has granted or denied a permit , including information
regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which
permit  was granted or denied. The City Manager  shall not unreasonably deny an
application for a permit .
   (b)   Form of permit. If an application for permit  is approved, the City
Manager  shall  issue the permit  in the form approved by the MPSC , with or
without additional or different permit  terms, in accordance with §§ 6(1), 6(2)
and 15 of the Act .
   (c)   Conditions. Pursuant to § 15(4) of the Act , the City Manager  may
impose conditions on the issuance of a permit , which conditions shall  be
limited to the telecommunications provider’s access and usage of the public
right-of-way .
   (d)   Bond requirement. Pursuant to § 15(3) of the Act , and without
limitation of division (c) above, the City Manager  may  require that a bond be
posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit . If a
bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the
public right-of-way  is returned to its original condition during and after the
telecommunications provider’s access and use.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.06 CONSTRUCTION/ENGINEERING PERMIT.
   A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over,
across or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a
construction or engineering permit as required under this code, as amended, for
construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such
a construction or engineering permit.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.07 CONDUIT OR UTILITY POLES.
   Pursuant to § 4(3) of the Act , obtaining a permit or paying the fees
required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a telecommunications
provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.08 ROUTE MAPS.
   Pursuant to § 6(7) of the Act , a telecommunications provider shall , within
90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new
telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the
location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city.
The route maps should be in paper format unless and until the Commission
determines otherwise, in accordance with § 6(8) of the Act .
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.09 REPAIR OF DAMAGE.
   Pursuant to § 15(5) of the Act , a telecommunications provider undertaking
an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities
within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way
in the city, as authorized by a permit , shall promptly repair all damage done
to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the
public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its
pre-existing condition.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.10 ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE FEE.
   In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set forth
in §
1486.04(d) of this chapter, a telecommunications provider with
telecommunications facilities in the city’s public rights-of- way shall pay an
annual maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to § 8 of the Act .
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.11 MODIFICATION OF EXISTING FEES.
   In compliance with the requirements of § 13(1) of the Act , the city hereby
modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications
providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act , relating to
access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the
amounts of fees and charges required under the Act , which shall be paid to the
Authority . In compliance with the requirements of § 13(4) of the Act , the
city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with
telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city’s
boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under section
if of the Act . The city shall provide each telecommunications provider
affected by the fee with a copy of this chapter in compliance with the
requirement of § 13(4) of the Act . To the extent any fees are charged
telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act ,
or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act , such imposition is hereby
declared to be contrary to the city’s policy and intent, and upon application
by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having
been charged in error.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.12 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   Pursuant to § 13(5) of the Act , if § 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or
unconstitutional, the modification of fees under §
1486.11 of this chapter shall be void from the date the modification was made.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.13 USE OF FUNDS.
   Pursuant to § 10(4) of the Act , all amounts received by the city from the
Authority  shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes.
In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the
Authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or the Local Street
Fund maintained by the city under Public Act 51 of 1951, being M.C.L.A. 247.651
to 247.675.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.14 ANNUAL REPORT.
   Pursuant to § 10(5) of the Act , the City Manager  shall file an annual
report with the Authority on the use and disposition of funds annually
distributed by the Authority .
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.15 CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS.
   Pursuant to § 13(6) of the Act , the city shall not hold a cable television
operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an
obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this
Act , a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from
charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through
broadband internet transport access services.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.16 EXISTING RIGHTS.
   Pursuant to § 4(2) of the Act , except as expressly provided herein with
respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that a
telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the
city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider
related to the use of the public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.17 COMPLIANCE.
   The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this chapter
is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act , and the provisions hereof
should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall
comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act , including but not
limited to the following:
   (a)   Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act,
Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in §
1486.04(c) of this chapter;
   (b)   Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit
requirements hereof, in accordance with §
1486.04(f) of this chapter;
   (c)   Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an
application for a permit , and excusing such providers from the $500
application fee, in accordance with §
1486.04(g) of this chapter;
   (d)   Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from
the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for
access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance
with §
1486.05(a) of this chapter;
   (e)   Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit , in
accordance with §
1486.05(a) of this chapter;
   (f)   Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit , in accordance
with §
1486.05(a) of this chapter;
   (g)   Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC , with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in §
1486.05(b) of this chapter;
   (h)   Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the
telecommunications provider’s access and usage of the public right-of-way , in
accordance with §
1486.05(c) of this chapter;
   (i)   Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds
the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its
original condition during and after the telecommunication provider ’s access
and use, in accordance with §
1486.05(d) of this chapter;
   (j)   Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for
construction or engineering permits, in accordance with §
1486.06 of this chapter;
   (k)   Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city’s
right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with §
1486.11 of this chapter;
   (l)   Submitting an annual report to the Authority , in accordance with §
1486.14 of this chapter; and
   (m)   Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to
pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with §
1486.15 of this chapter.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.18 RESERVATION OF POLICE POWERS.
   Pursuant to § 15(2) of the Act , this chapter shall not limit the city’s
right to review and approve a telecommunication provider ’s access to and
ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city’s authority to ensure
and protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.19 AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.
   The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the
authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations
(directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction
violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal
chapter violations bureau) for violations under this chapter as provided by the
city code.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
§ 1486.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for
a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less
than $500 and not more than $5,000, plus costs and other sanctions, for each
infraction. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate infraction.
   (b)   Repeat offenses under this chapter shall be subject to increased fines
as follows:
      (1)   First repeat offense. Not less than $1,000 and not more than
$10,000; and
      (2)   Second and subsequent repeat offense. Not less than $2,000 and not
more than $20,000.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 10-9-2002)
CHAPTER 1488: BLIGHT
Section
1488.01   Purpose
1488.02   Definitions
1488.03   Prohibited conduct
1488.04   Enforcement
1488.99   Penalty
§ 1488.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to prevent, reduce or eliminate blight in
the city by the prevention or elimination or contributing factors and causes of
blight which exist or which may in the future exist in the city.
(Ord. 06-02, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 1488.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words or terms, when used herein, shall be deemed to have the
meanings set forth below:
   BLIGHTED STRUCTURE. Any dwelling, garage, accessory or outbuilding, or any
factory, shop, store, office building, warehouse or any other structure or part
of a structure which:
      (1)   Because of fire, wind, other natural disaster or physical
deterioration, is no longer habitable as a dwelling or useful for the purpose
for which it was originally intended;
      (2)   Is partially completed and which is not presently being constructed
under an existing, valid building permit issued by or under the authority of
the city;
      (3)   Is not structurally sound, weathertight, waterproof or vermin-
proof; or
      (4)   Is not covered by a water resistant paint or other waterproof
covering so as to protect said structure from the adverse effects of the
elements or from physical deterioration.
   BUILDING MATERIAL. Any lumber, bricks, concrete, cinder blocks, plumbing
materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment,
shingles, mortar, cement, nails, screws or other materials commonly used in the
construction or repair of any buildings or structures.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A Grand Blanc City police officer.
   JUNK. Any abandoned, discarded, unusable objects or equipment, any object or
equipment unused for its originally intended purpose, including, but not
limited to, furniture, stove, refrigerators, freezers, cans, implements,
watercraft, parts of motor vehicles, machinery, cloth, rubber, bottles, any
metals, boxes, cartons or crates.
   PERSON. Any natural person, firm, association, partnership, limited
liability company or corporation.
   UNSECURED VACANT BUILDING. Any building which is unoccupied and which is not
securely locked, the windows glazed or of which is not securely boarded up and
protected against the elements, from vandals, and from rodents and/or other
animals.
(Ord. 06-02, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 1488.03 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   Except as may otherwise be permitted by the holding of a specific business
license or by other ordinances of the city or state or federal law , no person
in the city shall :
   (a)   Store, accumulate or permit the storage or accumulation of junk on
premises owned, leased, rented, or occupied by him or her unless such junk is
stored or accumulated for the purposes of collection and disposal, in which
case such junk shall be stored or accumulated in a closed container, if
possible, or in a closed structure. If it is impossible to store or accumulate
such junk in a closed container or closed structure, such junk shall be covered
in a manner sufficient to prevent such materials from causing dust and debris
to be blown about or spread to other areas. Junk may be stored or accumulated
in such manner only for the minimum period necessary to provide for collection
and disposal of same;
   (b)   Store, accumulate or permit the storage or accumulation of any
building materials on property owned, leased, rented or occupied by him or her
for any period longer than reasonably necessary for the immediate use of such
materials, but in no event longer than 60 days;
   (c)   Keep or permit the existence of any unsecured vacant building on
property owned, leased, rented or occupied by him or her; or
   (d)   Keep or permit the existence of any blighted structure on property
owned, leased, rented or occupied by him or her.
(Ord. 06-02, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 1488.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   Before commencing prosecution under this chapter, the enforcement officer
shall give notice to the person charged with violating this chapter. Such
notice shall be in writing, and shall be served upon said person or, at the
option of the enforcement officer, by posting a copy of this notice on the land
or attaching a copy of the notice to the building or structure. In addition, a
copy of the notice shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land ,
building or structure at the owner ’s last known address. The notice shall
specify that failure to remedy the violation within ten days of the date of
personal service or 12 days from the date of mailing shall result in the
issuance of a misdemeanor citation.
(Ord. 06-02, passed 6-14-2006)
§ 1488.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order
served in accordance with §
1488.04 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to 90 days in
jail and/or a fine up to $500, or both. Each day that a violation continues
after notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (b)   The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude
the City Attorney or other legal officer of the city from instituting
appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent
illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises , or to stop an illegal
act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises .
(Ord. 06-02, passed 6-14-2006)
TITLE SIX: HOUSING
      
Chap. 1490. Supplied Facilities, Maintenance and Occupancy of Dwellings and
Dwelling Units. (Repealed)
CHAPTER 1490: SUPPLIED FACILITIES, MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY
OF DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 1490 was repealed by Ordinance 04-06, passed January 12, 2005. See
Chapter 1414 for current Property Maintenance Code provisions.
PART SIXTEEN: FIRE PREVENTION CODE
      
Chap. 1610. International Fire Code.
      
Chap. 1612. Interference with Fire Suppression Forces; Emergencies.
      
Chap. 1614. Fireworks.
      
Chap. 1616. Open Burning and Recreational Fires.
CHAPTER 1610: INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, formerly titled “BOCA National Fire Prevention Code”, a
codification of Ordinance 239, passed January 8, 1997, was repealed in its
entirety and re-titled “International Fire Code” upon the adoption of Ordinance
01-02, passed August 8, 2001, codified herein. Ordinance 01-02 was repealed in
its entirety by Ordinance 05-02, passed August 10, 2005, codified herein.
Section
1610.01   Adoption of code
1610.02   Amendments
1610.03   Storage limits established
1610.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Fires and fire protection generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 29.1 et seq., 125.401
et seq., 750.240 et seq.
§ 1610.01 ADOPTION OF CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Clerk of the city, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code,
2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Fire Code of the City of Grand Blanc, in the State of Michigan,
regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and
explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Fire Code on file in the office of the Clerk of the city are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
1610.02.
(Ord. 05-02, passed 8-10-2005; Ord. 12-02, passed 6-13-2012)
§ 1610.02 AMENDMENTS.
   (a)   The International Fire Code, as adopted in Section 1610.01, is hereby
revised as follows:
      Section 101.1 Insert: City of Grand Blanc.
      Section 109.3 Insert: Misdemeanor, five hundred dollars ($500.00), 90
days.
      Section 111.4 Insert: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
   (b)   All inspections and maintenance reports required to be furnished to
the Fire Department by the code shall be electronically forwarded to the Fire
Department using the designated online reporting system approved by the fire
code official or authority having jurisdiction (AHJ). Any company doing
inspection and maintenance (as well as all occupancies that have a fire
protection system installed) shall be required to register with the designated
online reporting system.
(Ord. 05-02, passed 8-10-2005; Ord. 12-02, passed 6-13-2012; Ord. 1601-04,
passed 4-13-2016)
§ 1610.03 STORAGE LIMITS ESTABLISHED.
   The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2003
International Fire Code, as adopted in §
1610.01, are hereby established as follows:
Section 3204.3.1.1 (geographic limits in which the storage of flammable
cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited): Zoning Districts R-1,
R-2, R-3, R-T, LDMF, HDMF and MH.
Section 3404.2.9.5.1 (geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and
Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited):
Zoning Districts R-1, R-2, R-3, R-T, LDMF, HDMF and MH.
Section 3406.2.4.4 (geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class
II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited): Zoning Districts R-1, R-2, R-
3, R-T, LDMF, HDMF and MH.
Section 3804.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum
gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas):
Zoning Districts R-1, R-2, R-3, R-T, LDMF, HDMF and MH.
(Ord. 05-02, passed 8-10-2005)
§ 1610.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1612: INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE SUPPRESSION FORCES; EMERGENCIES
Section
1612.01   Purpose
1612.02   Authority at fires and other emergencies
1612.03   Interference with Fire Department operations
1612.04   Compliance with orders
1612.05   Unlawful boarding on or tampering with Fire Department emergency
equipment
1612.06   Damage or injury to Fire Department equipment or personnel
1612.07   Blocking fire hydrants and Fire Department connections
1612.08   Hydrant use approval
1612.09   Placement of hydrants and water mains
1612.10   Private fire hydrants
1612.11   Unauthorized use of fire suppression equipment
1612.12   Sale of defective fire extinguishers
1612.13   Street obstructions
1612.14   Recovery of costs incurred in connection with hazardous materials
1612.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Fires and fire protection generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 29.1 et seq., 125.401
et seq., 750.240 et seq.
§ 1612.01 PURPOSE.
   The Fire Prevention Code Official, or his or her duly authorized
representatives as may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency
involving the protection of life and/or property , are hereby authorized to
direct such operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control any
suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other hazardous conditions or
situations and to take any other action necessary in the reasonable performance
of their duty. The Official or his or her representative may prohibit any
person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may remove or cause to
be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object which may impede or
interfere with the operations of the Fire Department. The Official or his or
her representative may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or
object from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area
shall do so immediately and shall not re-enter the area until authorized to do
so by the Official or his or her representative.
(Ord. 203, passed 3-8-1989)
§ 1612.02 AUTHORITY AT FIRES AND OTHER EMERGENCIES.
   No person shall interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to
interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of
travel of, any Fire Department emergency vehicle in any way, or interfere with,
attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, or obstruct or hamper,
any Fire Department operation.
(Ord. 203, passed 3-8-1989)
§ 1612.03 INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT OPERATIONS.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Prevention Code Official or interfere with the compliance
attempts of another individual.
(Ord. 203, passed 3-8-1989)
§ 1612.04 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS.
   No person shall cling to, attach himself or herself to, climb upon or into
or board or swing upon, any Fire Department emergency vehicle, whether the same
is in motion or at rest, or sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-
protecting device thereon, or manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to
manipulate or tamper with, any levers, valves, switches, starting devices,
brakes, pumps or any equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of, any
Fire Department emergency vehicle, without authorization from the Fire
Prevention Code Official in charge of the Fire Department emergency equipment.
(Ord. 203, passed 3-8-1989)
§ 1612.05 UNLAWFUL BOARDING ON OR TAMPERING WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT EMERGENCY
EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall damage, deface or attempt to conspire to damage or deface
any Fire Department emergency vehicle at any time, or injure, attempt to injure
or conspire to injure Fire Department personnel while such personnel are
performing Department duties.
(Ord. 203, passed 3-8-1989)
§ 1612.06 DAMAGE OR INJURY TO FIRE DEPARTMENT EQUIPMENT OR PERSONNEL.
   (a)   No person shall obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or
restrict access to any fire hydrant or any Fire Department connection for the
pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and Fire
Department connections that are located on public or private streets and access
lanes or on private property .
   (b)   If, upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of
violation, obstructions or encroachments have not been removed, the Fire
Prevention Code Official shall proceed to remove the same. Cost incurred in the
performance of necessary work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on
certificate of the Fire Prevention Code Official and with the approval of the
Chief Administrative Official. The legal authority of the municipality shall
institute appropriate action for the recovery of such costs.
(Ord. 203, passed 3-8-1989)
§ 1612.07 BLOCKING FIRE HYDRANTS AND FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS.
   No person shall use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use by the Fire
Department for fire suppression purposes without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the Fire Prevention Code Official and the Department of Public
Works, except for the use of such hydrants by persons employed by, and
authorized to make such use by, the Department of Public Works.
(Ord. 203, passed 3-8-1989)
§ 1612.08 HYDRANT USE APPROVAL.
   The Fire Prevention Code Official shall recommend to the Chief
Administrative Official of the municipality the location or relocation of new
or existing fire hydrants and the placement or replacement of inadequate water
mains located upon public property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate
fire flow and distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or
removed from service until approved by the Fire Prevention Code Official.
(Ord. 203, passed 3-8-1989)
§ 1612.09 PLACEMENT OF HYDRANTS AND WATER MAINS.
   All new and existing oil storage plants, lumber yards, amusement or
exhibition parks, educational or institutional complexes and similar
occupancies and uses involving high fire or life hazards, which are located
more than 150 feet from a public street or which require quantities of water
beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution system, shall be
provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants shall be
capable of supplying fire flows as required by the Fire Prevention Code
Official and shall be connected to a water system in accordance with accepted
engineering practices. The Fire Prevention Code Official shall designate and
approve the number and location of such fire hydrants. He or she may require
the installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment housed in accordance
with approved rules and may require the establishment of a trained fire brigade
when the hazard involved requires such measures, private hydrants shall not be
placed into or removed from service until approved by the Fire Prevention Code
Official.
(Ord. 203, passed 3-8-1989)
§ 1612.10 PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANTS.
   No person shall obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire
hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under this
Fire Prevention Code, except for the purpose of extinguishing a fire, training
or testing purposes, recharging, making necessary repairs or when permitted by
the Fire Prevention Code Official. Whenever a fire appliance is removed, as
herein permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose
for which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire
appliances or equipment shall be repaired as directed by the Fire Prevention
Code Official.
(Ord. 203, passed 3-8-1989)
§ 1612.11 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF FIRE SUPPRESSION EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire
hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under this
Fire Prevention Code, except for the purpose of extinguishing a fire, training
or testing purposes, recharging, making necessary repairs or when permitted by
the Fire Prevention Code Official. Whenever a fire appliance is removed, as
herein permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose
for which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire
appliances or equipment shall be repaired as directed by the Fire Prevention
Code Official.
(Ord. 203, passed 3-8-1989)
§ 1612.12 SALE OF DEFECTIVE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.
   No person shall sell, trade, loan, repair, recharge or give away any form,
type or kind of fire extinguisher which is not approved of by the Fire
Prevention Code Official, or which is not in proper working order, or the
contents of which do not meet the requirements of the Fire Prevention Code
Official. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the sale, trade
or exchange of obsolete or damaged equipment for junk when such units are
permanently disfigured or marked with a permanent sign identifying the unit as
junk.
(Ord. 203, passed 3-8-1989)
§ 1612.13 STREET OBSTRUCTIONS.
   No person shall erect, construct, place or maintain any bump, fence, gate,
chain, bar, pipe, wood or metal horse or any other type of obstruction in or on
any street in the municipality . As used in this section, STREET means any
roadway accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including, but not
limited to, private street , or access lanes and all public streets and
highways within the boundaries of the municipality .
(Ord. 203, passed 3-8-1989)
§ 1612.14 RECOVERY OF COSTS INCURRED IN CONNECTION WITH HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   The cost of any incident involving hazardous materials, liquids or chemicals
in which the Fire Department or its agents are requested to control, contain,
prevent or clean up such materials, shall be borne by the firm, company,
individual or corporation involved in the release or possible release of such
materials. All such costs incurred by the Fire Department or its agents shall
be filled to such fire, company, individual or corporation. Failure to
reimburse the Fire Department or its agents shall result in a special tax
assessment or lien against the firm, company, individual or corporation, as
allowed by law .
(Ord. 203, passed 3-8-1989)
§ 1612.99 PENALTY.
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1614: FIREWORKS
Section
1614.01   Definitions
1614.02   Prohibition on use of consumer fireworks
1614.03   Prohibition on use and possession of consumer fireworks by minor
1614.04   Enforcement
1614.99   Penalty
§ 1614.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Firework devices that are designed to produce visible
effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction,
chemical composition and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States
Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 C.F.R. parts 1500 and 1507, and
that are listed in American Pyrotechnics Association (“APA”) standard 87-1A,
3.2.2, 3.2.3 and 3.2.4. CONSUMER FIREWORKS do not include low-impact fireworks.
   DISPLAY FIREWORKS. Large fireworks devices that are explosive materials
intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or
audible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation, as provided in 27
C.F.R. § 555.11, 49 C.F.R. part 172, and APA standard 87-1B, 2.3.
   FIREWORK or FIREWORKS. Any composition or device, except for a starting
pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designated for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. FIREWORKS
consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic,
display fireworks and special effects.
   LOW-IMPACT FIREWORKS. Ground and handheld sparkling devices.
   MINOR. An individual who is less than 18 years of age.
   NOVELTIES. As the term Novelty Devices as defined under APA standard 87-1,
3.2.1 and all of the following:
      (1)   Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls
or individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of explosive content
per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cup;
      (2)   Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy
guns in which toy caps as described in division (1) above of this definition
are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the
cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart
or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion;
      (3)   Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding one-eighth inch in
diameter; and
      (4)   Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes
with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer’s
name and the quantity contained in each box are printed on the box, and toy
smoke devices.
(Ord. 1907-01, passed 8-14-2019)
§ 1614.02 PROHIBITION ON USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person shall not
ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks within the city.
   (b)   A person may ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks during the
following days and times:
      (1)   From 11:00 a.m. on December 31 until 1:00 a.m. on January 1;
      (2)   Between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on Memorial Day and
on the Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day;
      (3)   Between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on June 29, June 30,
July 1, July 2, July 3 and July 4. If July 5 is a Friday or Saturday, fireworks
will be permitted between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m.; and
      (4)   Between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on Labor Day and on
the Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day.
   (c)   A person shall not ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on
public property , school property , church property or property owned by
another person or organization without that person’s or organization’s express
permission to use fireworks on the premises .
   (d)   Upon application to City Council in accordance with this section, City
Council may issue a non-transferrable permit for the use of consumer fireworks
on a date and for a time other than those set forth in division (b)(2) above.
Prior to the issuance of a non-transferrable permit, the site location for use
of consumer fireworks must be approved by the city’s Fire Chief.
   (e)   A person shall not discharge, ignite or use consumer fireworks or low-
impact fireworks while under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance,
or a combination of alcohol and a controlled substance. For purposes of this
provision, alcohol means the term defined in § 1d of the Michigan Vehicle Code,
Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.1d. For purposes of this
provision, controlled substance means the term defined in § 8b of the Michigan
Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.8b.
   (f)   Any person using consumer fireworks as defined in this section is
responsible for cleaning up any debris caused from the use of the consumer
fireworks , within a 24-hour period.
   (g)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the use of
novelties .
(Ord. 1907-01, passed 8-14-2019)
§ 1614.03 PROHIBITION ON USE AND POSSESSION OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS BY MINOR.
   A minor shall not possess consumer fireworks within the city.
(Ord. 1907-01, passed 8-14-2019)
§ 1614.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Fire Chief, his or her designees and sworn law enforcement officers are
authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1907-01, passed 8-14-2019)
§ 1614.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to a civil fine of $1,000 for each violation. Of
that fine, $500 must be remitted to the city’s Police Department.
   (b)   If the Fire Chief, his or her designee or a sworn law enforcement
officer determines that a violation of this chapter has occurred, he or she may
seize the consumer fireworks as evidence of the violation. Following the final
disposition of a finding of responsibility for violating this chapter, the city
may dispose of or destroy any consumer firework retained as evidence in that
prosecution. The person, firm, corporation or entity found responsible for
violation of this ordinance is responsible for the actual costs of storage and
disposal of the seized fireworks .
(Ord. 1907-01, passed 8-14-2019)
CHAPTER 1616: OPEN BURNING AND RECREATIONAL FIRES
Section
1616.01   Purpose
1616.02   Definitions
1616.03   Burning of household trash
1616.04   Burning of refuse
1616.05   Burning of building materials
1616.06   Burning on commercial property or open lands
1616.07   Fires in fire pits and patio fireplaces
1616.08   Bonfires
1616.09   Open flame cooking
1616.10   Sky lanterns
1616.11   Right of entry and inspection
1616.12   Enforcement
1616.99   Penalty
§ 1616.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter promotes the public health, safety and welfare of the city by
regulating the air pollution and fire hazards of open burning and outdoor
burning.
(Ord. 2105-01, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 1616.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLEAN WOOD. Natural wood which has not been painted, varnished or coated
with a similar material, has not been pressure treated with preservatives, and
does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood
products.
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE. Building waste materials, including, but
not limited to, waste shingles, insulation, lumber, treated wood, painted wood,
wiring, plastics, packaging, synthetic material, and rubble that results from
construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on a house,
commercial or industrial building or other structure.
   FIRE PIT. An outdoor pit (four feet diameter maximum) surrounded by metal,
stone, concrete, ceramic, berm or other non-combustible material, intended for
recreation but not including a fire intended for disposal of refuse  or other
prohibited material.
   HOUSEHOLD TRASH. Trash containing plastic, rubber, foam, treated lumber,
textiles, electronics or chemicals.
   OPEN BURNING/BONFIRE. The kindling or maintaining a fire where the products
of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through
a stack or a chimney.
   PATIO WOOD-BURNING UNIT. A chimnea, patio warmer or other portable
woodburning device used for outdoor recreation and/or heating and which is UL
listed and approved.
   REFUSE. Trees, logs, brush, stumps, leaves and grass clippings.
(Ord. 2105-01, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 1616.03 BURNING OF HOUSEHOLD TRASH.
   Open burning of household trash is prohibited.
(Ord. 2105-01, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 1616.04 BURNING OF REFUSE.
   Open burning of refuse is prohibited.
(Ord. 2105-01, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 1616.05 BURNING OF BUILDING MATERIALS.
   Open burning of construction and demolition waste is prohibited.
(Ord. 2105-01, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 1616.06 BURNING ON COMMERCIAL PROPERTY OR OPEN LANDS.
   Open burning , fire pit s and patio wood-burning units on commercial
property or on open lands are prohibited, unless a permit is received from the
city’s Fire Department.
(Ord. 2105-01, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 1616.07 FIRES IN FIRE PITS AND PATIO FIREPLACES.
   (a)   A patio wood-burning unit  may be installed and used in the city only
in accordance with all of the following provisions.
      (1)   The patio wood-burning unit shall not be used to burn refuse and
other prohibited materials.
      (2)   The patio wood-burning unit  shall burn only clean wood .
      (3)   The patio wood-burning unit  shall be a UL listed approved
container with a spark arrester.
      (4)   The patio wood-burning unit  shall be located at least 15 feet from
any structure or building and 15 feet from adjacent property lines.
      (5)   The patio wood-burning unit shall not be installed or used on a
balcony.
      (6)   A patio wood-burning unit  may not be used when wind conditions
exceed ten mph.
   (b)   A fire pit  may be installed and used in the city only in accordance
with all of the following provisions.
      (1)   The fire pit shall not be used to burn refuse and other prohibited
materials.
      (2)   The fire pit  shall burn only clean wood .
      (3)   The fire pit  shall be located at least 15 feet from any structure
or building and 15 feet from adjacent property lines.
      (4)   The fire pit  shall be located at least five feet from any tree,
bush or other natural combustible material and shall not be located directly
underneath an overhanging tree or other natural combustible material.
      (5)   A fire pit may not be greater than four feet in diameter.
      (6)   A fire pit may not be used when wind conditions exceed ten mph.
   (c)   Burning of clean wood in an outdoor fireplace with a chimney is
permitted.
   (d)   Fires in a fire pit or patio wood-burning unit may not be started
before sunrise and must be extinguished by 1:00 a.m.
   (e)   A garden hose or other method of extinguishment shall be readily
available at all times while burning using one of the above methods.
   (f)   Any person who starts a fire in a fire pit or patio wood-burning unit
, pursuant to this division (f), must remain at that fire at all times, until
said fire is extinguished.
   (g)   Any person who starts a fire in a fire pit or patio wood-burning unit
, pursuant to this division (g), must not use flammable liquid of any kind to
start the fire.
   (h)   The patio wood-burning unit or fire pit shall not cause a nuisance by
smoky conditions to neighbors, human health and safety, or property .
(Ord. 2105-01, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 1616.08 BONFIRES.
   A bonfire shall not be conducted within 50 feet of a structure or
combustible material unless the fire is contained in a fire pit .
(Ord. 2105-01, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 1616.09 OPEN FLAME COOKING.
   (a)   Charcoal grills and any other open-flame cooking shall not be operated
on combustible balconies or not closer than five feet from any combustible
construction in a multi-family dwelling, and not directly under an overhang.
   (b)   Charcoal grills or other open-flame cooking method may be operated at
a single-family dwelling, not closer than five feet from any combustible
construction, and not directly under an overhang.
(Ord. 2105-01, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 1616.10 SKY LANTERNS.
   A person shall not release or cause to be released an untethered sky
lantern.
(Ord. 2105-01, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 1616.11 RIGHT OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION.
   The Fire Chief, his or her designees and sworn law enforcement officers, who
presents credentials, may inspect any property for the purpose of ascertaining
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2105-01, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 1616.12 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Fire Chief, his or her designees and sworn law enforcement officers are
authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Where open burning
creates or adds to a hazardous situation, the Fire Chief, his or her designees
and sworn law enforcement offices may order the extinguishment of the open
burning operation.
(Ord. 2105-01, passed 5-12-2021)
§ 1616.99 PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or entity
violating the provisions of this chapter or failing to comply with a duly
authorized order issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined by state statute, which
shall be punishable by a civil fine of not more than $500.
   (b)   Any violator of this chapter shall be liable to the city for any and
all costs and expenses, direct or indirect, incurred by the city in connection
with the municipal infraction. Such costs shall be determined by the city. Such
costs may include, but are not limited to, the actual costs incurred for
fighting the fire, damages to third parties, attorney fees, court actions or
other related costs or damages. The city shall have the right to proceed in any
court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of obtaining an injunction,
restraining order or other appropriate remedy to compel compliance with this
chapter.
   (c)   Each day that a violation of this chapter exists shall constitute a
separate violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2105-01, passed 5-12-2021)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MICHIGAN COMPILED STATUTES ANNOTATED
M.C.L.A. Cites Code Section
M.C.L.A. Cites            Code Section
2.41 et seq.              Ch. 204
15.231 to 15.246          1486.04,
                          1486.17
15.231 et seq.            208.06
15.236                    208.02
15.243(l)(f)              Ch. 1240, App. A
24.201 to 24.328          410.01
29.1 et seq.              Ch. 1610,
                          Ch. 1612
29.7b                     Ch. 852
35.441 through 35.443     850.07
38.551 et seq.            Ch. 250
41.181 through 41.187     860.02
41.421 et seq.            Ch. 852
                          Ch. 1042,
46.171 et seq.            Ch. 1044,
                          Ch. 1060
54.211 et seq.            1224.07
67.38                     Ch. 1042,
                          Ch. 1044
87.20                     Ch. 240
91.1                      Ch. 1020
102.8                     Ch. 1020
103.4                     Ch. 1022
                          Ch. 206,
                          Ch. 220,
                          Ch. 222,
117.3                     Ch. 230,
                          Ch. 238,
                          Ch. 270,
                          Ch. 274,
                          Ch. 676
                          Ch. 1410,
117.3(k)                  Ch. 1412,
                          Ch. 1416
117.4a                    Ch. 250,
                          Ch. 1440
117.4b                    Ch. 1042,
                          Ch. 1044
117.4d                    Ch. 246
                          Ch. 250,
                          Ch. 1042,
117.4e                    Ch. 1044,
                          Ch. 1062,
                          Ch. 1440
117.4f                    Ch. 1042,
                          Ch. 1044
                          Ch. 222,
                          Ch. 248,
                          Ch. 270,
117.4i                    Ch. 676,
                          Ch. 802,
                          Ch. 1220,
                          Ch. 1222,
                          Ch. 1224
117.4j                    Ch. 222
                          Ch. 232,
117.5                     Ch. 274,
                          Ch. 1062
                          Ch. 202,
117.5b                    202.03,
                          Ch. 222
117.5c                    274.05
117.13                    Ch. 206
117.17                    Ch. 274
117.19                    Ch. 274
117.20                    Ch. 274
117.24                    Ch. 234
117.25                    Ch. 234
117.27a                   Ch. 206,
                          Ch. 234
117.28                    Ch. 274
117.29                    Ch. 222
117.31                    Ch. 236
117.32                    Ch. 274
117.33                    Ch. 274
117.34                    Ch. 248
117.35                    Ch. 1042,
                          Ch. 1044
123.67                    Ch. 1062
123.301 et seq.           Ch. 1060
123.361 et seq.           Ch. 1060
124.21 et seq.            806.02
                          Ch. 1220,
125.11 et seq.            Ch. 1222,
                          Ch. 1224
125.39                    Ch. 246
125.40                    Ch. 246
125.51 et seq.            Ch. 1224
125.71 et seq.            Ch. 1222
125.401 et seq.           Ch. 1610,
                          Ch. 1612
125.581 through 125.590   Ch. 1240, App. A
125.1361                  Ch. 1240, App. A
125.1501 through 125.1531 1416.02,
                          1416.10
                          Ch. 1410,
                          Ch. 1412,
125.1501 et seq.          1412.01,
                          Ch. 1416,
                          Ch. 1456
125.1504                  Ch. 282
                          1410.01,
125.1508b(6)              1416.02,
                          1416.03
125.2301 et seq.          Ch. 1240, App. A
                          Ch. 1220,
125.3101 et seq.          Ch. 1222,
                          Ch. 1224,
                          Ch. 1240, App. A
125.3201                  1440.01
125.3601                  Ch. 280
125.3601 et seq.          Ch. 1240, App. A
125.3602                  Ch. 280
125.3603                  Ch. 280
125.3606                  Ch. 280
125.3701                  Ch. 280
                          1046.005,
                          Ch. 1220,
125.3801 et seq.          1220.08,
                          Ch. 1222,
                          Ch. 1224
125.3811 et seq.          1224.03
125.3839                  Ch. 672
125.4101 through 125.4915 284.08
125.4214                  284.08
125.4217                  284.08
129.11 et seq.            Ch. 236
141.101 through 141.138   1046.095
141.671                   Ch. 236
141.2101 et seq.          Ch. 1440
168.25                    Ch. 240
205.1                     Ch. 802
206.201                   852.01
206.501 to 206.532        882.02
207.501 et seq.           Ch. 882
211.107a                  Ch. 882
211.203                   Ch. 882
211.741 et seq.           Ch. 1020
213.21 to 213.41          Ch. 1240, App. A
247.183 et seq.           Ch. 1486
247.651 to 247.675        1486.13
247.651 et seq.           Ch. 1240, App. A
256.531                   Ch. 870
256.532                   Ch. 870
                          410.01,
257.1 through 257.923     606.04,
                          676.04
257.1d                    1614.02
257.8b                    1614.02
257.79                    662.05
257.217                   Ch. 870
257.252d                  676.04
257.319                   606.04
257.403                   606.02,
                          662.05
257.624b                  606.04
257.624b(1)               606.04
257.672 et seq.           Ch. 440,
                          Ch. 450
257.676b(2)               850.10
257.707c                  666.06
257.907                   450.99,
                          480.99
257.951 to 257.951        440.05
280.1 et seq.             1046.005,
                          1046.113
280.421 et seq.           1046.112
280.429                   Ch. 1440
280.431                   Ch. 1440
287.2 et seq.             Ch. 610
287.701 et seq.           Ch. 610
289.1101 through 289.8111 812.02
289.1101 et seq.          852.09
290.601 et seq.           Ch. 204
                          Ch. 1240, App. A,
324.101 through 324.90106 1440.05,
                          1440.06,
                          1440.12
                          Ch. 1042,
324.101 et seq.           Ch. 1044,
                          1046.005
324.11506                 Ch. 1240, App. A
324.11701 et seq.         852.09
324.30301 et seq.         1046.005
324.3101 et seq.          Ch. 1040,
                          1046.005
324.3103                  Ch. 1040
324.3106                  Ch. 1040
324.3109                  Ch. 1040
324.8901 et seq.          Ch. 1062
324.80301 to 324.80322    676.04
324.82101 to 324.82161    480.02
330.1100d                 606.04
330.1931                  208.08
333.1101 et seq.          Ch. 270,
                          Ch. 676
333.6101 et seq.          852.11
333.6103                  606.04
333.7201 et seq.          Ch. 618,
                          618.01
333.7211 et seq.          618.02,
                          666.05
333.12501 to 333.12516    852.09
333.12521 to 333.12534    852.09
333.12541 to 333.12546    852.09
333.12701 to 333.12715    852.09
333.12771                 852.09
333.12905 to 333.12922    852.09
333.26423                 618.04
333.27956                 874.01
339.5701 to 339.5739      1456.02
339.6101 to 339.6133      1456.02
339.6101 et seq.          852.09
400.701 et seq.           Ch. 1240, App. A
431.201                   Ch. 852
431.202                   Ch. 852
433.53                    Ch. 240
433.62                    Ch. 240
436.1101 et seq.          Ch. 606,
                          606.02
436.1105                  666.05
436.1109                  666.05
436.1801                  606.04
436.1909                  606.04
436.2111 et seq.          Ch. 606
445.371 et seq.           Ch. 850
445.481 through 445.492   860.05,
                          860.09
445.481 et seq.           860.02
445.482                   860.03
462.2 et seq.             Ch. 672
462.101 et seq.           Ch. 672
484.301 et seq.           Ch. 806
484.2101 through 484.2701 806.03
484.2102                  1486.03
484.2251                  1486.04
484.3101 et seq.          1486.01,
                          1486.03
484.3105(1)               1486.04
486.51 et seq             Ch. 1042,
                          Ch. 1044
486.101 et seq.           Ch. 1042,
                          Ch. 1044
500.3123                  Ch. 806,
                          Ch. 1486
554.1 et seq.             Ch. 662
554.251 et seq.           Ch. 1020
                          1224.03,
559.101 et seq.           1224.06,
                          1226.01
                          1224.06,
559.101 through 559.272   1226.01,
                          Ch. 1240, App. A
559.166                   Ch. 1240, App. A
560.101                   1222.01,
                          1224.06
                          1224.06,
                          1226.01,
560.101 through 560.293   1226.06 ,
                          Ch. 1240, App. A,
                          1440.07
560.101 et seq.           1226.01
560.112                   1226.02
560.120                   1226.02
560.167                   1226.02
600.101 et seq.           Ch. 290
600.501 et seq.           Ch. 290
600.1925                  Ch. 240
600.2913                  Ch. 662
600.3801 et seq.          Ch. 270
600.8101 et seq.          Ch. 290
600.8395                  440.01
600.8701 et seq.          1046.090
600.8727(3)               676.08
691.1401 et seq.          Ch. 1022
691.1409                  Ch. 802
712A.1 to 712A.32         606.04
722.1 to 722.6            606.04
722.111 through 722.128   Ch. 1240, App. A
725.301                   Ch. 440,
                          Ch. 450
750.49 et seq.            Ch. 610
750.50b et seq.           Ch. 610
750.71 et seq.            Ch. 692
750.110                   Ch. 852
750.111                   Ch. 852
750.115                   Ch. 852
750.146                   Ch. 870
750.147                   Ch. 870
750.167 et seq.           Ch. 666
750.200                   Ch. 692
750.211a                  Ch. 692
750.240                   Ch. 1610,
                          Ch. 1612
750.301 et seq.           Ch. 666
750.356 et seq.           Ch. 662
750.377a                  Ch. 662
750.377b                  Ch. 662
750.385                   Ch. 1480
750.448 et seq.           Ch. 666
750.466 et seq.           Ch. 270,
                          Ch. 676
750.493 et seq.           Ch. 676
750.507 et seq.           Ch. 806,
                          Ch. 1486
750.511 et seq.           Ch. 672
750.561 et seq.           Ch. 204
752.821 et seq.           Ch. 1480
22247.183 et seq.         Ch. 806
                          
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed  Code Section
-        2-12-1975      232.02
                        1226.01—
-        11-12-1986     1226.14,
                        Ch. 1226 Figures
                       
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
7        5-28-1930   680.01
                     1042.01—
11       4-13-1938   1042.05,
                     1042.10
                     676.06,
14       7-30-1940   1024.01—
                     1024.03,
                     1024.05
15       7-30-1940   692.01
20       5-25-1949   1022.01—
                     1022.06
22       12-9-1953   676.03
24       12-8-1954   1020.01—
                     1020.10
                     1060.01,
29       8-10-1960   1060.07,
                     1060.08
30       4-8-1964    810.01—
                     810.05
31       5-26-1965   802.16
                     1042.01,
34       3-1-1967    1042.08,
                     1042.09
35       5-11-1967   676.02
40       1-13-1968   Ch. 1040, Repealed by Ord. 08-06
48       5-8-1969    440.01—
                     440.05
49       5-8-1969    1222.01
54       12-10-1969  1060.07
                     610.03,
56       2-11-1970   662.06,
                     666.02,
                     676.05
58       8-12-1970   662.07,
                     666.04
61       10-22-1970  852.01—
                     852.11
                     870.01—
62       12-9-1970   870.13,
                     870.15
69       9-8-1971    450.01
76       5-10-1972   1042.06
78       5-9-1973    1042.11
79       6-13-1973   1042.12
82       1-9-1974    274.01—
                     274.05
93       2-12-1975   818.01—
                     818.05
97       1-14-1976   450.03
101      3-9-1977    606.01
102      3-9-1977    660.01,
                     660.02
103      3-9-1977    662.04,
                     662.06
105      3-9-1977    672.01
                     662.01—
106      3-9-1977    662.03,
                     662.08,
                     662.09
113      10-9-1977   618.01
                     850.01—
                     850.04,
114      10-9-1977   850.06—
                     850.09,
                     850.11—
                     850.18
111      10-12-1977  610.10
118      7-12-1978   1062.01—
                     1062.06
121      8-16-1978   1484.01 (Repealed), 1484.03—1484.05 (Repealed)
124      8-8-1979    450.04
129      8-8-1979    480.01
130      10-10-1979  1460.01—
                     1460.07
                     1220.01—
132      5-14-1980   1220.07,
                     1220.09
142      2-10-1982   606.01
145      8-11-1982   676.04
149      5-11-1983   882.02
150      5-11-1983   882.01
168      11-11-1985  Ch. 806 (Repealed)
164      11-13-1985  1042.02
170      3-12-1986   1042.03,
                     1042.06
172      3-12-1986   1042.03
                     1060.01,
174      6-11-1986   1060.02,
                     1060.04,
                     1060.05, 1060.06 (Repealed)
175      6-11-1986   618.02
176      6-11-1986   666.05
177      8-13-1986   1042.07
167      9-10-1986   666.01,
                     666.03
182      6-10-1987   1044.01—
                     1044.12
197      6-8-1988    1060.03
203      3-8-1989    1612.01—
                     1612.14
206      4-12-1989   1042.13
207      9-13-1989   610.01—
                     610.09
                     272.01—
                     272.03,
213      4-11-1990   272.06—
                     272.08,
                     1220.08
215      9-5-1990    1224.01—
                     1224.22
216      10-10-1990  1026.01—1026.10 (Repealed), 1026.99 (Repealed)
220      2-13-1991   1440.01—
                     1440.14
                     1224.06,
222      4-10-1991   1224.07,
                     1224.18
226      9-9-1992    676.07
228-1    4-7-1993    606.02
-        8-11-1993   Ch. 1240 App. A
228      11-10-1993  666.06,
                     666.99
                     850.04,
232      12-13-1995  850.05,
                     850.10
233      1-10-1996   1060.09
-        2-14-1996   Ch. 1240 App. A
235      4-17-1996   662.05
239      1-8-1997    Ch. 1610, Repealed by Ord. 01-02
242      3-18-1998   1456.01—
                     1456.03
-        6-10-1998   Ch. 1240 App. A
243      6-10-1998   272.04,
                     272.05
245      7-8-1998    606.04
-        7-14-1999   1042.06
-        9-22-1999   Ch. 1486, Repealed by Ord. 02-02
234      7-12-2000   1224.06,
                     1224.17
236      10-11-2000  676.04
237      10-11-2000  660.01
256      8-8-2001    Ch. 1240 App. A
01-02    8-8-2001    Ch. 1610, repealed by Ord. 05-02
                     806.01—
                     806.10,
                     806.12—
-        9-5-2001    806.15,
                     Ch. 806 App. A,
                     Ch. 806 App. B,
                     Ch. 806 App. C
                     1486.01—
02-02    10-9-2002   1486.19,
                     1486.99
02-04    12-11-2002  660.01
03-15    2-12-2003   480.02
-        7-9-2003    Ch. 1240 App. A
03-21    2-11-2004   1066.01—1066.06 (Repealed)
-        11-10-2004  Ch. 1240 App. A
-        - -2005     Ch. 1240 App. A
04-06    1-12-2005   1414.01,
                     1414.02, Repealed Ch. 1490
04-01    5-25-2005   676.01
05-02    8-10-2005   1610.01—
                     1610.03
06-01    5-17-2006   284.01—
                     284.07
-        6-14-2006   Ch. 1240 App. A
                     1488.01—
06-02    6-14-2006   1488.04,
                     1488.99
06-05    6-14-2006   872.01—
                     872.17
-        8-9-2006    Ch. 1240 App. A
06-09    10-11-2006  694.01
-        3-12-2008   Ch. 1240 App. A
08-01    3-12-2008   694.02
08-02    3-12-2008   692.02
08-03    3-12-2008   660.03
08-04    3-12-2008   618.03
08-06    3-12-2008   Ch. 1040, Repealed Ord. 40
                     410.01—
08-07    6-25-2008   410.03,
                     410.99
08-09    8-13-2008   850.01—
                     850.18
-        8-19-2008   Ch. 1240 App. A
08-11    10-8-2008   694.03
-        8-12-2009   Ch. 1240 App. A
09-04    10-28-2009  1224.20
-        12-9-2009   Ch. 1240 App. A
-        7-14-2010   Ch. 1240 App. A
                     1042.04,
10-04    9-8-2010    1042.06,
                     1042.07
-        11- -2010   Ch. 1240 App. A
-        4-20-2011   Ch. 1240 App. A
12-02    6-13-2012   1610.01,
                     1610.02
10-12-01 10-10-2012  1416.10,
                     1416.11
2013-01  4-17-2013   618.04
2013-02  5-8-2013    1410.01
2013-03  5-8-2013    1412.01
2013-04  5-8-2013    1416.01
2013-05  5-8-2013    1416.02
2013-06  5-8-2013    1416.03
-        7-20-2013   Ch. 1240 App. A
2306     8-12-2013   860.09,
                     860.12
2013-07  11-13-2013  202.99
1407-01  8-13-2014   Ch. 1240 App. A
1411-01  12-10-2014  Ch. 1240 App. A
1411-02  12-10-2014  Ch. 1240 App. A
1411-03  12-10-2014  Ch. 1240 App. A
                     1046.001—
                     1046.005,
                     1046.020—
                     1046.027,
                     1046.040—
                     1046.045,
                     1046.060—
                     1046.063,
1411-04  12-10-2014  1046.075—
                     1046.078,
                     1046.090—
                     1046.096,
                     1046.110—
                     1046.113,
                     1046.125—
                     1046.131,
                     1046.145—
                     1046.149
1509-01  10-14-2015  618.02
1601-04  4-13-2016   1610.02
                     860.01—
1705-01  6-14-2017   860.14,
                     860.99
                     1480.01—
1707-01  7-12-2017   1480.15,
                     1480.99
                     812.01—
1701-08  12-13-2017  812.09,
                     812.99
1701-09  12-13-2017  1046.061
1710-01  12-13-2017  Ch. 1240 App. A
1701-10  1-10-2018   850.10
1902-01  2-13-2019   874.01
                     1480.01—
1906-01  7-24-2019   1480.15,
                     1480.99
                     1614.01—
1907-01  8-14-2019   1614.04,
                     1614.99
1908-01  8-14-2019   Ch. 1240 App. A
1911-01  12-11-2019  284.08
1911-02  12-11-2019  450.05,
                     450.99
2004-01  4-22-2020   1042.07
2008-01  8-12-2020   676.01
2102-01  2-10-2021   Ch. 1240 App. A
2104-01  4-14-2021   850.10
                     1616.01—
2105-01  5-12-2021   1616.12,
                     1616.99
2105-02  5-12-2021   Ch. 1240 App. A
2208-01  8-10-2022   Ch. 1240 App. A
2208-02  8-10-2022   Ch. 1240 App. A
2208-03  8-10-2022   Ch. 1240 App. A
2210-01  10-12-2022  1042.05
2211-01  12-14-2022  1480.03,
                     1480.06
2211-02  12-14-2022  Ch. 1240 App. A
2212-01  1-11-2023   Repealed Ch. 286
2305-01  6-14-2023   Repealed Ch. 1026
2305-02  6-14-2023   Repealed Ch. 1484
2305-03  6-14-2023   1042.08
2305-04  6-14-2023   662.10
2305-05  6-14-2023   666.01
2306-01  7-12-2023   Adopting Ordinance
2406-01  7-10-2024   1066.01
2406-02  7-10-2024   1066.02
2406-03  7-10-2024   Repealed Ch. 1066
2406-04  7-10-2024   232.01,
                     232.02
2407-01  8-14-2024   Repealed 1060.06
2410-01  11-13-2024  676.08
2410-02  11-13-2024  676.09
2412-01  1-8-2025    Ch. 1240, App. A
2412-02  1-8-2025    Ch. 1240, App. A
2412-04  1-8-2025    Ch. 1240, App. A
2412-05  1-8-2025    Ch. 1240, App. A
2412-06  1-8-2025    Ch. 1240, App. A
2502-02  3-12-2025   666.07
                     202.98,
2502-03  3-12-2025   410.99,
                     666.01,
                     676.04
2504-01  5-14-2025   850.03
2504-02  5-14-2025   1060.02
2505-01  7-9-2025    1042.05
2511-01  12-10-2025  1480.02
2511-02  12-10-2025  Ch. 1240, App. A
2512-01  1-14-2026   676.01
2512-02  1-14-2026   Ch. 1240, App. A
2512-03  1-14-2026   Ch. 1240, App. A
2512-04  1-14-2026   Ch. 1240, App. A
                     802.01—
2512-05  1-14-2026   850.12,
                     802.99
2512-06  1-14-2026   850.19—
                     850.22
                     1060.01,
2512-07  1-14-2026   1060.03—
                     1060.05
2512-08  1-14-2026   1060.10
                    
 
 
