HAMTRAMCK, MICHIGAN
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-9 Supplement contains:
Local Legislation current through Res. 2026-15, passed 1-27-2026
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
Chapter
CHAPTER 1
INCORPORATION AND BOUNDARIES
   
1-01   Body corporate politic; general powers
   
1-02   Boundaries
CHAPTER 2
WARD AND ELECTION PRECINCTS
   
2-01   One ward
   
2-02   Election precincts; number, boundaries
CHAPTER 3
REGISTRATION, NOMINATION AND ELECTION
   
3-01   Registered voters; registration required, state law
   
3-02   Candidates; nomination at primary election
   
3-03   Primary elections; time
   
3-04   Precinct election inspectors; compensation
   
3-05   Candidates; statement of candidacy; filing, forms; petitions,
signatures; restriction, inspection
   
3-06   Challengers, appointment
   
3-07   Conducting primary elections; state law
   
3-08   Canvass of votes; returns
   
3-09   Candidates nominated for general election; tie vote, recount;
determination
   
3-10   Number of candidates; primary election not required
   
3-11   Filling vacancies; petitions, ballots, statements of candidacy,
requirements
   
3-12   Municipal general elections; time, state law
   
3-13   Special elections; council authority
   
3-14   Qualified voters
   
3-15   Ballots, ballot boxes; printing, filing; city clerk, duties
   
3-16   City election commission; composition, meetings; special officers;
powers and duties enumerated
   
3-17   Election officers, compensation
   
3-18   Elections; notice required; city clerk, duties
   
3-19   Conduct of elections; state law
   
3-20   Canvass of votes; declaration, statement required; state law
   
3-21   Tie vote; determination
   
3-22   Recount; petition, procedure; state law
CHAPTER 4
ELECTIVE OFFICERS
   
4-01   Elective officers enumerated; term
   
4-02   Elective officers; qualifications
   
4-03   Elective offices; filling vacancies
   
4-04   Council members who run for mayor
   
4-05   Mayor who runs for council
CHAPTER 5
APPOINTED DEPARTMENT HEADS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS
   
5-01   Appointed department heads, boards, commissions; qualifications,
removals; filling vacancies
   
5-02   Appointed boards and commissions, term
   
5-03   Department heads, boards and commissions; term; oath required; removal
   
5-04   Department heads, boards and commissions; nepotism, political, religious
consideration prohibited
   
5-05   Elective officers; appointments, compensation, restrictions
   
5-06   Appointed department heads, boards or commissions; compensation,
determination
CHAPTER 6
GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO ELECTIVE OFFICERS, AND DEPARTMENT HEADS, BOARDS
AND COMMISSIONS
   
6-01   Elective officers; notice of election required
   
6-02   Oath of office required; form
   
6-03   Officers; bonds, filing; requisites
   
6-04   Officers; additional, new bonds
   
6-05   Bonds, liability
   
6-06   Oaths, bonds; failure to file, penalty
   
6-07   Oaths, bonds; failure to file; declaration of vacancy
   
6-08   Elective, appointive office; persons in default disqualified
   
6-09   Delivery of books, papers, etc., to successor required
   
6-10   Officers, employees; surety bonds; prohibition
   
6-11   Declaration of vacancy in office; causes enumerated
   
6-12   Appointive officers; powers and duties
   
6-13   Fees; duty to pay to city treasurer
   
6-14   Officers; charter violations, penalty; city attorney, duty
   
6-15   Officers; expenditures, commitments in excess of appropriations
prohibited; penalty; city attorney, duty
   
6-16   Principles of personnel management
   
6-17   Appointments to office, restriction
   
6-18   Officers; resignations, procedure
   
6-19   Filling vacancies; procedure, term
CHAPTER 7
COUNCIL
   
7-01   Council, composition; compensation
   
7-02   Legislative authority; administrative, executive powers
   
7-03   Meetings; presiding officer; determination; clerk; appointive officers;
attendance, duty
   
7-04   Journal of proceedings required; rules of procedure; disorderly conduct,
ordinance authorized
   
7-05   General welfare; ordinances, regulations
   
7-06   Resolutions, majority vote; mayor’s voting rights
   
7-07   Specific powers; enumeration not construed as limitation
   
7-08   Officers, employees, departments; city council, authority
   
7-09   Regular, special meetings; time, place; open to public; quorum
   
7-10   Accounts, claims; audit, approval required; requisites
CHAPTER 8
POWERS OF CITY AND COUNCIL IN GENERAL
   
8-01   General powers
   
8-02   Intergovernmental contracts
CHAPTER 9
POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENT HEADS
Mayor
   
9-01   Powers and duties
   
9-02   Mayor pro tem
   
9-03   Compensation of mayor and mayor pro tem
City Clerk
   
9-04   Powers and duties
City Controller
   
9-05   Powers and duties
   
9-06   Monthly, annual financial statements, contents; funds, management,
liability; records, bond required
   
9-07   Controller, records; audit required
City Treasurer
   
9-08   Powers and duties; bond; taxes, collection
   
9-09   City funds, custody; disbursements, duty; accounts
   
9-10   Monthly, annual reports required contents
   
9-11   Disbursements; vouchers required
   
9-12   City funds; separate accounts
   
9-13   Depositories, designation by council; interest; daily deposits
City Assessor
   
9-14   Powers and duties
City Attorney
   
9-15   Qualifications; powers and duties
Chief of Police
   
9-16   Qualifications; powers and duties
Chief of Fire Department
   
9-17   Qualifications; powers and duties
City Manager
   
9-18   City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation
Civil Service System
   
9-19   Establishment; city council, authority
CHAPTER 10
POLICE DEPARTMENT
   
10-01   Maintenance; temporary appointments
   
10-02   City manager; regular appointments, vacancies, authority
Chief of Police
   
10-03   Chief of police; powers and duties
   
10-04   Police; powers and duties
   
10-05   Police, compensation
CHAPTER 11
FIRE DEPARTMENT
   
11-01   Maintenance; temporary appointments
   
11-02   Fire chief, firemen; appointment
Chief of the Fire Department
   
11-03   Fire department, supervision
   
11-04   Extinguishing fires; authority to command aid; violation, penalty
   
11-05   Fire hazards, nuisances; abatement
   
11-06   Fire chief, firemen, department employees; compensation
CHAPTER 12
ORDINANCES
   
12-01   Enacting clause, style
   
12-02   Adoption, requisites; effective date
   
12-03   Record, authentication required
   
12-04   Record, publication; city clerk, duties
   
12-05   Violations of ordinances; penalty, restriction
   
12-06   Violations; fines, recovery; procedure
   
12-07   Complaints, pleadings; reference to ordinances
CHAPTER 13
TAXATION AND FINANCE
   
13-01   Power to tax; limitations
   
13-02   Exemption from taxes
   
13-03   Tax day
   
13-04   Preparation of the assessment roll
   
13-05   Board of review
   
13-06   Duties and functions of board of review
   
13-07   Clerk to certify tax levy
   
13-08   City tax roll
   
13-09   Tax roll certified for collection
   
13-10   Tax lien on property
   
13-11   Taxes due; notification
   
13-12   Collection fees
   
13-13   Failure or refusal to pay personal property tax
   
13-14   Delinquent tax roll to county treasurer
   
13-15   Protection of city lien
   
13-16   Additional rights, duties, powers, immunities and procedures
   
13-17   Budget procedure contracts
   
13-18   Purchasing and contractual procedure
   
13-19   Contracts, purchases, expenditures; regulations, restrictions
   
13-20   Authority to expend funds
   
13-21   Contracts, expenditures; budget provision required
   
13-22   Contracts, expenditures; controller, approval prerequisite
CHAPTER 14
GENERAL FINANCE BORROWING POWERS
   
14-01   General borrowing
   
14-02   Special assessment bonds
   
14-03   Other bonds
   
14-04   Preparation and record
   
14-05   Limitations of indebtedness
CHAPTER 15
IMPROVEMENTS AND ASSESSMENTS
   
15-01   General power relative to special assessments
   
15-02   Lien for special assessments
   
15-03   Contested assessments
CHAPTER 16
STREETS, PARKS, TREES, AND SIDEWALKS
   
16-01   Public ways; supervision and control
   
16-02   Public ways; naming; vacation, abolition; notice, procedure
   
16-03   Parks; vacation
   
16-04   Improvements; taxes, special assessments authorized; procedure
   
16-05   Special assessment districts; city; expense, apportionment
   
16-06   Public ways; encumbrances, obstructions; prohibitions, remedy
   
16-07   Trees; regulations authorized
   
16-08   Sidewalks; council authority
   
16-09   Sidewalks; snow, ice, encumbrances; council authority
   
16-10   Compliance with orders required; violations, remedy; procedure
   
16-11   Signs, awnings, etc.; regulations, prohibitions authorized
CHAPTER 17
SEWERS
   
17-01   Maintenance, construction; appropriation of private property
   
17-02   Construction, etc.; costs; special assessments, taxes authorized
   
17-03   Private drains; authority to require; costs; connection to public
drains
CHAPTER 18
PUBLIC UTILITIES
   
18-01   General powers regarding utilities
   
18-02   Rates
Water Works
   
18-03   Water system; city manager responsibilities
   
18-04   Water and sewer rates; meters; assessments for water
   
18-05   Water for public purposes; appropriations required
   
18-06   Connecting pipes; construction, maintenance; ordinance required;
connections, permit required
   
18-07   Ordinances, resolutions authorized
Franchises
   
18-08   Use of public ways; franchise required
   
18-09   Franchises, licenses; term, restriction
   
18-10   Irrevocable franchises; approval of registered voters required
   
18-11   Exclusive franchise prohibited; renewal, requisites
   
18-12   Leasing, assigning franchises
   
18-13   Changing, modifying franchises, procedure
   
18-14   Public utilities; license fees authorized
   
18-15   Franchises; reservations in favor of city required
   
18-16   Joint use of franchise property; compensation; council authority
CHAPTER 19
APPROPRIATION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY
   
19-01   Procedure, state law
   
19-02   Awards in condemnation proceedings; special assessments authorized;
conditions, procedure; portion payable from general taxes
CHAPTER 20
RECALL; REMOVAL; INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
   
20-01   State law
   
20-02   Appointive officers; removal
   
20-03   Petitions; contents, signatures, requisites
   
20-04   Form of petition
   
20-05   Petition; filing; city clerk, duties
   
20-06   Petitions; signatures; examination, determination; city clerk duties
   
20-07   Petitions; insufficiency; additional signatures, procedure
   
20-08   Petitions; sufficiency; return to council
   
20-09   Ordinance; submission to registered voters; special election
   
20-10   Ordinance; submission to registered voters; regular election
   
20-11   Referendum; petition, requisites; suspension of ordinance; procedure
   
20-12   Referendum; submission by council; time, restriction
   
20-13   Conflicting ordinances; adoption; construction, determination
   
20-14   Ordinances; submission to registered voters; notice, publication
required
   
20-15   Ordinance adopted by referendum; amending, repealing; restriction
   
20-16   Additional regulation authorized, restriction
CHAPTER 21
MISCELLANEOUS
   
21-01   Definitions
   
21-02   Notice; posting, publication; requirements, evidence
   
21-03   Process against city; service upon designated officers
   
21-04   “Newspaper of general circulation” defined
   
21-05   Records required
   
21-06   Records; public inspection
   
21-07   Fiscal year
   
21-08   Uniform system of accounts; state law
   
21-09   Books, records, accounts, etc.; examination, audit
   
21-10   Misdemeanors; penalty
   
21-11   Officers, employees; service in military forces; compensation
authorized
   
21-12   Severability of provisions
   
21-13   Charter; amending, revising; procedure; state law
   
21-14   City seal; design, contents
   
21-15   “He”, “masculine form” defined
   
21-16   Council, officers; powers construed
CHAPTER 22
SUBMISSION AND ELECTION
   
22-01   Charter; submission to registered voters, date
   
22-02   Charter; publication required; official ballot
Official Ballot
   
22-03   Effective date of charter
      (a-c)   Elected officers transition to revised charter
      (d)   Continuation of public and private rights
      (e)   Rights of employees
      (f)   Pension system
      (g)   One-year exemption for city clerk and treasurer
      (h)   Compensation for city clerk, city treasurer, council, mayor and
mayor pro tem
      (i)   General provision
      (j)   Conflicts of Interest and ethics ordinance
Preamble
   We, the people of the City of Hamtramck, County of Wayne, and State of
Michigan, pursuant to the authority granted by the Constitution and Statutes of
the State of Michigan, desiring to promote the peace, health, safety,
contentment, equitable treatment, and general welfare of all its people,
perfect a municipal government to meet the growing needs of our diverse
community, ensure effective and efficient administration of all City affairs
and secure the fullest measure of self-government allowed by the Constitution
and general law of our State, do ordain and establish this charter.
Chapter 1 - Incorporation and Boundaries
Sec. 1-01   Body corporate and politic; general powers
   The municipal corporation heretofore created by the voters on the 10th day
of October, A. D. 1921, pursuant to the Constitution and Statutes of the State
of Michigan and known as, “The City of Hamtramck” shall be a body corporate and
politic, under the name and style of “The City of Hamtramck,” and shall have
the powers as provided below.
   (a)   Powers of the City
   The City shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the
constitution and laws of this State as fully and completely as though they were
specifically enumerated in this charter.
   (b)   Construction
   The powers of the City under this charter shall be construed liberally in
favor of the City, and the specific mention of particular powers in the charter
shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power in this
chapter.
   (c)   Intergovernmental relations
   The City may exercise any of its power or perform any of its functions and
may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by
contract or otherwise, with any one or more states, or any state civil division
or agency, or the United States, or any of its agencies.
Sec. 1-02   Boundaries
   The boundaries of said City of Hamtramck shall be the same as those fixed
and established as the boundaries of the former Village of Hamtramck, to which
municipal corporation the City of Hamtramck is successor, which boundaries are
described as follows:
   Beginning at the intersection of the Easterly line of Quarter Section Sixty
(60), Ten Thousand Acre Tract, Township of Hamtramck, Wayne County, Michigan,
with the Northerly boundary line of the City of Detroit, Wayne County,
Michigan, thence Westerly along the said Northerly boundary line of the City of
Detroit to the Easterly line of St. Aubin Avenue, thence following said City of
Detroit boundary line Northerly along said Easterly line of St. Aubin Avenue
and said Easterly line of St. Aubin Avenue extended to a point in Quarter
Section Thirty-Nine (39) of the Ten Thousand Acre Tract, said point being 233
feet Northerly of the Southerly line of said Quarter Section Thirty-Nine (39),
thence again following the boundary lines of the City of Detroit, Westerly on a
line parallel with the Southerly line of said Quarter Sections Thirty-Nine (39)
and Thirty-Eight (38) and being 233 feet Northerly of the Southerly line of
said Quarter Sections Thirty-Nine (39) and Thirty-Eight (38) to the Westerly
line of the Detroit, Grand Haven and Milwaukee Railway Right-of-Way, thence
Northerly following the Westerly line of said Right-of-Way to the Northerly
line of Quarter Section Twenty-Three (23) Ten Thousand Acre Tract, thence
Easterly along the Northerly line of Quarter Sections 23, 22 and 21, all in the
Ten Thousand Acre Tract, to the Northeast corner of said Quarter Section
Twenty-One (21), thence Southerly along the Easterly line of said Quarter
Section Twenty-One (21), of the Ten Thousand Acre Tract to the Northwest corner
of Fractional Section Twenty (20), Township One (1), south of Range Twelve (12)
East, thence East along the East line of said Fractional Section Twenty (20) to
the Northeast corner thereof, thence South along the East line of said
Fractional Section Twenty (20), Township One (1) South of Range Twelve (12)
East to the Southeast corner thereof, thence West along the South line of said
Section Twenty (20), to the East line of the Ten Thousand Acre Tract, thence
Southerly along the Easterly line of Quarter Sections Forty-One (41) and Sixty
(60) of the Ten Thousand Acre Tract to the Northerly boundary lines of the City
of Detroit, Wayne County, Michigan, and being the place of beginning.
Chapter 2 - Ward and Election Precincts
Sec. 2-01   One ward
   The City of Hamtramck shall consist of one ward.
Sec. 2-02   Election precincts; number, boundaries
   The City of Hamtramck shall establish the number of election precincts and
boundaries by ordinance.
Chapter 3 - Registration, Nomination and Election
Sec. 3-01   Registered voters; registration required, state law
   The voters of the City of Hamtramck shall be registered as provided by state
law.
Sec. 3-02   Candidates; nomination at primary election
   Candidates for all offices to be voted for at any municipal election under
the provisions of this charter shall be nominated at a primary election, and no
other names shall appear on the election ballot for election of such officers,
except those selected in the manner hereinafter prescribed.
Sec. 3-03   Primary elections; time
   A primary election for the nomination of candidates for all elective
municipal offices to be filled at the succeeding general municipal election
shall be at a date and time to be established by ordinance or resolution of the
city council and in conformity with state law.
Sec. 3-04   Precinct election inspectors; compensation
   Precinct election inspectors for all elections shall be appointed and
compensated in the manner provided by law.
Sec. 3-05   Candidates; statement of candidacy; filing, forms; petitions,
signatures; restriction, inspection
   Any person desiring to become a candidate for any elective office in the
City of Hamtramck, shall on or before the time provided by state law prior to
the primary election, file with the city clerk an affidavit of identity.
   Each candidate shall at the time file a petition of at least twenty-five
(25) and not more than fifty (50) registered voters, requesting such candidacy.
Each petition shall be verified by one or more persons as to the
qualifications, residence, and street number of each of the persons signing the
petition, and the petition shall be in the form required by state law. In lieu
of a petition, candidates may pay a one hundred dollar ($100.00) filing fee.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sign more than one such nominating
petition for the same office, except when there are two or more candidates to
be elected for the same office, when he may sign as many petitions as there are
persons to be elected for such office.
   The city clerk shall prepare and keep on hand blank forms of the nominating
petitions, and shall furnish the petition, free of charge, for the use of the
voters and candidates.
   All such nomination petitions shall be open to public inspection after being
filed in the office of the city clerk in accordance with such rules and
regulations as shall be prescribed by him and in conformance with state law.
Sec. 3-06   Challengers, appointment
   Challengers may be appointed in such manner and with such rights and
privileges as are provided in the general laws of the state.
Sec. 3-07   Conducting primary elections; state law
   Primary elections, except as otherwise provided, shall be conducted as
provided for the holding of elections under this charter and state and federal
law.
Sec. 3-08   Canvass of votes; returns
   Immediately upon the closing of the polls, the inspectors of each precinct
shall count the ballots and ascertain the number of votes cast in the precinct
for each of the candidates whose names shall be printed or written upon such
ballots, and shall count the votes for and against any charter amendment or
other special question which may be submitted to the registered voters at such
primary election and return the count forthwith to the city clerk in accordance
with state law.
Sec. 3-09   Candidates nominated for general election; tie vote, recount;
determination
   When only one person is to be elected to any office, then the two candidates
receiving the highest number of votes for that office shall be the only
candidates whose names shall be placed on the ballots for that office at the
general election.
   When two or more persons are to be elected to any office, then the names of
the persons receiving at the primary election the highest number of votes for
the office up to a number equal to twice the number of persons to be elected to
the office at the general election, shall be placed upon the ballot for that
office.
   In case of a tie vote, or if a recount of the votes cast at a primary
election is desired, the same proceedings shall apply as provided in this
chapter relative to vote recounts and tie votes.
Sec. 3-10   Number of candidates; primary election not required
   If at the expiration of the time for the filing of nomination petitions, the
number of candidates for each and every office to be voted upon shall not
exceed the number of candidates to be nominated for such respective offices,
then no primary election shall be held and the persons who have filed such
petitions and nominating statements shall be nominated.
   The names of such candidates shall be printed upon the ballot to be voted at
the next municipal election in the same manner as though such candidates had
been nominated at a regularly held primary election.
Sec. 3-11   Filling vacancies; petitions, ballots, statements of candidacy,
requirements
   Whenever it shall be necessary to nominate candidates to fill vacancies, the
candidates for the nomination for such office shall state such fact in their
petitions and affidavit of identity. The primary ballot shall distinguish the
candidates for the unexpired terms from the candidates for the regular full
term.
Sec. 3-12   Municipal general elections; time, state law
   All municipal general elections held in the City of Hamtramck, shall be held
in odd-numbered years in the manner prescribed by the law of the State relative
to general elections except that they will be on a non-partisan basis.
Sec. 3-13   Special elections; council authority
   Special elections may be appointed by resolution of the council and held at
such times as it shall determine. The purpose and object of such election shall
be fully set forth in the resolution. No more than two special elections,
including a primary election, shall be held within one year unless otherwise
allowed by state law. All special elections shall be held on a non-partisan
basis.
Sec. 3-14   Qualified voters
   The inhabitants of the City who are registered to vote in the City under
state law shall vote in the election district where he shall reside. The term
“reside” means having an established residence in the city not less than thirty
(30) days before the next election.
Sec. 3-15   Ballots, ballot boxes; printing, filing; city clerk, duties
   The city clerk shall cause ballots to be printed and filed in his offices,
in accordance with the general election laws. The council shall also provide
and cause to be kept by the clerk for use at all elections suitable ballot
boxes of the kind required by law.
Sec. 3-16   City election commission; composition, meetings; special officers;
powers and duties enumerated
   There shall be a commission of four members to be known as the City Election
Commission, consisting of the city attorney, city clerk, chief of police and
city manager. The members shall meet at the council chamber preceding the day
of each election, and shall report to the commission as a whole as to the
preparation each member has made for the election as herein provided, and the
city election commission shall complete all arrangements for the holding of
such elections.
   The city clerk shall be chairperson of the city election commission and
direct all election activities according to law. The city attorney shall advise
the city election commission on all legal matters.
   The city clerk shall furnish all materials and supplies necessary for the
conducting of elections by the several election boards, and shall report to the
city election commission at the council chamber preceding the day of election,
a correct list and tabulation of all ballots, supplies, stationery, and
accessories to be furnished ready for delivery to the chief of police on the
morning of election day, and such delivery shall be made by the clerk to the
chief of police on the morning of election day at the office of the clerk at
least one-half hour before the time of opening the polls.
   The chief of police shall have charge of, supervise, and be responsible for
the delivery of all ballots, ballot boxes, materials and supplies, to the
election inspectors and election boards at each place of voting before the time
of opening of the voting places and shall take charge of the ballot boxes
immediately upon their being sealed by the board of election inspectors, and at
once deliver them to the city clerk at his office. He shall properly guard the
boxes and secure them from tampering or disturbance from the time they may be
delivered to him by the various precinct boards until they are returned to the
office of the clerk after sealing.
   The city manager shall have charge of, and supervise, and be responsible for
the places of voting. He shall see that the polling places are prepared,
arranged, furnished, lighted, heated, and properly cleaned before each election
and that suitable polling places shall be rented in case the City has not
provided polling places and that the rent shall be paid by the city council.
   The inspectors of election shall hear the reports of the members of the city
election commission as herein before provided, and shall receive instructions
from the city election commission as to their duties, and shall be privileged
to make inquiry concerning their duties if they so desire.
   If any complaint shall be made to the city election commission that any
inspector of election or other election officer has been guilty of any
violation of the provisions of this charter or any general law governing
elections, or shall be unfit or disqualified for the performance of his duties
for any reason, the city election commission may, in its discretion, after the
investigation of such complaint, remove such inspector or other election
officer, and the city clerk at the time of such removal may appoint another
suitable person who shall act in place of the inspector or election officer so
removed for the balance of election day. The city election commission shall
report such action, with its reasons therefore, to the council at its next
regular meeting, and the inspector so appointed shall receive all or such
proportionate part of the compensation allowed by the council for the
performance of such duties as the council may direct.
Sec. 3-17   Election officers, compensation
   All inspectors of election, clerks, and other election officers shall
receive as full compensation for the services required of them at any election,
such sum as shall be determined by the council prior to the date of the holding
of any election.
Sec. 3-18   Elections; notice required; city clerk, duties
   Notice of the time and place of holding any election and of the officers to
be elected and questions to be voted upon shall be, except as herein otherwise
provided, or as required by state law, given by the clerk at least ten days
before the date of the election by posting such notices in at least three
conspicuous places in each election precinct of the city, and by publishing a
copy at least twice, the first publication not less than ten days before the
date of election in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, designated
by the council, and if the council shall so direct, by the further publication
of such notices in any other newspaper or newspapers of general circulation in
the city, and in case of a special election the notice shall set forth the
purpose of the election as fully as the same is required to be set forth in the
resolution appointing such election.
Sec. 3-19   Conduct of elections; state law
   All elections in the City shall be conducted as nearly as may be in the
manner provided by the law for holding general elections in the State, except
as herein otherwise provided. The election inspectors at all municipal
elections shall have the same powers and authority for the preservation of
order and for enforcing obedience to their lawful commands during the time of
holding the election and the canvass of votes, as are conferred by law.
Sec. 3-20   Canvass of votes; declaration, statement required; state law
   Immediately after closing the polls the inspectors and clerks of election
shall, without adjourning, publicly canvass the votes received by them and
declare the results and shall immediately thereafter make a statement in
writing upon a blank form furnished by the city clerk setting forth in words at
full length the whole number of votes given for each office, the names of the
persons for whom such votes for each office were given and the number of votes
so given for each person, and the whole number of votes given upon each
question voted upon and the number of votes for and against the same, which
statement shall be certified under their hands to be correct, and they shall
deposit such statement and certificate, together with the poll list and the
register of voters, with the city clerk. The manner of canvassing the votes
shall be the same as prescribed by law for canvassing votes at general
elections held in this State, and the inspectors and clerks shall in all other
respects, except as herein otherwise provided, conform as nearly as may be to
the duties required of inspectors and clerks of election at general elections.
Sec. 3-21   Tie vote; determination
   If at any election two or more candidates for the same office receive an
equal number of votes and not all can be elected, then the board of canvassers
must set a date for those persons to appear in order to determine by lot the
right to that office and must give notice, so that all interested persons may
attend. The manner of determining by lot must be in accordance with law.
Sec. 3-22   Recount; petition, procedure; state law
   Any candidate for office failing of election, or any citizen interested in
any charter amendment or other proposition who shall not be satisfied with the
results of the vote as shown by the returns of the boards of election
inspectors to the city clerk or as shown by the canvass of the returns of such
inspectors, may seek a recount of the votes cast as provided in Michigan
Election Law.
Chapter 4 - Elective Officers
Sec. 4-01   Elective officers enumerated; term
   One mayor and six council members shall be elected on a non-partisan ballot
from the City at-large for four-year staggered terms, in accordance with
section
22-03. Terms shall begin on January 1 following the election.
Sec. 4-02   Elective officers; qualifications
   Only registered voters of the City are eligible to hold office as a council
member or mayor. No individual shall, at the same election, be a candidate for
both mayor and councilperson, nor may such individual be an employee of the
City while a candidate for elective office. Only registered voters of the City
who have been a resident for at least one year at the time of filing to run for
office, or appointment to office, are eligible to hold office as mayor or
council member. A person may not hold the office of mayor for more than three
terms, or hold the office of city council member for more than three (3) terms.
(Amended 11-2-2021)
Sec. 4-03   Elective offices; filling vacancies
   a)   If a vacancy occurs on council, the fourth place finisher in the last
general election for city council shall be appointed to fill the vacancy for
the remainder of the term. If the fourth place finisher is ineligible or
unwilling or unable to be appointed, the fifth place finisher in the last
general election for city council shall be appointed. If the fifth place
finisher is ineligible or unwilling or unable to be appointed, the sixth place
finisher in the last general election for city council shall be appointed. If
the sixth place finisher is ineligible or unwilling or unable to be appointed,
the council shall have thirty (30) days to fill the vacancy.
   b)   Each member of council may nominate one candidate to fill the vacancy
to be considered by council. If council is unable to agree on a candidate
within thirty (30) days, the mayor shall appoint one of the nominated
candidates to fill the vacancy. The person appointed to fill the vacancy shall
serve for the remainder of the term of the position vacated.
   c)   If a vacancy occurs in the office of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall
fill the vacancy until the next municipal general election, which election
shall be effective upon certification of election and oath of office for the
remainder of the term. If there is less than two years remaining on the term,
the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term.
Sec. 4-04   Council members who run for mayor
   Any councilperson who decides to become a candidate for mayor shall, unless
his term as councilperson shall expire in the year of the election, resign his
seat on the city council not later than sixty (60) days prior to the filing
deadline for council or mayor by tendering his irrevocable, written resignation
to the city clerk, such resignation to become effective upon the seating of the
next succeeding city council in January. If the resignation is not received by
the city clerk at least sixty (60) days prior to the filing deadline for mayor
or council, the councilmember shall be deemed ineligible to seek the office of
mayor in that election. The vacancy, if any, created by such resignation shall
be nominated at the primary and filled at the general election for the balance
of the council term so vacated. No individual shall at the same election be a
candidate for both mayor and councilperson.
Sec. 4-05   Mayor who runs for council
   Any mayor who decides to become a candidate for council shall, unless his
term as mayor shall expire in the year of the election, resign his position as
mayor not later than sixty (60) days prior to the filing deadline for mayor or
council, by tendering his irrevocable, written resignation to the city clerk,
such resignation to become effective upon the seating of the next succeeding
city council in January. If the resignation is not received by the city clerk
at least sixty (60) days prior to the filing deadline for mayor or council, the
mayor shall be deemed ineligible to seek the office of council in that
election. The vacancy, if any, created by such resignation shall be nominated
at the primary and filled at the general election for the balance of the
mayor’s term so vacated. No individual shall at the same election be a
candidate for both mayor and councilperson.
Chapter 5 - Appointed Department Heads, Boards, and Commissions
Sec. 5-01   Appointed department heads, boards, commissions; qualifications,
removals; filling vacancies
   (a)   Members appointed to boards and commissions do not require approval by
council- and mayor-elect unless otherwise provided by statute, this charter; or
ordinance in existence prior to the effective date of this charter. The powers
and duties of such boards or commissions may be prescribed by ordinance subject
to the provisions of this charter or state statute.
   (b)   The members of all boards and commissions that are created by
ordinance shall be appointed by the mayor if the ordinance creating the board
or commission does not specify the method by which members to that board or
commission are appointed.
   (c)   The city clerk must post notice of expiring or vacated board and
commission positions as they occur, stating the general duties and that
application forms are available from the city clerk.
   (d)   The mayor shall appoint, a library board consisting of five members
appointed to three-year staggered terms beginning with the third Monday of
April, 2006, with two members appointed for three years, two members appointed
for two years and one member appointed for one year, and thereafter, all
members shall be appointed to three-year terms.
   (e)   The mayor shall appoint a board of review consisting of three
residents of the City with qualifications required by this Charter for officers
of the City, and such other boards or commission members as shall be provided
by ordinances of the city council to be appointed by the mayor.
   (f)   All appointed department heads shall be appointed by the city manager,
subject to approval by a majority vote of the council- and mayor-elect.
“Department head” shall mean the city clerk, city treasurer, police chief, fire
chief, city controller, city assessor, city attorney, and such other department
heads as may be established by ordinance.
   (g)   All department heads shall be subject to the administration and under
the jurisdiction of the city manager.
   (h)   The appointing authority may remove, without assigning cause, except
where prohibited by state law, any department head or member of any board or
commission who by the terms of this charter or ordinance of the City shall be
appointed by the appointing authority provided, that for the first ninety (90)
days after his election or appointment, the appointing authority may remove
such department head, and commission or board members only for cause.
   (i)   The appointing authority shall have the power to fill any vacancy,
caused by his removal of a department head or member of a board or commission.
This appointment shall be in the same manner that is defined by this charter
regarding appointing department heads, and board and commission members.
Sec. 5-02   Appointed boards and commissions, term
   All boards or commissions shall be appointed at such time, and for such term
as shall be prescribed in this charter or in the ordinance or State statute
creating such office. If any appointment shall not be made on the day specified
in this charter or in the ordinance or statute creating such office, it may be
made at any subsequent time. After confirming such appointment, it shall be the
duty of the city clerk within five days to notify in writing by certified mail
the person receiving such appointment.
Sec. 5-03   Department heads, boards and commissions; term; oath required;
removal
   All department heads and board and commission members shall enter upon the
duties of their several offices upon taking and filing the oath of office and
filing the requisite surety, if any be required of them. All appointments shall
expire on their expiration, unless sooner removed.
Sec. 5-04   Department heads, boards and commissions; nepotism, political,
religious consideration prohibited
   All department heads and boards and commissions shall be appointed with
reference to their qualifications and fitness, and for the good of the public
service, and without any regard whatever to their religious faith or party
affiliations. The spouse, spousal equivalent, child, parent, grandchild,
grandparent, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, or the spousal
equivalent of any of them, whether by marriage, or by blood, or by adoption of
the mayor or any councilperson, shall be disqualified for appointment to a
board or commission during the term for which the mayor or councilperson is
elected.
Sec. 5-05   Elective officers; appointments, compensation, restrictions
   No elective officer shall after his election and during the term for which
he was elected, or within one year thereafter, be appointed to any department
head, board, or commission which shall have been created, or the salary of
which has been increased during his term of office, except that the elected
clerk and treasurer shall be eligible for appointment as a department head, in
accordance with section
22-03.
Sec. 5-06   Appointed department heads, boards or commissions; compensation,
determination
   a)   Every department head and board or commission member shall receive such
salary or compensation as the council- and mayor-elect may by ordinance or
resolution provide.
   b)   The members of the library board may not receive compensation for their
services on or in connection with the affairs of the board, unless provided by
state law.
Chapter 6 - General Provisions Relating to Elective Officers, and Department
Heads, Boards and Commissions
Sec. 6-01   Elective officers; notice of election required
   It shall be the duty of the city clerk, within five days after the meeting
of the Board of Canvassers and the determination as to the result of any
election, to notify, by certified mail each person elected of his election.
Sec. 6-02   Oath of office required; form
   Every officer, department head, board, or commission member elected or
appointed shall within ten days of the effective date of the term of election
or appointment and before entering upon the duties of his office, take and
subscribe to an oath of office, which shall be kept and filed in the office of
the city clerk, which oath of office shall be as follows:
   State of Michigan )
   County of Wayne ) ss.
   I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the
United States and the Constitution of this State, and that I will faithfully
discharge the duties of the office of ______, of the City of Hamtramck,
according to the best of my ability.
   (Signed)_____________________
   Subscribed and sworn to before me________________on this________________day
of________
   Notary Public, Wayne County, Michigan,
   My commission expires_________________
   In case of his failure to take, subscribe, and file the oath within ten (10)
days after the effective date of his term of election or appointment, unless
the council shall extend the time by resolution, he shall be deemed to have
declined the office.
Sec. 6-03   Officers; bonds, filing; requisites
   Every elected officer or elective or appointed board or commission member,
before entering upon the duties of his office, and within the time prescribed
for filing his oath of office, if a bond be required, shall file with the city
clerk such bond or surety as may be required by law or any ordinance or
resolution of the council, and with such sureties as shall be approved by the
council, conditioned for the due performance of the duties of his office,
except that the bond or security given by the city clerk shall be deposited
with the city treasurer.
Sec. 6-04   Officers; additional, new bonds
   The council may at any time require any elected officers or board or
commission members to execute and file with the city clerk additional or new
official bonds, with such new or further security as the council shall deem
requisite. Failure to comply with such requirements within fifteen (15) days
shall subject the officer to immediate removal from office by the council.
Sec. 6-05   Bonds, liability
   The resignation or removal of any elected officer or appointed board or
commission member shall not, nor shall the appointment or election of another
to the office, exonerate such officer, board or commission member, or his
sureties from any liability incurred by them.
Sec. 6-06   Oaths, bonds; failure to file, penalty
   At the next regular meeting of the council after the expiration of the time
in which any official bond or oath of office is required to be filed, the clerk
shall report in writing to the council the name of any person elected or
appointed to any office who shall have neglected to file such oath or bond.
Unless the council shall for good cause shown, extend the time for the filing
of such bond or oath, such office shall be deemed to be vacant, following such
a meeting.
Sec. 6-07   Oaths, bonds; failure to file; declaration of vacancy
   If any person elected or appointed to office shall fail to file his oath of
office or to give the bond or surety required for the due performance of the
duties of his office within the required time, the council may declare the
office vacant, unless he files the oath and gives the required bond or surety
before the office is declared vacant.
Sec. 6-08   Elective, appointive office; persons in default disqualified
   No person shall be elected or appointed to any office who is a defaulter to
the City or to any board, or office, or department thereof, or to any school
district, county, or other municipal corporation of the State, now or
heretofore existing. All votes for the election or appointment of any such
defaulter shall be void.
Sec. 6-09   Delivery of books, papers, etc., to successor required
   Whenever any officer, department head or board or commission member shall
resign or be removed from office, or the term for which he has been elected or
appointed shall have expired, he shall on demand deliver over to his successor
in office all the books, papers, money, and effects in his office; and any
person willfully violating this provision shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Sec. 6-10   Officers, employees; surety bonds; prohibition
   No officer, agent, or employee of the city shall become surety on the
official bond of another officer, agent, or employee of the City, nor upon any
bond or contract executed or made to the City.
Sec. 6-11   Declaration of vacancy in office; causes enumerated
   If any person elected to office shall die, resign, move from the city, be
removed from office, or be convicted of a felony, or if any councilperson or
mayor shall absent himself from council meetings for a period of five unexcused
consecutive regular meetings or ten unexcused regular meetings within a year
without good and sufficient reason, and without the permission of the council,
the office held by such person shall be deemed to be vacant.
Sec. 6-12   Appointive officers; powers and duties
   All department heads or board and commission members shall perform such
duties other and further than those prescribed in this charter as shall be
prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the council that are not in conflict
with
Chapter 7 Sec.
7-03.
Sec. 6-13   Fees; duty to pay to city treasurer
   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this charter or in the ordinance
or resolution fixing the salary or compensation of any officer, no department
head, employee, or board or commission member, shall be entitled to retain for
his own use and benefit any fee or money payable to him by virtue of his office
or position, but shall collect all such fees and monies for the use and benefit
of the City and shall pay the same into the city treasury to be credited to the
proper funds.
Sec. 6-14   Officers; charter violations, penalty; city attorney, duty
   Failure, neglect, or refusal by any elected official to comply with the
provisions of the charter shall be a cause for his removal from office, and it
shall be a duty of the city attorney to file a complaint against such offending
officer before Council immediately upon receiving information of such offense.
Should the city attorney fail, neglect, or refuse to file such complaint, any
citizen of the City of Hamtramck may file and prosecute such complaint on
behalf of the city. A copy of the complaint shall be provided to the offending
officer, who will be provided an opportunity to appear at a hearing before
Council to be heard, to present witnesses and to cross-examine witnesses.
Sec. 6-15   Officers; expenditures, commitments in excess of appropriations
prohibited; penalty; city attorney, duty
   Every elected officer or employee of the City who shall knowingly or without
proper authorization expend money or incur liability in excess of his budget
allowance shall be personally liable to the City of Hamtramck for the
overdraft, and it shall be the duty of the city attorney to bring action
against such officer or employee for collection of such overdraft immediately
upon receiving the information of the overdraft; and if the city attorney shall
fail or neglect to bring said action within thirty (30) days after receiving
the information, then any taxpayer of the City may bring and prosecute such
action on behalf of the City. In addition to the foregoing, overdrawing a
budget allowance by any elective or appointive officer shall be a cause for his
removal from office.
Sec. 6-16   Principles of personnel management
   (a)   All appointments and promotions of city officials and employees must
be made on the basis of merit and fitness demonstrated by a valid and reliable
examination or other evidence of competence.
   (b)   No person who is a spouse, spousal equivalent, child, parent,
grandchild, grandparent, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, or the
spousal equivalent of any of them, whether by marriage, or by blood, or by
adoption, of any member of city council, of the mayor, or of the city manager
may be hired or promoted during the term or tenure of that officer, and no
employee of the city may be supervised by a relative.
   (c)   In accordance with law, city council may provide by ordinance for the
establishment, regulation, and maintenance of merit based personnel policies
necessary to conduct effective administration of the employees of the city’s
departments, offices, and agencies, including but not limited to classification
and pay plans, examinations, force reduction, removals, working conditions,
provisional and exempt appointments, in-service training, grievances,
relationships with employee organizations, and severance for those employees
not otherwise covered by an employment contact or labor agreement. There must
be an employee reference manual that outlines the personnel policies.
   (d)   Employees of the city have the right to organize and bargain
collectively in accordance with law.
   (e)   The city council may provide for a hearings board to which employees
not otherwise covered by a grievance system may appeal any proceedings or
situations having a bearing on employment status or conditions,
   (f)   Each employee must be protected against retaliation for lawful
disclosure of information which she or he reasonably believes evidences a
violation of any law, rule, or regulation; mismanagement; gross waste of
monies; abuse of authority; or a substantial and specific danger to public
health or safety.
   (g)   No former employee who is drawing a pension from the City may hold a
paid position with the City or may be a paid consultant for more than seventy
(70) hours in any one month. However, this does not preclude a retired city
employee from holding office as mayor or city council member.
Sec. 6-17   Appointments to office, restriction
   (a)   No elected official shall hold more than one position. Appointed board
or commission members or employees may not hold more than two positions in the
city except as provided by ordinance or unless prohibited by law.
   (b)   Employees of the City of Hamtramck shall not be employed with another
governmental unit except where permission has been granted by resolution of
council. Outside employment of employees during their normal work hours is
prohibited unless approved by resolution of council.
Sec. 6-18   Officers; resignations, procedure
   Resignations of elective officers shall be made to the city council and
filed with the city clerk. Resignations of appointive officers shall be made to
that officer who has in the first instance the power of making such
appointment.
Sec. 6-19   Filling vacancies; procedure, term
   Vacancy in any appointive office shall be filled by that appointing
authority who has in the first instance the power to make such appointment, and
unless otherwise in this charter specified, shall be made for the balance of
the unexpired term.
Chapter 7 - Council
Sec. 7-01   Council, composition; compensation
   (a)   The council of the City of Hamtramck shall consist of six city
councilpersons, three of which shall be elected every two years for four-year
terms. Council members shall be paid annually two percent (2%) of the State of
Michigan governor’s salary. Such compensation shall be paid monthly.
   (b)   Reasonable expenses may be allowed by the council by resolution and
budgetary authority when such expenses are actually incurred on behalf of the
City, upon proper documentation being furnished in such form and manner as the
council shall prescribe for all city employees seeking reimbursement of
expenses.
   (c)   Elected officials shall not be entitled to any fringe benefits.
Sec. 7-02   Legislative authority; administrative, executive powers
   The legislative authority of the City and all administrative and executive
powers not otherwise delegated, are hereby vested in the council.
Sec. 7-03   Meetings; presiding officer; determination; clerk; appointive
officers; attendance, duty
   The regular meetings of the city council shall be presided over by the
mayor, who along with the city manager shall establish the agenda for the
meetings, or in case of his absence or disability, by the mayor pro tem. The
mayor pro tem shall be that councilperson who is selected by the council at
their first regular meeting after the effective date of taking office following
a general election. The city clerk shall be the clerk of the council.
   A representative of appointed boards or commissions of the City and
department heads shall attend regular meetings of the council at the request of
council through the city manager. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the
council and each of its members shall deal with the administrative branch of
the government solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor any
members shall give any order or directions, written or verbal, either publicly
or privately, to any of the subordinates of the city manager.
   The council may act only through resolution or ordinance.
Sec. 7-04   Journal of proceedings required; rules of procedure; disorderly
conduct, ordinance authorized
   The council shall keep in the English language a permanent, written or
printed journal of its proceedings, which shall be signed by the city clerk.
The council shall determine its own rules of procedure and may provide by
ordinance or resolution for the punishment of its members for disorderly
conduct during the meetings.
Sec. 7-05   General welfare; ordinances, regulations
   The council shall further have authority to enact all ordinances and to make
all regulations consistent with this charter and the laws and constitution of
this State as they may deem necessary for the safety, order, and good
government of the City and the general welfare of the inhabitants. An ordinance
shall require the vote of a majority of the council- and mayor-elect for
passage. The mayor may not propose an ordinance for consideration by the
council.
Sec. 7-06   Resolutions, majority vote; mayor’s voting rights
   Unless otherwise provided in this charter, a majority yea and nay vote of a
quorum of council-elect excluding the mayor shall be required for the passage
and final adoption of any resolution. In the event of a tie vote, the mayor
shall vote to break the tie on any resolution. The mayor may not propose a
resolution for consideration by the council.
   The council may act only through resolution or ordinance.
Sec. 7-07   Specific powers; enumeration not construed as limitation
   The granting of the City or council of any specific power in this charter
shall not be construed as limiting any general granting of powers unless the
intention to so limit is clearly indicated.
Sec. 7-08   Officers, employees, departments; city council, authority
   The City of Hamtramck shall have all power and authority to provide by
ordinance or resolution for the appointment or employment by the respective
city officers, departments, or boards, of such deputies, assistants, and
employees as the city council- and mayor-elect shall deem necessary, and also
in resolutions to fix, subject to the provisions of this charter, the
compensation and period of appointment or employment.
Sec. 7-09   Regular, special meetings; time, place; open to public; quorum
   (a)   The city council must meet regularly at least twice in every month, at
least fourteen (14) days apart, and at times and places which the city council
provides by resolution. Special meetings may be called by the mayor, or by two
or more city council members, or by the city manager. An organizational meeting
shall be held on the first Tuesday after January 1st at 7:00 p.m. EST. Meetings
must be held in accordance with the Open Meetings Act.
   (b)   The majority of the council-elect, excluding the mayor, shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business; a less number may adjourn
from time to time, and compel the attendance of absent members in such manner
as shall be prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the council; and all
pending business and business noticed or set down for hearing at any meetings
at which there shall not be a quorum present shall be taken up and heard at
such adjourned meeting, or at the next regular meeting.
Sec. 7-10   Accounts, claims; audit, approval required; requisites
   To the extent permitted by State law, the council shall audit and allow all
accounts chargeable against the City, but no account or claim or contract shall
be received for audit or allowance unless it be accompanied with the
certificate of an officer of the corporation or an affidavit of the person
rendering it, to the effect that he verily believes that the services therein
charged have been actually performed; or the property or goods have been
delivered to the city; that the sums charged are reasonable and just; and that
to the best of his knowledge and belief no actual set off exists nor payment
has been made on account thereof except such as are endorsed or referred to in
such account or claim. Every such account shall exhibit in detail all the items
making up the amount claimed and the true date of each.
Chapter 8 - Powers of City and Council in General
Sec. 8-01   General powers
   Unless otherwise provided or limited in this charter, the City and its
officers shall possess and be vested with any and all powers, privileges, and
immunities, expressed or implied, which cities and their officers are, or
hereafter may be, permitted to exercise or to provide for in their charters
under the Statutes and Constitution of the State of Michigan, including all
powers, privileges, and immunities granted to cities and their officers by Act
279 of the Public Acts of 1909 of the State of Michigan [MCL 117.1 et seq., MSA
5.2071 et seq.], as amended, and including all powers, privileges, and
immunities which cities are, or may be, permitted to provide in their charters,
and in no case shall any enumeration of particular powers, privileges, or
immunities herein be held to be exclusive.
   The City and its officers shall have power to exercise all municipal powers
in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration
of the municipal government, whether such powers be herein expressly enumerated
or not; to do any act to advance the interests of the city, good government,
and prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants; to make, continue,
amend, repeal, and enforce all ordinances and resolutions which shall be
necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers and all
other powers vested by the Constitution and Statutes of the State of Michigan
in cities, except where forbidden, or where the subject is covered exclusively
by a general law. The City and its officers should have power to provide for
the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property, and to
provide that the levy, collection, and return of state, county, and school
taxes shall be in conformity with the general laws of the State, except that
the preparation of the assessment roll, the meeting of the board of review, and
the confirmation of the assessment roll shall be as provided by this charter.
Sec. 8-02   Intergovernmental contracts
   The City shall have the power to join with any governmental unit or agency,
or with any number or combination thereof, by contract or otherwise as may be
permitted by law, to have performed (a) jointly, or (b) by one or more of them
for or on behalf of the other or others, or (c) by any other person, firm, or
corporation, any function which is permitted to be so performed by law by such
governmental unit or agency, and to provide for the financing thereof.
Chapter 9 - Powers and Duties of Officers and Department Heads
Mayor
Sec. 9-01   Powers and duties
   The mayor shall be presiding officer of the council and chief executive
officer of the city and shall perform such other duties as are, or may be,
imposed or authorized by the laws of the State or this charter. He shall
execute or authenticate by his signature such instruments as the council, this
charter, or any statute of the State of Michigan or law of the United States
shall require, including certifying the minutes.
   He shall be the conservator of the peace and may in emergencies exercise
within the City the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress riot and
disorder and shall have the authority to command the assistance of all able-
bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the ordinances of the City and to
suppress riot and disorder.
   In times of public danger or emergency, he may, with consent of the council,
take command of the police and such other departments and subordinates of the
City as may be deemed necessary by the council to maintain order and enforce
laws.
   The mayor shall keep an office in some convenient place in the City to be
provided by the city council.
   The mayor may recommend such appointments to office as are prescribed by
this charter or ordinance of the council and may remove such appointees without
assigning cause, except as provided in
Chapter 5 Sec.
5-01, and may recommend appointment to the vacancy caused thereby.
   The mayor shall perform all acts required by the constitution and laws of
this State and this charter, whether herein specifically enumerated or not.
   The mayor shall be ex-officio a member of such boards or commissions of
which he is appointed a member by the terms of this charter or ordinances of
the city.
   The mayor shall notify the council of any prolonged absence or inability to
perform his duties. Council by resolution may define what “prolonged absence”
means.
Sec. 9-02   Mayor Pro tem
   The mayor pro tem shall, during the absence or inability of the mayor to
perform his duties, act in the name and stead of the mayor and shall, during
the time of such absence or inability, exercise all the duties and possess all
the powers of the mayor. The mayor pro tem, when acting as mayor, shall preside
over the meeting and may vote on resolutions or ordinances. In the absence of
the mayor pro tem, the council members present shall select an acting mayor pro
tem.
Sec. 9-03   Compensation of mayor and mayor pro tem
   The mayor shall be paid annually four percent (4%) of the salary set for the
governor of the State of Michigan. The mayor pro tem shall be paid annually
three percent (3%) of the salary set for the governor of the State of Michigan.
Such compensation shall be paid monthly. The mayor, or mayor pro tem while
serving as mayor, shall receive no further compensation for his official duties
or for any other purpose. Reasonable expenses may be allowed by the council by
resolution and budgetary authority when such expenses are actually incurred on
behalf of the City, upon proper documentation being furnished in such form and
manner as the council shall prescribe for all city employees seeking payment
for such expenses.
   Elected officers shall not be entitled to any fringe benefits.
City Clerk
Sec. 9-04   Powers and duties
   The city clerk shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to approval
by a majority vote of the council- and mayor-elect, and shall hold office at
the pleasure of the city manager and shall be directly responsible to the city
manager. The functions and duties of the city clerk shall be as follows:
   (a)   The clerk shall be the clerk of the council. He shall give notice of
its meetings, attend all meetings of the council, and shall keep a permanent,
written or printed journal of its proceedings in the English language. He shall
keep a record of all ordinances, resolutions, and actions of the council.
   (b)   He shall have the power to administer all oaths required by state law,
this charter and the ordinances of the city.
   (c)   He shall be custodian of the city seal and shall affix it to all
documents and instruments requiring the seal and shall attest to the same. He
shall also be custodian of all papers, documents, and records pertinent to the
City, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for by this charter. All
records of the city shall be made available to the general public in compliance
with the Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 to 15.246. He shall give to the
proper officers of the City ample notice of the expiration or termination of
any official bonds, franchises, contracts, or agreements to which the City is a
party.
   (d)   He shall at all times cooperate with the city manager and provide such
information and reports and perform such duties as are requested by the city
manager, so long as they are not inconsistent with the duties of his office as
herein provided.
   (e)   He shall certify by his signature all ordinances, resolutions, and
minutes enacted or passed by the council and perform other duties required of
him by state or federal law, this charter, the council, and ordinances of the
city.
   (f)   He shall be responsible for the issuance of licenses within the City
by ordinance or state statute.
City Controller
Sec. 9-05   Powers and duties
   The city controller shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to
approval by a majority vote of the council- and mayor-elect, and shall hold
office at the pleasure of the city manager, and shall be directly responsible
to the city manager. He shall be a qualified and competent accountant and shall
be the chief financial officer of the city.
   The functions and duties of the city controller shall be as follows:
   (a)   He shall receive and audit all accounts and demands against the City
and prepare vouchers for the same. Such accounts and demands, or such parts
thereof, as to the correctness of which he has no doubt, he shall list in the
order of their allowance, and certify to the council the correctness of the
same. Such accounts and demands concerning which he has any doubt as to their
correctness, he shall list separate from those allowed by him, and send them to
the council with his objections.
   (b)   After the allowance by the council of any account or demand, the city
clerk shall certify the same to the city controller, who shall draw his warrant
upon the city treasurer, which warrant shall be countersigned by the city
treasurer, city controller, and city manager. The controller shall not sign
such warrants until he has first registered the same against the fund or funds
from which they are payable. He shall keep a complete set of books exhibiting
the financial conditions of the City, with all its resources and liabilities,
in its various departments and funds.
   (c)   He shall keep a bond register in which shall be entered a record of
all bonds issued by the City, with the name, amount, and the date thereof, and
complete details of all coupons attached thereto.
   (d)   He shall keep an account of all funds, taxes, receipts, and
expenditures of the City, as obtained from the daily reports of receipts and
disbursements received by him from the city treasurer.
Sec. 9-06   Monthly, annual financial statements, contents; funds, management,
liability; records, bond required
   (a)   Within three weeks after the end of each month, the controller shall
present to the council and city manager a financial statement of the City for
the preceding month, which statement shall provide a comparison of the actual
revenues and expenditures of each fund, including all the various budgeted
funds compared to the budgeted amounts prepared on a basis of accounting
generally accepted in the United States for local units of government.
   (b)   The controller shall also file a true copy of the financial statement
with the city clerk, who shall keep and preserve it as public record and shall
give access to it to every citizen of the City of Hamtramck at any time during
the business hours of the day. Such copy shall be verified to the truthfulness
and correctness of the facts stated therein, by the oath or affirmation of the
controller. For the purpose of preparing the financial statement and list, the
controller shall require every board, officer, and employee to file with him
all information which he may deem necessary, and every such board, officer, and
employee shall file with the controller the information at the time and in the
manner as he may prescribe.
   (c)   On or before three months after July in each year, he shall make out
and present to the council and city manager a financial statement of the City
for the fiscal year ending on the 30th day of June of each year, consistent
with accounting generally accepted in the United States for local units of
government and complying with the Uniform Budgeting and Accounting Act, MCL
141.425-428. He shall at other times, if directed by the council, furnish
statements showing the condition of the several funds and accounts.
   (d)   He shall charge the city treasurer with the whole amount of taxes and
assessments, special or general, levied for the City and placed in the
treasurer’s hands for collection, crediting the various funds and accounts
according to the various appropriations.
   (e)   He shall also charge the city treasurer with all sums received from
licenses, rents, and other monies which are payable to the treasurer, and the
various proceeds of all bonds, coupons, notes, leases, mortgages, bills
receivable, or bills payable, or revenue of whatsoever nature. When any fund or
appropriation has been exhausted by warrants already drawn, or by
appropriations, liabilities, debts, and expenses actually made, incurred, or
contracted for and to be paid out of such fund or appropriations, the
controller shall advise the council thereof in writing at its next meeting and,
he shall be personally liable to the City in an action brought in any court of
law or in any suit in equity by the City or by any taxpayer of the city for the
full amount or amounts of payments where no funds are available if he shall
fail or neglect to so advise the council.
   (f)   He shall keep in his office a complete list of all the property -
real, personal, and mixed - belonging to the city.
   (g)   He shall keep a record of all receipts, disbursements, debts, and
liabilities of the city, in order that the amount of the monies and all of the
liabilities of the City may at any time be known at his office. The controller
shall exercise a general supervision over the financial concerns of the City.
   (h)   He shall be charged with the leasing, repairs, insurance, and general
supervision of the City property not herein otherwise provided for, and for his
information may require reports from all officials or persons having city
property in charge or in their possession, and shall report the same when
required by the council.
   (i)   He shall also perform such other duties as are prescribed by this
charter or may be required by ordinance or resolution of the council.
   (j)   He shall keep on file in his office the city budget to which he shall
give access to every taxpayer of the city at any time during the business hours
of the day for inspection or taking copies. Within two weeks after his
appointment he shall file with the city clerk a bond in such amount and with
such sureties as shall be satisfactory to the council. The premium on the bond
shall be paid by the City.
   (k)   He is authorized generally to administer oaths, affirmations, take
affidavits, and to certify copies of all papers in his office.
Sec. 9-07   Controller, records; audit required
   The controller shall obtain and record all activities of all funds of the
City and annually audit such records.
City Treasurer
Sec. 9-08   Powers and duties; bond; taxes, collection
   The city treasurer shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to
approval by a majority vote of the council- and mayor-elect, and shall hold
office at the pleasure of the city manager and shall be directly responsible to
the city manager.
   The city treasurer shall perform all duties of the treasurer as prescribed
by this charter and the general laws of the state, together with such other
duties as may be required by the city manager or assigned to him. He shall give
a bond in such amount and with such sureties as shall be satisfactory to the
council. The premium on the bond shall be paid by the City, except as otherwise
provided by ordinance. The treasurer shall be the chief collection officer of
the city, except as otherwise provided by ordinance, and shall aggressively
pursue all delinquencies to the City.
   The city treasurer shall also give to the treasurer of the County of Wayne
such further securities as are or may hereafter be required by law of the
several city treasurers in this state. For the purpose of collection and return
of all taxes, and the return of property delinquent for the non-payment of
taxes, and for the purpose of suit for the collection of taxes, the treasurer,
on giving the bond so required, shall possess all the powers and perform all
the duties as are performed by the several city treasurers of this state, as
prescribed by law.
Sec. 9-09   City funds, custody; disbursements, duty; accounts
   The city treasurer shall have the custody of all monies, bonds, mortgages,
notes, leases, and evidences of value belonging to the City; he shall receive
all monies belonging to and receivable by the City, and keep an account of all
receipts and expenditures; he shall pay no money out of the treasury, except in
pursuance of, and by authority of law, and upon warrants signed by the city
manager and controller, which shall specify the purpose for which the amounts
are to be paid; he shall collect and keep an account of and be charged with all
taxes and monies appropriated, raised, or received for each fund for the City,
and shall keep an account of each fund and shall credit all monies raised, paid
in, or appropriated therefor, and shall pay every warrant out of the particular
fund raised for the purpose for which the warrant was issued. He shall
countersign all licenses and permits upon receiving proper fees.
Sec. 9-10   Monthly, annual reports required contents
   The city treasurer shall render to the council by the third week of each
month, a report on the previous month’s revenues and sources and cash and
investment balances of each fund including details of financial institutions,
types of accounts, maturity dates, and interest rates.
Sec. 9-11   Disbursements; vouchers required
   The city treasurer shall take vouchers for all money paid from the treasury,
showing the amount and fund from which payment was made, which vouchers upon
settlement with the proper officers of the city shall be surrendered and filed
with the controller.
Sec. 9-12   City funds; separate accounts
   The city treasurer shall keep all city monies in his hands belonging to the
City separate and distinct from his own monies, and he is hereby prohibited
from using, either directly or indirectly, the city monies, warrants, or
evidences of debt in his custody or keeping, for his own use or benefit, or
that of any other person.
Sec. 9-13   Depositories, designation by council; interest; daily deposits
   All money belonging to the City of Hamtramck shall be deposited in such
depositories as may be selected by the city council, and all interest received
on such deposits shall be charged to the city treasurer and credited to the
City in the proper funds. The city treasurer shall report to the mayor, city
manager and council each month the amount of interest credited to the City and
shall deposit all city monies received by him.
City Assessor
Sec. 9-14   Powers and duties
   The city assessor shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to
approval by a majority vote of the council- and mayor-elect, and shall hold
office at the pleasure of the city manager and shall be directly responsible to
the city manager. The functions and duties of the city assessor shall be as
follows:
   (a)   He shall possess all the powers vested in, and shall be charged with
the duties imposed upon, assessing officers by statute.
   (b)   He shall prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the
manner prescribed by statute, this charter, and by ordinance.
   (c)   He shall at all times cooperate with the city manager and provide such
information and reports and perform such duties as are requested by the city
manager, so long as they are not inconsistent with the duties of his office as
herein provided.
City Attorney
Sec. 9-15   Qualifications; powers and duties
   The city attorney, which may be an individual or a law firm, shall be
appointed by the city manager, subject to approval by a majority vote of the
council- and mayor-elect, and shall hold office at the pleasure of the city
manager. The functions, duties, and compensation of the attorney shall be as
follows:
   (a)   The attorney shall act as legal advisor to and be attorney for the
council and mayor in the performance of their duties as elected officials, and
shall be responsible solely to the city manager. He shall advise any officer or
department head of the city in matters relating to his official duties when so
requested by resolution of the city council, or the city manager and shall file
with the clerk a copy of all written opinions given by him.
   (b)   He shall prosecute ordinance violations and conduct for the City such
cases in court and before other legally constituted tribunals as the council
may request. He shall file with the clerk copies of such records and files
relating thereto as the council may direct.
   (c)   He shall prepare or review all ordinances, contracts, bonds, and other
written instruments which are submitted to him by the council, mayor, or city
manager, and shall promptly give his opinion as to the legality thereof.
   (d)   He shall call to the attention of the council, mayor, and the city
manager all matters of law and changes or developments therein affecting the
City.
   (e)   He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by
this charter, by resolution or ordinance, or as prescribed by state or federal
law or regulation.
   (f)   He shall at all times cooperate with the city manager and provide such
information and reports and perform such duties as are requested by the city
manager, so long as they are not inconsistent with the duties of his office as
herein provided.
   (g)   He shall recommend the retention of special legal counsel to handle
any matter in which the City has legal interest or to assist him when he
believes it to be in the best interest of the City.
   (h)   The compensation set by resolution for the attorney shall be in
contemplation of the normal duties of that office. Special compensation may be
provided by resolution for appeals to, or litigation in, the federal courts,
the circuit court or state appellate courts; for work requiring extensive
hearings before quasi-judicial or administrative tribunals; for legal work in
connection with the issuance of bonds of the city; for condemnation
proceedings; or for other matters outside the scope of his normal duties. No
special compensation, nor any compensation to special legal counsel, shall be
paid except in accordance with an agreement made between the City and the
attorney or special counsel prior to the time such special services have been
rendered.
   (i)   No person shall be appointed city attorney of the City of Hamtramck
unless he shall have been admitted to practice law before the Supreme Court of
the State of Michigan at least two years prior to the time of his appointment.
Chief of Police
Sec. 9-16   Qualifications; powers and duties
   The chief of police shall be the head of the police department of the City
of Hamtramck. He shall have the qualifications prescribed by
Chapter 5 Sec.
5-01 of this charter for appointive officers, and in addition shall reside
within a thirty (30) mile radius of the city, except as otherwise provided in
MCL 15.602.
   (a)   He shall be responsible for the faithful performance of his duties to
the city manager. It shall be his duty to see that all laws, ordinances, and
regulations of the city council made or enacted for the preservation of peace,
good order, safety, and protection of the inhabitants of the city are enforced.
He shall have the power and authority to make all proper rules for the
government and discipline of the police department subject to the approval of
the city attorney and city manager.
   (b)   As police officer, he shall, within the City, be vested with the
powers conferred by law upon sheriffs for the preservation of peace and good
order.
   (c)   He shall have power to serve and execute all process directed or
delivered to him in proceedings for violation of the ordinances of the city or
in which the City may be interested or a party.
   (d)   He shall design an effective training program for the police
department, and recommend such training program to the city manager. Such
training shall be reported to council by the city manager on a semi-annual
basis.
   (e)   He shall be responsible for making application for available resources
for the police department and shall provide a quarterly report to the city
manager regarding these applications.
   (f)   He shall submit to the city manager each year, as in this charter
provided, an estimate in detail of the expenditures of his department for the
ensuing year, to be included in the yearly budget, and shall make such other
reports as may be required by the city manager, provisions of this charter or
by law or ordinance of the city.
   (g)   He shall have the custody and control of all evidentiary property,
books, records, and equipment belonging to the police department.
   (h)   He shall have such further powers, duties, and responsibilities as are
conferred by the laws of the State, the provisions of this charter, and the
ordinances of the city council.
Chief of Fire Department
Sec. 9-17   Qualifications; powers and duties
   The chief of the fire department shall be the head of the fire department of
the City of Hamtramck. He shall have the qualifications prescribed by
Chapter 5 Sec.
5-01 of this charter for appointive officers, and in addition shall reside
within a thirty (30) mile radius of the city, except as otherwise provided in
MCL 15.602.
   (a)   He shall be responsible for the faithful performance of his duties to
the city manager. He shall have the power and authority to make all proper
rules for the government and discipline of the fire department, subject to the
approval of the city attorney and city manager.
   (b)   He shall be responsible for making application for available resources
for the fire department and shall provide a quarterly report to the city
manager regarding these applications.
   (c)   He shall design an effective training program for the fire department,
and recommend such training program to the city manager. Such training shall be
reported to council by the city manager on a semi-annual basis.
   (d)   He shall submit to the city manager each year, as in this charter
provided, an estimate in detail of the expenditures of his department for the
ensuing year, to be included in the yearly budget, and shall make such other
reports as may be required by the city manager, provisions of this charter or
by law or ordinance of the city.
   (e)   He shall have the custody and control of all evidentiary property,
books, records, and equipment belonging to the fire department.
   (f)   He shall have such powers, duties, and responsibilities as are
conferred by laws of the state, and the provisions of this charter, and the
ordinances of the city council.
City Manager
Sec. 9-18   City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation
   The council- and mayor-elect shall, by a majority vote of its total
membership, appoint a city manager solely on the basis of executive and
administrative qualifications. The council- and mayor-elect shall set the
manager’s compensation and conditions of employment in a written contract. The
city manager shall serve as an “at will” employee of the city. Upon a vacancy
in the position of city manager, the job description shall be published in
professional publications of city management and municipal associations. The
manager need not be a resident of the city or State of Michigan at the time of
appointment, but shall reside within a thirty (30) mile radius of the City of
Hamtramck except as otherwise provided in MCL 15.602.
   In addition to the required qualifications of the city manager provided
elsewhere in this charter, any city manager hired shall have the following
qualifications: a minimum of three years experience as a chief municipal
administrator, assistant chief municipal administrator, or equivalent
governmental experience, and be the holder of a degree from an accredited
college or university.
These qualifications may be waived by a three-fifths vote of the council and
mayor upon considering other qualifications of any candidate for such position.
   (a)   Powers and duties. The city manager shall be the chief administrative
officer of the City. He shall be responsible to the council and mayor for the
administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by this charter. He
shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   He shall appoint and, when he deems it necessary for the good of
the City, suspend or remove all city employees and department heads provided
for in this charter or by ordinance, except as otherwise provided by law. He
may authorize any person appointed by him who is subject to his direction and
supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that
officer’s department, office, or agency.
      (2)   He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all
departments of the city government, control and supervise the department heads
of the city government that he appoints and their subordinates, and see that
all such officers of the city faithfully comply with and discharge their
official duties, except as otherwise provided by this charter or state law.
      (3)   He shall attend all council meetings, unless excused by a
resolution of council, and have the right to take part in discussion, but shall
not vote.
      (4)   He shall see that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of
the council subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject to his
direction and supervision are faithfully executed.
      (5)   He shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital
improvement program to the council.
      (6)   He shall submit a monthly report and shall within ninety (90) days
after the end of each fiscal year submit to the council and make available to
the public a complete report on the financial operations prepared by the
Controller, financial condition, and administrative activities of the City as
of the end of each fiscal year.
      (7)   He shall keep the council fully advised as to the financial
condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the
council concerning the affairs of the city as he deems advisable.
      (8)   He shall make such other reports as the council may require
concerning the operations of the city departments, offices, and agencies
subject to his direction and supervision.
      (9)   He shall be responsible for implementing and maintaining an
effective training program for the police and fire departments. Such training
shall be reported to council on a semi-annual basis.
      (10)   He shall have the custody and control of all property, books,
records, and equipment belonging to the several departments under his control,
with the exception of any evidentiary property, records, books and equipment as
determined by the discretion of the chief of the police department or the chief
of the fire department.
      (11)   He shall perform such other duties as are specified in this
charter or may be required of him by the council.
      (12)   He shall be responsible for scheduling and performing maintenance
and improvements to all city property.
   (b)   Acting City Manager. The city manager shall, by letter filed with the
city clerk, designate, subject to approval by resolution of city council, an
administrative employee of the City of Hamtramck to exercise the powers and
perform the duties of city manager during his temporary absence, disability, or
vacancy in office. During such absence, disability, or vacancy, council may
revoke such designation at any time and appoint another acting city manager to
serve until the city manager shall return, or his disability shall have ceased
or, a new city manager shall have been appointed.
   (c)   No person who has been elected or appointed a member of the council or
the mayor under this charter, or who is a member of the council or is the mayor
at the effective date of this charter shall be eligible for appointment as city
manager or as acting city manager until two years have elapsed following the
expiration of the term for which he was elected or appointed.
   (d)   Petition to Remove the City Manager. In the event that a petition
requesting the removal of the city manager by the council- and mayor-elect be
filed with the clerk, signed by not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the
registered voters of the city and setting forth as reasons for the requested
removal specific act(s) or failure(s) to act on the part of the city manager
which constitute violations of the Charter, or failure to perform the duties of
his office as set forth in this Charter, a committee of three (3) members shall
be designated from among the mayor and councilmembers. Such committee shall
make a report of its investigation of such statement of reason at the second
regular meeting of the council following its appointment. If the committee
finds and reports that the statements contained in the petition do not
constitute violations of this Charter or that the acts or failures to act
complained of were performed at the direction of the council or in conformance
with policies established by it, no further action shall be taken on such
petition. If the committee finds and reports that the reasons set forth in the
petition are true and the acts or failures to act were not in accordance with
directives or policies of the council, the council shall, at its next regular
meeting, vote to remove or to retain the city manager.
(Am. Res. 2018-28, passed 4-12-2018)
Civil Service System
Sec. 9-19   Establishment; city council, authority
   The city council of the City of Hamtramck may in its discretion establish a
civil service system in the City, and for that purpose authorize the
appointment of such civil service board or officers, assistants, and employees
having such powers, duties, and responsibilities, and receiving such
compensation as the city council shall determine.
   In case of the establishment of such board, the council- and mayor-elect may
by ordinance, prescribe such qualifications for the members and officers as the
council shall see fit, and may in its discretion include within the scope of
the authority of the civil service system all officers, deputies, assistants,
police officers, fire fighters, and employees of the city other than the
elective officers prescribed in this charter, and such officers and members of
boards as are by the provisions of this charter prescribed to be appointed by
the city council and mayor.
Chapter 10 - Police Department
Sec. 10-01   Maintenance; temporary appointments
   The city council of the City of Hamtramck shall maintain a police department
for the protection of the persons and property of the inhabitants of the city
and others temporarily in the city and for good government. In cases of
emergency and danger, the mayor shall have the power to authorize the chief of
the police department to appoint temporarily such number of policemen and
special officers in addition to the regular police department, as the chief of
the police department determines the particular occasion may require.
Sec. 10-02   City manager; regular appointments, vacancies, authority
   The city manager shall appoint a chief of police, and such number of police
officers, patrolmen, and other officers and members of the police department as
established by ordinance or resolution. He shall in the same manner fill all
vacancies that may occur from time to time in the police department as are
permitted by the budget of the city.
Chief of Police
Sec. 10-03   Chief of police; powers and duties
   The chief of police shall at all times be subject to the supervision of the
city manager. The police chief shall supervise the police department in the
performance of its duties.
Sec. 10-04   Police; powers and duties
   It shall be the duty of the police department of the city to suppress all
riots, disturbances, and breaches of the peace; to arrest all persons fleeing
from justice; to apprehend upon view any person found in the act of committing
any offense against the laws of the State or violating the ordinances of the
City, or any provisions of this charter, or in any manner involving the breach
of peace, and to take the offender so arrested before the proper magistrate or
officer to be punished; to make complaint before the proper magistrate of any
person known or believed by it to be guilty of any crime or violation of the
laws of this State, the ordinances of this City, or the provisions of this
charter, and to serve all processes that may be delivered to it for that
purpose; and generally to perform all such duties as may be required of it by
the police chief under the supervision of the city manager for the good
government of the City. It shall be the duty of the police department of the
City to see that all ordinances and regulations of the City made for the
preservation of peace and good order and for the safety and protection of the
inhabitants of the City are promptly enforced. For the preservation of peace
and good order, and as peace officers, each policeman shall be and is hereby
vested within the territorial limits of the City with all the powers conferred
by law upon sheriffs for the preservation of peace and good order, and shall
have and is hereby vested with all the powers given by law to constables for
such purposes. Such police officers shall have power to serve and execute all
processes directed or delivered to them, in all proceedings for violation of
the ordinances of the City. Such processes may be served by such police
officers anywhere within the County of Wayne. When any person has committed or
is suspected of having committed any crime or misdemeanor within the city or
has escaped from the city jail, the police officers of the city shall have the
same right to pursue, arrest, and detain such persons outside the city limits
as the sheriff of the County.
Sec. 10-05   Police, compensation
   The chief of police and all officers, policemen, and employees of the police
department shall receive such compensation as the council may prescribe.
Chapter 11 - Fire Department
Sec. 11-01   Maintenance; temporary appointments
   The city council of the City of Hamtramck shall maintain an efficient fire
department for the protection of the people and property located therein, and
shall provide all necessary apparatus and equipment and make provision for a
suitable and adequate supply of water for the use of the department for
extinguishing fires. In cases of emergency and danger, the mayor shall have the
power to authorize the chief of the fire department to appoint temporarily such
number of firemen and special officers in addition to the regular fire
department, as in the judgment of the chief of the fire department the
particular occasion may require.
Sec. 11-02   Fire chief, firemen; appointment
   The city manager shall appoint a chief of the fire department and such
number of firemen and other officers in the department as the council shall by
ordinance or resolution direct to be appointed. He shall in the same manner
fill all vacancies that may occur in the department from time to time as are
permitted by the budget of the city.
Chief of the Fire Department
Sec. 11-03   Fire department, supervision
   The chief of the fire department shall at all times be subject to the
supervision of the city manager, and shall have supervision and direction of
the fire department and all fire fighters and other employees thereof.
Sec. 11-04   Extinguishing fires; authority to command aid; violation, penalty
   The chief of the fire department or other officer acting as such may command
any person present at a fire to aid in extinguishing thereof and to assist in
the preservation of life or property. If any person shall willfully disobey any
such lawful requirement or other lawful order of such officer, he shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as in this charter provided.
Sec. 11-05   Fire hazards, nuisances; abatement
   Every building or structure which may be erected, placed, enlarged, or kept
in violation of any provisions of this charter or of any ordinance or
regulation lawfully made for the prevention of fires, or any material which
shall be stored or kept in violation of this charter or any ordinance or
regulation lawfully made for the prevention of fires, is hereby declared to be
a nuisance and, except as otherwise in this charter provided, the same may be
abated or removed by the direction of the council, after notice as may be
provided in State law of a hearing before Council provided to the property
owner, with an opportunity to appear, present evidence and witnesses, and to
cross-examine any witnesses.
Sec. 11-06   Fire chief, firemen, department employees; compensation
   The chief of the fire department and all officers, firemen, and employees of
the fire department shall receive such compensation as the council may
prescribe.
Chapter 12 - Ordinances
Sec. 12-01   Enacting clause, style
   The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: “The City of Hamtramck
ordains.” Such caption may be omitted, however, when the ordinances are
published in book form or are revised and digested by authority of the council.
Sec. 12-02   Adoption, requisites; effective date
   Every proposed ordinance or summary thereof shall first be read at a council
meeting. Thereafter, the ordinance shall be made available to the public for
fourteen (14) days at the city clerk’s office. No less than fourteen (14) days
following its initial reading, the council shall hold a public hearing
regarding the proposed ordinance. At that same public hearing, the council may
pass a resolution adopting the ordinance, including any changes.
   Every ordinance, unless otherwise provided for in this charter, shall
require for its passage and adoption a majority vote of the council- and mayor-
elect and shall take effect fourteen (14) days after the publication of the
ordinance unless otherwise provided in the ordinance itself, but not before
publication.
Sec. 12-03   Record, authentication required
   All ordinances when regularly enacted shall be recorded by the city clerk in
a book called “The Record of Ordinances”, and it shall be the duty of the mayor
and the clerk to authenticate the same by their official signatures upon such
record.
Sec. 12-04   Record, publication; city clerk, duties
   Within ten days after the passage of any ordinance, the ordinance or a
summary thereof shall be recorded by the clerk and published in a newspaper of
general circulation; and the clerk shall, immediately after such publication,
enter in the record of ordinances, in a blank space to be left for such purpose
under the record of the ordinance, a certificate under his hand, stating the
time and place of such publication. Such certificate shall be prima facie
evidence of the due publication of the ordinance.
Sec. 12-05   Violations of ordinances; penalty, restriction
   When by the provisions of this charter the council has authority to pass
ordinances for any purpose, it may prescribe a penalty for each violation
thereof. Such penalty shall be a fine or forfeiture of not exceeding the
maximum allowed by state law, or imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days or ninety-three (93) days in cases where state law so provides, or
both, in the discretion of the court, together with payment of the costs of
prosecution. Such ordinances may further provide that in case any person shall
fail to pay any fine so imposed, together with the costs of prosecution, that
he may be imprisoned until such fine and costs shall be paid. Provided,
however, that no person shall be imprisoned for a single violation of any
ordinance for a longer period than ninety (90) days or ninety-three (93) days
in cases where state law so provides. Such penalty shall be prescribed in the
ordinance.
Sec. 12-06   Violations; fines, recovery; procedure
   Whenever a penalty shall be incurred for the violation of any ordinance, and
no provision shall be made for imprisonment of the offender upon conviction
thereof, such penalty may be recovered in an action of debt. And when a
corporation shall incur a penalty for the violation of any such ordinance, the
same shall be sued for in one of the actions aforesaid. Prosecutions for
violations of the ordinances of the City, may, in all cases, except against
corporations, be commenced by warrant for the arrest of the offender. Such
warrant shall be in the name of the People of the State of Michigan, and shall
set forth the substance of the offense complained of, and shall be issued upon
complaint made as provided for criminal cases cognizable by the appropriate
court. The proceedings relating to the arrest and custody of the accused during
the pendency of the suit, the pleadings in procuring the attendance and
testimony of witnesses, and in rendition of judgments and the execution
thereof, shall, except as otherwise provided by this charter, be governed by
and conform, as nearly as may be, to the provisions of law regulating
proceedings in criminal cases cognizable by the appropriate court.
Sec. 12-07   Complaints, pleadings; reference to ordinances
   It shall be a sufficient statement of the cause of action in any such
complaint or warrant, to set forth substantially, and with reasonable
certainty, the act or offense complained of, the date, the time when, and place
where committed, and alleging a violation of an ordinance of the city,
referring to the ordinance number and section, and signed by the enforcement
officer or official.
   It shall not be necessary in any suit, proceeding, or prosecution for the
violation of any ordinance, to state or set forth such ordinance or any of the
provisions thereof, in any complaint, warrant, process, or pleading therein,
but the same shall be deemed sufficiently set forth or stated by reciting its
number.
Chapter 13 - Taxation and Finance
Sec. 13-01   Power to tax; limitations
   The City is authorized annually to levy property taxes for municipal
purposes not to exceed two percent (20 mills) on all real and personal property
in the city. The subjects of taxation for municipal purposes must be in
accordance with statute and the same as for state, county, and school taxes.
The City levies, collects, and returns state, county, and school taxes as
provided by ordinance in accordance with law.
Sec. 13-02   Exemption from taxes
   No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed, except as expressly required
or permitted by statute.
Sec. 13-03   Tax day
   The taxable status of persons and property shall be determined as of the
31st day of December, which shall be deemed the tax day for the immediately
succeeding calendar year, which is also the tax year, subject to the exceptions
provided or permitted by statute.
Sec. 13-04   Preparation of the assessment roll
   The assessor shall make and complete an assessment roll for the city, in the
manner and form provided in the general tax law of the state, not later than
the first Monday in March each year. On that date he shall file such roll with
the clerk for public inspection during the normal office hours of the clerk,
and such period of inspection shall continue until the date of convening of the
board of review. On that date the clerk shall turn such assessment roll over to
the board of review. Further, the assessor shall, by first class mail addressed
to the owner named on the tax roll, notify the owner of any change in the
assessment of the property; such notice shall be mailed prior to March 1st.
Failure on the part of the assessor to give such notice shall not invalidate
the assessment roll nor release the person or property assessed from any taxes
provided in this charter.
Sec. 13-05   Board of Review
   The board of review shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval by
a majority vote of council- and mayor-elect, and shall be comprised of three
persons who are residents in the city, and have the qualifications required by
this charter for officers of the city. The term of office shall be for two
years. The members of the board, during their term of office, shall not be city
officers, employees, nominees, or candidates for elective city office. The
assessor shall be secretary of the board and shall attend its meetings prepared
to present the position of his office without the right to vote upon any
decision of the board.
Sec. 13-06   Duties and Functions of board of review
   For the purpose of reviewing and correcting assessments, the board of review
shall have the same powers and perform like duties in all aspects as are by
statute conferred upon and required of boards of review, except as otherwise
provided in this charter. It shall hear the complaints of all persons
considering themselves aggrieved by assessments; and if it shall appear that
any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll,
the board shall correct the roll in such manner as it deems just. In all cases,
the roll shall be reviewed according to the facts existing on the tax day, and
no change in the status of any property after said day shall be considered by
the board in making its decisions. Except as otherwise provided by statute, no
person other than the board of review shall make or authorize any change upon
or additions or corrections to the assessment roll.
Sec. 13-07   Clerk to certify tax levy
   Within three days after the council has adopted the budget for the ensuing
year, the clerk shall certify to the assessor the total amount which the
council determines shall be raised by general ad valorem tax. He shall also
certify all amounts of current or delinquent special assessments and all other
amounts which the council requires to be assessed, reassessed, or charged upon
any property or against any person.
Sec. 13-08   City tax roll
   After the board of review has completed its review of the assessment roll,
the assessor shall prepare a copy of the assessment roll, to be known as the
“City Tax Roll”, and upon the certifications of the several amounts to be
raised, as provided in Section 10, the assessor shall spread upon said roll the
several ad valorem taxes according to and in proportion to the several
valuations set forth in the assessment roll. To avoid fractions in computation
on any tax roll, the assessor may add to the amounts as prescribed by statute.
Any excess created thereby on any tax roll shall belong to the city.
Sec. 13-09   Tax roll certified for collection
   After spreading the taxes, the assessor shall certify the tax roll and the
mayor shall sign his warrant thereto directing and requiring the treasurer to
collect from the several persons named in the tax roll, the several sums
mentioned thereon opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment, and
granting to him, for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments and
charges on the roll, all statutory powers and immunities possessed by city
treasurers for the collection of taxes.
   Such warrant shall further direct that all taxes paid on or before the 20th
day of August shall be collected without additional charge. If any person shall
pay one-half of the general city taxes on or before the 31st day of July of the
year in which said taxes are assessed, he may pay the remaining one-half of
such taxes on or before the 30th day of December of that year without
additional charge, but, should the remaining one-half not be paid on or before
30th day of December, then the same shall be subject to collection charges as
in section
13-12. Failure to pay the second half on or before December 30th shall subject
the property to all the provisions of this charter relating to delinquent taxes
the same as if the first half had not been paid, except that no interest or
penalty shall be charged against the one-half that is paid. Payment of one-half
a tax shall not in any manner nullify the provisions of section
13-12. The persons liable for a tax under the provisions of this charter on
July 15 of each year shall be liable for the full amount of the tax, and such
tax shall not be considered ‘paid’ until paid in full.
Sec. 13-10   Tax lien on property
   The taxes thus assessed shall become a debt due to the City from the persons
to whom they are assessed. The amounts assessed on any interest in real
property shall become a lien upon such real property, for such amounts and for
all interest and charges thereon, and all personal taxes shall become a first
lien on all personal property of such persons so assessed. Such lien shall take
precedence over all other claims, encumbrances, and liens to the extent
provided by statute and shall continue until such taxes, interest, and charges
are paid.
Sec. 13-11   Taxes due; notification
   The treasurer shall give notice to the taxpayers of the City, by publication
at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City (which
publication of notice shall be made at least ten days prior to the first day of
July), of the time when the taxes will be due for collection and shall give
such notice of the time when the taxes will be due for collection by first
class mail addressed to the owners of the property upon which taxes are
assessed, according to the names of such owners and their addresses as
indicated on the tax roll. Such notice shall be deemed sufficient for the
payment of all taxes on the tax roll. Failure on the part of the treasurer to
give notice shall not invalidate the taxes on the tax roll nor release the
person or property assessed from any penalty or interest provided for in this
charter in case of nonpayment of the same.
Sec. 13-12   Collection fees
   When property taxes shall become delinquent, the treasurer shall add to all
taxes paid thereafter a collection fee of four percent (4%) of the amount of
the taxes. Such collection fee shall belong to the City and constitute a charge
and shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes themselves apply,
collectible in the same manner as the taxes to which they are added. The City
may by ordinance provide interest and penalties for delinquent city real and
personal property taxes.
Sec. 13-13   Failure or refusal to pay personal property tax
   If any person, firm, or corporation shall neglect or refuse to pay any
personal property tax assessed to him or them as required by state law, the
treasurer shall collect the same by seizing the personal property of such
person, firm, or corporation in an amount sufficient to pay such tax, fees, and
charges for subsequent sale whenever the same may be found in the State.
   No property shall be exempt from such seizures. The treasurer may sell the
property seized to an amount sufficient to pay the taxes and all charges in
accordance with statutory provisions. The treasurer may, if otherwise unable to
collect a tax on personal property, sue, in accordance with statute, the
person, firm, or corporation to whom it is assessed.
Sec. 13-14   Delinquent tax roll to County treasurer
   If the treasurer has been unable to collect any of the city taxes on the
City Tax Roll on real property before the first day of March following the date
when the roll was received by him, it shall be his duty to return all such
unpaid taxes on real property to the county treasurer, in the same manner and
with like effect as returns by township treasurers of townships, school and
county taxes. Such returns shall be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be
prepared by the treasurer and shall include all the additional charges and fees
herein before provided; which charges shall, in such return, be added to the
amount assessed in the tax roll against each description. The taxes thus
returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the
county treasurer under the provisions of the general laws of the State and
shall be and remain a lien upon the lands against which they are assessed,
until paid.
Sec. 13-15   Protection of city lien
   The City shall have power, insofar as the exercise thereof shall not
conflict with or contravene the provisions of any general law of the State, to
acquire by purchase any premises within the City at any tax or other public
sale of by direct purchases from the State of Michigan or the fee owner when
such purchase is necessary to protect the lien of the City for taxes, or
special assessments, or both, on said premises. The City may hold, lease, or
sell the same solely for the purpose of securing therefrom the amount of such
taxes, or special assessments, or both, together with any incidental expenses
incurred in connection with the exercise of this power. Any such procedure
exercised by the City in the protection of its tax lien shall be deemed to be
for a public purpose.
Sec. 13-16   Additional rights, duties, powers, immunities and procedures
   Except as otherwise provided by this charter or ordinance, the rights,
duties, powers, immunities, and procedures established by state general law
shall apply in the collection and enforcement of city property taxes.
Sec. 13-17   Budget procedure
   By the first of March each calendar year, the city council shall adopt a
budget calendar that establishes deadlines for the preparation, review, and
adoption phases for the ensuing fiscal year general, special revenue,
enterprise, internal service, and debt service fund budgets.
   As part of that resolution, the city council shall also adopt guidelines
that the city manager shall follow in preparing the budget. At the time of this
charter, the guidelines recommended by the Government Finance Officers
Association are suggested.
   As part of the budget adoption phase, the city council shall set all service
fees for the ensuing fiscal year and adopt a five-year capital improvement
plan, both of which may be amended during the fiscal year, provided that no
action is taken until the city council by resolution gives notice of intention
to make such changes at least six days before considering such changes.
   All budgets shall be adopted by the city council no later than the second
day of June each year in accordance with this charter and state law. No deficit
budget shall be approved. All systems of accounting used by the City shall
conform to the uniform system of accounts as required by law.
Contracts
Sec. 13-18   Purchasing and contractual procedure
   (a)   The City must provide, by ordinance based upon a national standard,
for a purchasing procedure to be followed in purchasing city supplies,
materials, equipment, contractual services, or other personal property. Before
making any purchase or contract to purchase, competitive bids or proposals must
be obtained, except when the purchasing official for the city is exempted from
the bidding requirements by the purchasing ordinance because of value or when
the city council determines that no advantage to the City would result from
competitive bidding or a request for proposal.
   (b)   Purchases must be made from the lowest responsible bidder or party
making a proposal which meets specifications, unless the city council
determines that the public interest would be better served by accepting a
higher bid or proposal or by rejection of all submitted bids or proposals. At
any time that the bid of the lowest responsible bidder is not accepted, the
city council must specify the reason in its resolution concerning the purchase.
   (c)   The City must provide in the ordinance the definition of “lowest
responsible bidder,” the dollar limit within which the purchasing official may
make purchases without the necessity of obtaining competitive bids, and the
dollar limit within which purchases may be made without city council approval.
   (d)   The purchasing official must provide the city council with all
certifications required by law prior to city council action on any contract.
The city manager must, before the final payment for any work for which a bond
has been furnished, report to the city council whether the work has, in the
city manager’s judgment, been done in all respects in accordance with the
specifications. The report does not waive any rights the City may have to
pursue any action for non-compliance.
   (e)   No contract shall be split into multiple contracts in order to avoid
any provisions of the bid procedure.
   (f)   All contracts require the signature of the mayor, city manager, and
city clerk.
   (g)   When it becomes necessary or prudent during any work or improvement
project done under contract to make substantial alterations or modifications in
the contract which exceed an amount set by resolution of the city council, the
alterations or modifications must be made only upon resolution of the city
council. The city council must by resolution determine what is “substantial”
and may do so as a general policy or on a contract-by-contract basis. No order
may be effective until the price to be paid for the material, or work, or both,
under the altered or modified contract has been agreed upon in writing and
signed by the contractor and the city clerk, upon authority of the city
council, and a copy of the modification documents are filed in the office of
the city clerk.
Sec. 13-19   Contracts, purchases, expenditures; regulations, restrictions
   Except as otherwise herein provided, the council by resolution shall have
full power to make and authorize contracts on behalf of the City with due
consideration of short- and long-term cost projections. The city manager shall
act as purchasing official, by whom all purchases of supplies for the City
shall be made, and who shall approve all vouchers for the payment of the same.
All such purchases and sales shall conform to such rules and regulations as the
council may from time to time prescribe.
Sec. 13-20   Authority to expend funds
   No city officer, department head, or board member shall have the authority
to expend funds of the City which should be turned into the city treasury, or
to obligate the City of Hamtramck in any way beyond the amount permitted by
this charter or authorized by the city council.
   The city council shall have no power to authorize any contract on behalf of
the City for the expenditure of money in excess of the budget allowance or to
make or to authorize to make any purchase of materials or supplies of the value
exceeding the budget allowance.
Sec. 13-21   Contracts, expenditures; budget provision required
   No liability shall be incurred by any officer or employee of the city except
in accordance with the provisions of the budget, and all contracts not in
accordance with such provisions shall be void.
Sec. 13-22   Contracts, expenditures; controller, approval prerequisite
   Before any order or contract for improvement, service, supplies, etc., is
issued by the city, council, or any board, officer, or employee, it shall be
presented to the city controller for his approval. The controller shall examine
such order or contract and shall not approve it unless he finds that an
appropriation has been made which has not been exhausted, and that the order or
contract has been otherwise legally authorized and approved. All orders and
contracts which have not been approved by the controller shall be void.
Chapter 14 - General Finance Borrowing Powers.
Sec. 14-01   General borrowing
   Subject to the applicable provisions of state law and this charter, the
council, by proper ordinance or resolution, may authorize the borrowing of
money for any purpose within the scope of the powers vested in the City and the
issuance of bonds of the city or other evidence of indebtedness thereof, and
may pledge the full faith, credit, and resources of the City for the payment of
the obligations created therefore.
Sec. 14-02   Special assessment bonds
   The council shall, subject to the applicable provisions of the general law
of the State, have authority to borrow money in anticipation of the payment of
special assessments made for the purpose of defraying the cost of any public
improvement or in anticipation of the payment of any combination of such
special assessment, and to issue bonds therefore. Such special assessment bonds
may be solely an obligation of the special assessment district or districts or
a general obligation of the City. All collections on each special assessment
roll or combination of rolls may be set apart in a separate fund for the
payment of the principle and interest of the bonds issued in anticipation of
payment of such special assessment and shall be used for no other purpose.
Sec. 14-03   Other bonds
   The City shall have power to issue revenue or other types of bonds in the
manner and for the purpose permitted by the constitution and general laws of
the State of Michigan.
Sec. 14-04   Preparation and record
   Each bond and other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a
statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued, and it shall be
unlawful for any officer of the city to use the proceeds for any other purpose,
and any officer who shall violate this provision shall be deemed guilty of
misconduct in office. All bonds and other evidence of indebtedness issued by
the City shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the clerk under the
seal of the city. Interest coupons may be executed with a facsimile signatures
of the mayor and clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other
evidence of indebtedness issued by the City shall be kept by the controller.
Upon payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be
marked “Cancelled.”
Sec. 14-05   Limitations of indebtedness
   The City may not incur indebtedness by the issuance of bonds or otherwise,
which exceeds the greater of the following:
   (a)   Ten percent (10%) of the assessed value of all real and personal
property in the City;
   (b)   Fifteen percent (15%) of the assessed value of real and personal
property in the City, if that portion of the total amount of indebtedness
incurred exceeds ten percent (10%), is being, or has been used solely for the
construction and renovation of hospital facilities. However, in the case of
fire, flood, or other calamity, the council may borrow for the relief of the
inhabitants of the city and for the preservation of municipal property, the sum
not to exceed three-eighths of one percent (.00375) of the assessed value of
all real and personal property in the City, due in not more than five years,
even if the loan would cause the indebtedness of the City to exceed the limits
established by this section. The indebtedness identified by state statute as
excluded from calculations or limitations set forth herein and shall not be
included for purposes of determining the maximum indebtedness under this
provision.
Chapter 15 - Improvements and Assessments
Sec. 15-01   General power relative to special assessments
   The city council shall, after public hearing, have power to determine and
declare by resolution that the whole or any part of the expense of public
improvement, repair, or abatement of nuisance shall be defrayed by special
assessments upon the property specifically benefited.
   (a)   Those roads, maintained by the City, which have been designated as
Basic Arterial Inter-County Roads shall be improved without specially assessing
any costs thereof to the residential property adjacent thereto.
   (b)   Those paved roads which have been accepted and are maintained by the
city, and have been reported to and approved by the Michigan Department of
State Highways and Transportation for the purposes of Act 51 of the Public Acts
of 1951 [MCL 247.651 et seq., MSA 9.1097(1) et seq.] shall be maintained,
repaired and improved without specially assessing any costs thereof to the
residential property adjacent thereto.
Sec. 15-02   Lien for special assessments.
   From the date of confirmation of any roll levying any special assessment,
the City shall possess a lien on the premises subject thereto for the full
amount of the unpaid special assessment and the interest on all unpaid
installments thereof; and such amount shall also be a debt of the person to
whom assessed until paid and, in case of delinquency, may be enforced as
delinquent city property taxes or by a suit against such person.
Sec. 15-03   Contested assessments.
   No action of any kind shall be instituted for the purpose of contesting or
enjoining the collection of any special assessment, unless (a) a protest is
filed at the hearing held to confirm the special assessment roll; and unless
(b) such action shall be commenced within thirty (30) days after the
confirmation of the roll. If the city attorney submits a written opinion
finding said roll illegal, in whole or in part, the city council shall revoke
its confirmation, correct the illegality, if possible, and reconfirm the same.
Property which is not involved in the illegality shall not be assessed more
than was imposed upon the original confirmation without further notice and
hearing thereon.
Chapter 16 - Streets, Parks, Trees, and Sidewalks
Sec. 16-01   Public ways; supervision and control
   The council, except as otherwise in this charter provided, shall have
supervision and control of all public highways, bridges, streets, avenues,
alleys, sidewalks, and public grounds within the City, including establishing
new public ways or vacating or abolishing existing public ways, and shall have
the like authority over the same as is given by the general laws of the state.
Sec. 16-02   Public ways; naming; vacation, abolition; notice, procedure
   When the City shall deem it advisable to vacate, discontinue, or abolish any
highway, street, lane, alley, or public ground or any part thereof, or change
the name thereof, they shall by resolution so declare, and in the same
resolution shall appoint a time not less than four weeks thereafter when they
will meet and hear objections thereto; notice of such meeting, with a copy of
the resolution, shall be given in such manner as shall be prescribed by
ordinance or resolution. Objections to such proposed action of the council may
be filed with the city clerk in writing and if any such shall be filed, the
street, alley, or public ground, or any part thereof, shall not be vacated,
discontinued, or abolished, or the name changed, except by a vote of five-
sevenths (5/7) of the council- and mayor-elect.
Sec. 16-03   Parks; vacation
   When the City shall deem it advisable to vacate, discontinue, or abolish any
park or any part thereof, it shall require a three-fifths (3/5) vote of the
electorate voting on the proposal. The issue shall be voted on no later than
the next general election.
Sec. 16-04   Improvements; taxes, special assessments authorized; procedure
   The expense of constructing and maintaining bridges and the whole or such
part as the council shall determine, of the expense of paving, improving, and
working, including grading and graveling upon the streets, alleys, and
highways, may be paid from the general city funds, to be raised by tax upon all
the property in the City. The expense of grading, paving, or graveling or
otherwise improving any street, alley, or highway, may be defrayed by a special
assessment upon the lots and premises abutting upon such improvement, or a part
of such expense may be so paid and the remainder may be paid from the general
city funds as the council may decide. The lots and premises abutting upon a
street, alley, or highway improvement shall constitute a special assessment
district. The term “paving” shall include curbing and the construction of
crosswalks in the paved streets. All assessments for street improvements shall
be made upon the abutting lots and premises according to the number of feet
frontage upon the improvement, and all assessments for alley improvements shall
be made upon abutting lots and premises according to the benefits received by
such lots and premises. When such assessment is to be made upon lots in
proportion to their frontage upon the improvement, if from the shape or size of
any lot an assessment thereon in proportion to the frontage would be unjust and
disproportionate to the assessment upon other lots, the assessor making the
assessments may assess such lot for such number of feet frontage as in his
opinion will be just.
Sec. 16-05   Special assessment districts; city; expense, apportionment
   When expenses for any such improvement shall be assessed in a special
assessment district, and there shall be lands belonging to the City or school
district fronting upon such improvement, such part of the expense of such
improvement as in the opinion of the assessor making the special assessment
would be justly apportionable to such City or school district property, and to
any interior squares or spaces formed by the intersection of streets, were they
assessable, shall be paid from the general city funds, and the balance of such
expense shall be assessed upon the remaining lots and premises included in the
special assessment district.
Sec. 16-06   Public ways; encumbrances, obstructions; prohibitions, remedy
   The council shall have power to prohibit and prevent obstructions and
encumbrances in and encroachments upon the public highways, streets, and alleys
of the City and remove the same; and to punish those who shall obstruct,
encumber, encroach or maintain any encroachment upon or in any such highway,
street or alley; and to require all such persons to remove every such
obstruction, encumbrance, or encroachment.
Sec. 16-07   Trees; regulations authorized
   The council may provide for and regulate the planting of shade and
ornamental trees in public highways, streets, and avenues of the city, and for
the protection thereof, and the trimming of all trees in or that overhang such
highway, streets, or avenues, or which obstruct public lighting, and may light
the streets and public places, and regulate the setting of lamp posts therein
and protect the same.
Sec. 16-08   Sidewalks; council authority
   The council shall have control of all sidewalks in the public streets and
alleys of the city and may prescribe the grade thereof and change the same when
deemed necessary. The council shall have power through and by the proper
officers, to build, maintain, and keep in repair sidewalks and crosswalks in
the public streets and alleys and to charge the expense of constructing and
maintaining such sidewalks upon the lots and premises adjacent to and abutting
upon such sidewalks. The council shall also have authority to require the
owners and occupants of lots and premises to build, rebuild, and maintain
sidewalks in the public streets adjacent to and abutting upon such lots and
premises and to keep them in repair at all times, and to construct and lay the
same upon such lines and grades and of such width, materials, and manner of
construction, and within such time as the council shall by ordinance or
resolution prescribe the expense thereof to be paid by such owner or occupant;
or the council may, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the council-elect, pay
such part of the expense of building or rebuilding, maintaining and keeping in
repair such walks as they deem proper from the general city funds.
Sec. 16-09   Sidewalks; snow, ice, encumbrances; council authority
   The council shall also have power either by ordinance or resolution to cause
and require the owners and occupants of any lot or premises to remove all snow
and ice from the sidewalks in front of or adjacent to such lot and premises,
and to keep the same free from obstructions, encroachments, encumbrances,
filth, and other nuisances; provided, that the council may provide by ordinance
for the removing of all ice or snow therefrom, and for keeping the same free
from encumbrances and pay the expense thereof from the general city funds.
Sec. 16-10   Compliance with orders required; violations, remedy; procedure
   If the owner or occupant of any lot or premises shall fail to construct or
maintain any particular sidewalk as mentioned and prescribed in section above,
or shall fail to keep the same in repair, or to remove the snow, ice, and filth
therefrom, or to remove and keep the same free from obstructions,
encroachments, encumbrances, or other nuisances, or shall fail to perform any
other duty required by the council in respect to such sidewalks within such
time and such manner as the council shall require, the council may cause the
same to be done, at the expense of such owner or occupant, and the council may
cause the amount of all expenses incurred thereby to be reported to the city
treasurer, who shall cause a notice of such assessment to be mailed to the
owners of the premises if known.
   If the amount of the assessment is not paid to the treasurer within a period
of sixty (60) days from the date of mailing such notice, the treasurer shall
report the same to the council, and the council shall report the same to the
city assessor, to be by him levied, together with a penalty of ten percent in
addition thereto, as a special assessment upon the lot or premises adjacent to
or abutting upon such sidewalk, which special assessment shall be subject to
review after proper notice has been given as in all other cases of special
assessment provided for in this charter; and such assessment when confirmed
shall be a lien upon such lot or premises the same as other special assessments
and all proceedings subsequent to confirmation, provided for in this chapter,
in relation to special assessments shall apply; or the City may collect such
amount, together with the penalty from the owner or occupant of the premises,
together with costs of suit.
Sec. 16-11   Signs, awnings, etc.; regulations, prohibitions authorized
   The council shall have power to regulate and prohibit the placing of signs,
awnings, awning posts, and other things upon or over sidewalks, and to
regulate, license, or prohibit the construction and use of openings in the
sidewalks, and of all vault structures and excavations under the same.
Chapter 17 - Sewers
Sec. 17-01   Maintenance, construction; appropriation of private property
   The council may establish, construct, control, and maintain, either within
or without its corporate limits, sewers, drains, and water courses, whenever
and wherever necessary, and of such dimensions and materials, and under such
regulations as it may deem proper for the drainage of the city; and private
property, or the use thereof, may be acquired either by purchase or
condemnation. But in all cases where the council shall deem it practicable such
sewer, drain, and watercourses shall be constructed in the public streets and
grounds.
   The council shall establish from time to time a scale of rates to be charged
and paid for supply of water and sewage treatment system to be called “water
and sewer rates”, and which rates shall be appropriate, as nearly as may be
practicable, to different classes of buildings in the city with reference to
the dimensions, value, exposure to fires, ordinary or extraordinary uses,
yards, number of families or occupants, or consumption of water. The council
may provide for the installation of meters upon any premises supplied with
water, and for the payment for the water actually used as registered by such
meter. The council shall prescribe by ordinance the manner of assessing water
charges, the time when such charges shall be paid, the date when the same shall
become a lien upon the property, the penalties for non-payment of such charges,
and what steps shall be taken to enforce the payment thereof, and may provide
that in case of non-payment that the supply of water to any premises may be
shut off or stopped. All water and sewer charges shall be paid to the city
treasurer.
   The formula for establishing water and sewer rates shall be established by
ordinance and the rates approved by resolution.
Sec. 17-02   Construction, etc.; costs; special assessments, taxes authorized
   The expense of constructing, reconstructing, or repairing and improving
sewers, drains, ditches, and water courses, may be paid by general tax upon all
the taxable property in the City; or such expenses may be defrayed by special
assessments upon the lands and premises benefitted by the drainage, in
proportion to the benefits resulting to each lot or parcel of land
respectively; or such part of the expense as the council shall determine may be
defrayed by special assessment; and the remainder may be paid by general tax.
Sec. 17-03   Private drains; authority to require; costs; connection to public
drains
   Whenever the council shall deem it necessary for the public health, it may
require the owners and occupants of lots and premises to construct private
drains therefrom to connect with some public sewer or drain, and thereby to
drain such lots and premises; and to keep such private drains in repair and
free from obstruction and nuisances; and if such private drains are not
constructed and maintained according to such requirement, the council may cause
the work to be done at the expense of such owner or occupant, and the amount of
such expense shall be a lien upon the premises drained, and may be collected by
special assessment to be levied thereon.
   The owners and occupants of lots and premises shall have the right to
connect the same, at their own expense, by means of private drains, with the
public sewers and drains under such rules and regulations as the council shall
prescribe.
Chapter 18 - Public Utilities
Sec. 18-01   General powers regarding utilities
   The City reserves all the power granted to cities by statute and the
constitution to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend,
repair, and maintain either within or outside the corporate limits, including,
but not by way of limitation, public utilities for supplying water, light,
heat, power, gas, sewage systems, communication systems, and garbage
facilities, or any of them to the municipality; and to sell and deliver water,
light, heat, power, gas, communications, and other public utility services
within or outside its corporate limits to an amount not to exceed the
limitations set by state statute and the constitution.
Sec. 18-02   Rates
   Council shall have the power to fix from time to time such just and
reasonable rates and other charges as it may deem advisable for the supplying
of the inhabitants of the City and others with such public services as the City
may provide. No free service shall be permitted. Higher rates may be charged
for services outside the corporate limits of the city.
Water Works
Sec. 18-03   Water system; city manager responsibilities
   The public water system of the City of Hamtramck, is under general direction
and control of the city manager.
   The city manager shall from time to time recommend to the council a schedule
of rates such that the revenues of the public water system of the city shall be
sufficient to provide for the expense of operation and the payment of all
indebtedness incurred in the establishment and maintenance of the public water
system of the City.
Sec. 18-04   Water and sewer rates; meters; assessments for water
   The council shall provide by ordinance the formula to establish water and
sewer rates, which shall be set by resolution of the council upon adoption of
the annual budget. The council, by resolution, may provide for the installation
of meters upon any premises supplied with water, and for the payment for the
water actually used as registered by such meter; the time when such charges
shall be paid; the date when same shall become a lien upon the property; the
penalties for non-payment of such charges; the steps to be taken to enforce
payment thereof; and provide that in case of non-payment that the supply of
water to any premises may be shut off or stopped. All water and sewer charges
shall be paid to the city treasurer.
Sec. 18-05   Water for public purposes; appropriations required
   The council shall from time to time appropriate money to be raised by
general taxation for the payment for water used for fire purposes, street
cleaning, and other general public uses.
Sec. 18-06   Connecting pipes; construction, maintenance; ordinance required;
connections, permit required
   The connecting or supplying pipes leading from buildings or yards to the
distributing pipes shall be inserted and kept in repair at the expense of the
owner or occupant of the building or yard, and shall not be inserted or
connected with the main pipe until a permit shall be obtained from the city.
All such connecting or supply pipes shall be constructed and connected in the
manner prescribed by ordinance.
Sec. 18-07   Ordinances, resolutions authorized
   The council may enact such ordinances and adopt such resolutions as may be
necessary to regulate and control the taking and use of water from the water
system.
Franchises
Sec. 18-08   Use of public ways; franchise required
   No person, partnership, association, or corporation operating a public
utility shall have the right to the use of highways, streets, alleys, or other
public places of the city, for wires, poles, pipes, tracks, or conduits,
without the consent of the City; nor to transact a local business therein
without first obtaining a franchise from the City. The right of the City to the
reasonable control of its streets, alleys, and public places, and of the space
above and beneath them is hereby reserved to the City, except as limited by
state law.
Sec. 18-09   Franchises, licenses; term, restriction
   No franchise or grant shall be granted by the City for a longer period than
thirty (30) years. No license shall be granted by the council for a longer
period than one year.
Sec. 18-10   Irrevocable franchises; approval of registered voters required
   No franchise or grant which is not revocable at the will of the City shall
be granted or become operative until the same shall have been referred to the
people at a general or special election, and has received the approval of
three-fifths (3/5) of the registered voters voting at such election. The
expenses of such election as determined by the city council shall be paid by
the franchisee applicant or grantee prior the election.
Sec. 18-11   Exclusive franchise prohibited; renewal, requisites
   No person, firm, or corporation shall be granted any exclusive franchise,
license, right, or privilege whatever, and no franchise shall be renewed before
one year prior to its expiration.
Sec. 18-12   Leasing, assigning franchises
   No franchise granted by the City shall be leased, assigned, or otherwise
alienated except in accordance with the express provisions of the franchise,
and all franchises granted by the City shall provide how, in what manner, and
under what conditions the franchise may be leased, assigned, or alienated, and
no dealing with the lessee or assignee on the part of the City, which shall
recognize the performance of any act or payment of any compensation by the
lessee, shall be deemed to have operated as such consent.
Sec. 18-13   Changing, modifying franchises, procedure
   No change or modification of any franchise or grant of rights or powers
previously granted to any corporation, firm, person, or association of persons
shall be made except in the manner and subject to all the conditions herein
provided for the making of original grants and franchises.
Sec. 18-14   Public utilities; license fees authorized
   Except where the same may be in conflict with the laws of the State or
constitution, the City shall have the right to license and impose a license fee
on communication services, transportation systems, gas, electric, and water
meters, or any devices used for measuring services, also communication devices,
electric light and power poles, conduits, and wires. All license fees shall be
exclusive of and in addition to other lawful taxes upon the property.
Sec. 18-15   Franchises; reservations in favor of city required
   The grant of every franchise or privilege shall be subject to the right of
the City whether in terms reserved or not, to make all regulations which shall
be necessary to secure in the most ample manner the safety, welfare, and
accommodation of the public, including, among other things, the right to pass
and enforce ordinances, to require proper and adequate extensions of the
service of such grant, to protect the public from danger or inconvenience in
the operation of any work or business authorized by the grant of the franchise,
and the right to make and enforce all such regulations as shall be reasonably
necessary to secure adequate, sufficient, and proper service, extensions, and
accommodations for the people and insure their comfort and convenience.
Sec. 18-16   Joint use of franchise property; compensation; council authority
   The City, by and through its council, shall have the power to require any
corporation holding a franchise from the City, to allow the use of its tracks,
poles, conduits, and wires, or any facilities that can be jointly used, by any
other corporation to which the City shall grant a franchise, upon the payment
of a reasonable rental, and any franchise or right which may hereafter be
granted to any person or corporation to operate a public utility within the
city or its suburbs, shall be subject to the condition that the City shall have
the rights to grant to any other person or corporation desiring to build or
operate a street railway or interurban railway, or any other public utility,
within or into the city or its suburbs, the right to operate; provided, that
the person or corporation desiring to so operate shall first agree in writing
with the owner thereof to pay such owner reasonable compensation for the use of
such facilities. And if the person or corporation desiring to use the same
cannot agree with the owner as to the compensation within sixty (60) days from
offering in writing so to do and to terms and conditions of the use of the
facilities, then the council shall, by resolution, after a fair hearing to the
parties concerned, fix the terms and conditions of such use and compensation to
be paid, which award of the council when so made shall be binding on and
observed by the parties concerned.
Chapter 19 - Appropriation of Private Property
Sec. 19-01   Procedure, state law
   Private property may be condemned by the City for any public use or purpose
within the scope of its powers in the manner provided for by the general laws
of the State.
Sec. 19-02   Awards in condemnation proceedings; special assessments
authorized; conditions, procedure; portion payable from general taxes
   In all cases where awards for damages have been made in condemnation
proceedings, if the council believes that a portion of the city in the vicinity
of the improvement will be benefitted by such improvement, they may, by an
entry in their minutes, determine that the whole or any just proportion of the
compensation awarded by the jury shall be assessed upon the owners or occupants
of real estate deemed to be thus benefitted, and thereupon they shall, by
resolution, fix and determine the district or portion of the city benefitted,
and specify the amount to be assessed upon the owners or occupants of the
taxable real estate therein. The amount of the benefit thus ascertained shall
be assessed upon the owners or occupants of such taxable real estate in
proportion, as nearly as may be, to the advantage which each such lot, parcel,
or subdivision is deemed to acquire by the improvement. The assessment shall be
made and the amount levied and collected in the same manner and by the same
officers and proceedings, as near as may be provided in and by this charter for
assessing, levying, and collecting the expense of a public improvement. The
assessment roll containing said assessment, when ratified and confirmed by the
council, shall be final, conclusive, and prima facie evidence of the regularity
and legality of all proceedings prior thereto, and the assessment therein
contained shall be and continue a lien on the premises on which the same is
made until payment thereof. Whatever amount or portion of such awarded
compensation shall not be raised in the manner herein provided shall be
assessed, levied, and collected upon the taxable real estate of the City; as
other general taxes are assessed and collected therein. At any sale which takes
place of the assessed premises, or any portion thereof, delinquent for non-
payment of the amount assessed and levied thereon, the City may become a
purchaser.
Chapter 20 - Recall; Removal; Initiative and Referendum
Sec. 20-01   State law
   Any holder of an elective office may be recalled and removed from their
office by the registered voters of the City of Hamtramck, in the manner
provided by the constitution and general laws of this State.
Sec. 20-02   Appointive officers; removal
   All appointive officers of the City of Hamtramck shall be subject to removal
as in this charter provided.
Sec. 20-03   Petitions; contents, signatures, requisites
   Any ordinance which may be legally adopted by the council of the City of
Hamtramck may be proposed by petition signed by a number of registered voters
of the City of Hamtramck equal to the percentage hereinafter provided, but in
no case shall the number of such signers be less than two hundred and fifty
(250). The petition shall be addressed to the council and shall set forth at
length the ordinance proposed to be enacted. With each signature attached
thereto shall be given the place of residence, with the street and number of
the registered voter so signing, and the date when such signature was attached.
The signatures need not all be on one paper, but all petitions shall be filed
with the city clerk at the same time. An affidavit or affidavits shall be made
by one or more registered voters of the city, which affidavits shall state that
each signature appearing upon such petition, to which such affidavit is
attached, is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be,
and that to the best of affiant’s knowledge and belief, the signers whose names
are attached to the petition are registered voters of the City of Hamtramck.
Sec. 20-04   Form of petition
   The petition proposing an ordinance shall be in the following form: To the
Honorable, the Council of the City of Hamtramck, County of Wayne, State of
Michigan:
   We, the undersigned registered voters of the City of Hamtramck, under and by
virtue of the authority granted by Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as
amended, and by Chapter 20 of the Charter of the City of Hamtramck, do hereby
propose and initiate for submission to the registered voters of the City of
Hamtramck, in the County of Wayne, and State of Michigan, the following
proposed ordinance:
      (Here set forth proposed ordinance in full.)
   If a special election is desired insert the following:
   Your Petitioners further pray that a special election be called for the
purpose of submitting the proposed ordinance provided no regular or special
election is to be held in the City within four months from the date the city
clerk shall certify the sufficiency of this petition. And your petitioners will
ever pray, etc.
   Name______Number_______Street_______Date of Signing
   AFFIDAVIT
   STATE OF MICHIGAN, ss:
   COUNTY OF WAYNE,
______________________being first duly sworn, deposes and say, that the names
appearing upon the foregoing petition are the genuine signatures of the persons
whose names appear thereon, and that to the best of affiant’s knowledge and
belief, such persons are registered voters of the City of Hamtramck.
   Subscribed and sworn to before me this___________day of________________,
A.D.
   Notary Public, Wayne County, Michigan.
   My commission expires_______________
Sec. 20-05   Petition; filing; city clerk, duties
   The petition, when signed by the requisite number of registered voters,
shall be filed with the city clerk. The city clerk shall attach thereto a
certificate setting forth the name and address of the person or persons filing
the petition in his office and the date when the petition was filed. A copy of
the petition, exclusive of signatures, together with the certificate shall be
entered in a record book to be kept for that purpose in the office of the city
clerk. Any defect in the form of the petition or record as kept by the city
clerk shall not invalidate the same.
Sec. 20-06   Petitions; signatures; examination, determination; city clerk
duties
   Within ten days from the date of the filing of the petition with the city
clerk, it shall be the duty of the clerk to ascertain by comparison of the
petition with the registration books of the City of Hamtramck, whether or not
the petitions are signed by the requisite number of registered voters, and
following the examination, the clerk shall attach to the petition his
certificate showing the result of the examination.
Sec. 20-07   Petitions; insufficiency; additional signatures, procedure
   If the certificate of the clerk so attached shows the petition to be
insufficient, he shall within ten days cause notice in writing, setting forth
the fact that the petitions are found to be insufficient, to be served upon one
or more of the persons designated in the certificate attached by him to the
petition as the persons who filed the petition in his office. Additional
signatures, properly verified, may be filed with the clerk at any time within
fifteen (15) days from the date of the service of such notice. The city clerk
shall attach his certificate to such additional petitions and shall cause them
to be entered in the record book. The clerk shall within five days after the
filing of such additional petitions make like comparison of the additional
signatures with the registration books and attach his certificate of the
result. If the number of signatures are still shown to be insufficient, or if
no additional signatures are so filed, the clerk shall, upon demand, return the
petition to any of the persons designated as filing it, without prejudice to
the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
Sec. 20-08   Petitions; sufficiency; return to council
   When the petition shall be found by the city clerk to be sufficient, he
shall so certify and submit the same with his certificate to the council at its
next regular meeting.
Sec. 20-09   Ordinance; submission to registered voters; special election
   If the petition accompanying the proposed ordinance is signed by a number of
registered voters of the city equal to at least twenty percent (20%) of the
entire vote cast for all candidates for mayor at the last preceding general
election at which a mayor was elected, and contains a request that the proposed
ordinance be submitted to a vote of the registered voters at a special
election, the council shall within twenty (20) days thereof either:
   (a)   Pass the ordinance without alteration, subject to the referendum
provided by this charter, or
   (b)   Call a special election to be held within ninety (90) days from the
date of the certificate of the city clerk attached thereto, and at such special
election, the proposed ordinance shall be submitted without alteration to the
vote of the registered voters of the City. Provided, however, that if any
election is to be held in the city within four months from the date of the
certificate by the city clerk, then the ordinance shall be submitted at the
election, and no other special election for the purpose of submitting the
ordinance shall be called.
Sec. 20-10   Ordinance; submission to registered voters; regular election
   If the petition accompanying the proposed ordinance is signed by registered
voters of the city of Hamtramck equal in number to at least ten percent (10%)
but less than twenty percent (20%) of the vote cast for all candidates for
mayor of the city at the last preceding general municipal election at which a
mayor was elected, which number shall be not less than two hundred and fifty
(250), as shown in the manner hereinafter provided, and the ordinance be not
passed without alteration by the council within twenty (20) days as provided in
the preceding section, then the ordinance, without alteration, shall be
submitted by the council to electoral vote at the next regular election that
shall occur at any time after thirty (30) days from the date of the city
clerk’s certificate of sufficiency attached to the petition accompanying the
ordinance.
Sec. 20-11   Referendum; petition, requisites; suspension of ordinance;
procedure
   Within twenty (20) days after the publication of any ordinance duly passed
by the City, a petition may be presented to the council protesting against such
ordinance continuing in effect. The petition shall contain the text of the
ordinance and shall be signed by registered voters of the city equal in number
to at least fifteen percent (15%) of the entire vote cast for all candidates
for mayor at the last preceding general election at which a mayor was elected,
which number shall in no case be less than two hundred and fifty (250). The
ordinance shall thereupon and thereby be suspended from operation, and the
council shall immediately reconsider the ordinance.
   If the ordinance is not entirely repealed, the council shall submit the
question of whether or not it shall become effective to a vote of the
registered voters of the city, either at the next regular election or at a
special election which may in its discretion be called for that purpose, and
such ordinance shall not be restored to operation unless a majority of the
registered voters voting at such election shall vote in favor thereof.
   The procedure in regard to such petition of protest and referendum shall be
the same as provided in this chapter for the initiative and referendum on a
proposed ordinance, with such modifications as the nature of the case may
require. Provided, however, that no such referendum shall be ordered by the
council on any ordinance required to be passed by the general laws of this
state, or when such ordinance shall be an emergency measure which is necessary
for the immediate preservation of public peace, health, or safety.
Sec. 20-12   Referendum; submission by council; time, restriction
   The council by resolution may submit to a referendum for adoption or
rejection at any general, primary, or special election held in the City, any
proposed ordinance or measure or a proposal for the repeal or the amendment of
any ordinance in the same manner and with the same force and effect as provided
in this chapter for submission on petition. No such ordinance or amendment
shall be submitted, however, at any election to be held in less than thirty
(30) days from the date of the meeting of the council when such ordinance or
amendment is ordered submitted.
Sec. 20-13   Conflicting ordinances; adoption; construction, determination
   If the provisions of two or more proposed ordinances or measures adopted or
approved at the same election are inconsistent, then the ordinance or measure
receiving the highest affirmative vote shall prevail.
Sec. 20-14   Ordinances; submission to registered voters; notice, publication
required
   Whenever any ordinance is submitted to the voters of the city at any
election, the council shall cause such ordinance to be published in full in
accordance with law.
Sec. 20-15   Ordinance adopted by referendum; amending, repealing; restriction
   No ordinance adopted under this charter by referendum or initiative shall be
repealed or amended except by vote of the electorate.
Sec. 20-16   Additional regulation authorized, restriction
   The council- and mayor-elect may by ordinance or resolution make such
regulations not in conflict herewith as it may deem necessary to carry out the
provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 21 - Miscellaneous
Sec. 21-01   Definitions
   The term, “City”, whenever used in this charter, shall be construed to mean
the City of Hamtramck. The term, “council”, as used in this charter, shall be
construed to mean the city council and shall mean the same as the term “common
council” wherever the same is used in this charter or in any law of the State
as designating the legislative body of the city.
Sec. 21-02   Notice; posting, publication; requirements, evidence
   When, by the provisions of this charter or the laws of the State, notice of
any matter or proceedings is required to be published or posted, an affidavit
of the publication or posting of the same made by the printer of the newspaper
in which the same was inserted or by some person in his employ knowing the
facts, if such notice was required to be by publication, or by the person
posting the same when required to be by posting, shall be prima facie evidence
of the facts therein contained. Such affidavit of publication or posting shall
be filed with the city clerk within six months from the date of the last
publication thereof or the posting of the same.
Sec. 21-03   Process against city; service upon designated officers
   All process against this City shall run against the City in its corporate
name and may be served by leaving a certified copy with the city manager or
city clerk, at such time and manner as may be provided by law.
Sec. 21-04   “Newspaper of general circulation” defined
   A “newspaper of general circulation” selected by council from time to time,
shall be construed to mean any newspaper having a general circulation in the
City of Hamtramck or subject to the definition provided in state law.
Sec. 21-05   Records required
   All records of the proceedings of the council and records of the City shall
be kept in the English language in the books or journal of the city.
Sec. 21-06   Records; public inspection
   All the records of this City shall be made available to the general public
in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 to 15.246.
Sec. 21-07   Fiscal year
   The fiscal year of this City shall begin with the first day of July of each
year, and end with the 30th day of June next thereafter.
Sec. 21-08   Uniform system of accounts; state law
   The system of accounts of the City shall conform to any uniform system,
which may be required by state law.
Sec. 21-09   Books, records, accounts, etc.; examination, audit
   All books, papers, records, and accounts of any officer, elected or
appointed, or of any office or department of the City shall be the property of
the City, and shall at all times be subject to audit, examination, or
inspection by any members of the council or mayor, or by any person employed or
designated by the council or mayor for that purpose.
Sec. 21-10   Misdemeanors; penalty
   All offenses herein declared to be misdemeanors shall be punishable, unless
herein otherwise provided for, by a fine not exceeding the maximum allowed by
state law, or by imprisonment in the county jail, or any place of imprisonment
provided by the City or laws of the State of Michigan, for a period not
exceeding ninety (90) days, or ninety-three (93) days in cases where state law
so provides, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Sec. 21-11   Officers, employees; service in military forces; compensation
authorized
   Whenever any officer or officers, employee or employees of the City of
Hamtramck shall be called into the military or naval service of the United
States, or shall voluntarily enter such service in time of war, the council
shall have power to grant to such officer or officers, employee or employees,
an indefinite leave of absence to cover the period of such service, with full
pay or such proportion thereof as the council in its discretion may determine.
Sec. 21-12   Severability of provisions
   Should any portion of this charter be declared void, illegal, or
unconstitutional, such finding shall not invalidate the remainder of this
charter.
Sec. 21-13   Charter; amending, revising; procedure; state law
   This charter may be amended or revised in the manner provided by the general
laws of this State.
Sec. 21-14   City seal; design, contents
   There shall be a city seal, which shall be of such design and with such
wording and device thereupon as shall be prescribed by the city council of the
City of Hamtramck. The year inscribed thereupon shall be the calendar year in
which the City of Hamtramck became legally incorporated.
Sec. 21-15   “He”, “masculine form” defined
   Wherever the word “he” is used in this charter, it may also be read “she”,
and wherever the name of any officer connected with the government of the City
of Hamtramck is in masculine form, it may also be held to include the feminine
form.
Sec. 21-16   Council, officers; powers construed
   Wherever, under the provisions of this charter, any powers of action or
determination are granted to the city council, the exercise of such powers
shall be deemed subject to the limitations herein set forth, unless expressly
exempted, but where any right of control management or superintendence is
herein given or conferred upon any appointive officer, the same shall be held
and construed to be not in derogation of the powers of the council, but only in
the execution thereof.
Chapter 22 - Submission and Election
Sec. 22-01   Charter; submission to registered voters, date
   This charter shall be submitted to the registered voters of the City of
Hamtramck for their approval or rejection at a special election to be held on
February 22, 2005.
Sec. 22-02   Charter; publication required; official ballot
   Prior to the submission to the voters, this charter shall be published as
required by law.
   Official Ballot
   Shall the City Charter proposed by the City of Hamtramck
   Charter Revision Commission approved by resolution on
   November 8, 2004 be adopted? [ ] YES   [ ] NO
Sec. 22-03   Effective date of charter
   If this charter is adopted, this charter shall take effect on the filing
with the Secretary of State and the County Clerk as provided in MCLA 117.24 or
July 1, 2005, whichever is later, subject to the following:
   (a)   The mayor, city council, city clerk, and city treasurer elected at the
general election, held November 4, 2003, under the old charter, shall continue
to serve the elected term of office to December 31, 2005. Any vacancies created
before December 31, 2005, shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of
this charter, as in
4-03 (b).
   (b)   At the November, 2005 election, three councilpersons shall be elected
for a four-year term and three councilpersons shall be elected for a two-year
term. In the November, 2007 election and each municipal election thereafter,
three councilpersons shall be elected to four-year terms.
   (c)   For the period immediately following the effective date of this
charter until the six councilmembers elected in the November 2005 general
municipal election are sworn in, the number of councilmembers shall not exceed
five (5), and the city council shall consist of the councilmembers who hold
office at the effective date of this charter. From the effective date of this
charter until January 1, 2006, any vacancies on the city council shall be
filled in the manner described in section
4-03(b).
   (d)   Continuation of public and private rights
   All writs, actions, suits, proceedings, civil or criminal liabilities,
prosecutions, judgments, sentences, orders, decrees, appeals, causes of action,
contracts, claims, demands, titles, and rights existing when this charter takes
effect continue unaffected except as modified in accordance with this charter.
   (e)   Rights of employees
   No provision of this charter may affect or impair the employment rights or
privileges of employees existing when this charter takes effect concerning
appointment, ranks, grades, promotion, removal, pension, and retirement rights.
   (f)   Pension system
   All pension systems of the City of Hamtramck existing when this charter
takes effect continue until changed in accordance with law. No person may
receive pension benefits for service as an elected officer.
   (g)   One-year exemption for city clerk and treasurer
   The elected city clerk and city treasurer shall be granted an exemption from
the one-year non-employment provision
Chapter 5 Sec.
5-05.
   (h)   Compensation for city clerk, city treasurer, council, mayor and mayor
pro tem
      (1)   The compensation for the city clerk and city treasurer as elected
officers shall remain at $12,000 per year if they remain as part-time elected
officers.
      (2)   If the city treasurer, or the city clerk, or both elected at the
November 4, 2003 election, or the person appointed to the position of city
clerk or city treasurer in the case of a vacancy meet the qualifications of the
appointed positions, it will be at the discretion of the city manager to
recommend their appointment to full time status, subject to approval of the
mayor and city council.
      (3)   The city council- and mayor-elect will set the compensation for the
full-time appointed city clerk and city treasurer positions to be within the
range of other communities for like positions.
      (4)   The council elected at the November 4, 2003 election shall receive
the compensation set forth Section
7-01, effective July 1, 2005.
      (5)   The mayor elected at the November 4, 2003 election shall receive
the compensation set forth in Section
9-03, effective July 1, 2005.
      (6)   The mayor pro tem selected by council shall receive the
compensation set forth in Section
9-03, effective July 1, 2005.
   (i)   General provision
   If any question arises concerning transition from the old charter to this
charter, for which this charter has not provided, the City may resolve the
question by ordinance.
   (j)   Conflicts of interest and ethics ordinance
   Within one year of the approval of this charter, the city manager and city
attorney shall prepare and submit to council for its consideration a conflicts
of interest and ethics ordinance which is not in conflict with MCL 15.321, et
seq., and shall include, but not be limited to: acting in an official capacity
in matters in which the officer has a private financial interest clearly
separate from that of the general public; the acceptance of gifts and other
things of value; acting in a private capacity on matters dealt with as a public
official; the use of confidential information; and the appearance of City
officers before other city agencies on behalf of private interests. This
ordinance shall provide for reasonable public disclosure of finances by elected
officials.
   Resolved, that the Charter Revision Commission of the City of Hamtramck does
hereby adopt the foregoing charter for and to be the charter of the City of
Hamtramck, and the Secretary of this Commission is hereby instructed to
transmit the same to the Governor of the State of Michigan. in accordance with
the provisions of the statute for her approval.
      Carried by the following vote:
         Yeas: Lukas, Zwolak, Wiitala, Kirchner, Urbaniak and Puls.
         Nays: None.
         Absent: Woods
   I, Gregory Kirchner, Secretary of the Charter Revision Commission, elected
on November 5, 2002, to revise the charter for the City of Hamtramck, do hereby
certify that the above and foregoing charter was adopted by the Hamtramck
Charter Revision Commission at a session thereof held upon the 8th day of
November, 2004, at 7:00 P.M., and that the foregoing is a full, true, and
complete copy of the resolution by which the charter was adopted and the vote
thereupon.
______________________________________
   Gregory Kirchner
   Secretary of the Charter Revision Commission      Date: November 8, 2004
   The members of the Hamtramck Charter Revision Commission who have signed
below submit this charter for adoption at a special election to be held on
February 22, 2005.
__________________________               _____________________________
   David Puls, Chairman                     Jolanta Urbaniak, Vice-Chairman
__________________________               _____________________________
   Gregory Kirchner, Secretary                  Dennis Lukas
__________________________               _____________________________
   William Wiitala                           Beatrice Woods
__________________________               APPROVED
   Robert Zwolak
                                    _____________________________
                                    Governor of the State of Michigan
                                    Date:_________________________
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.001   How code designated and cited
   
10.002   Definitions
   
10.003   Section catchlines and other headings
   
10.004   Certain ordinances not affected by code
   
10.005   Continuation of ordinances
   
10.006   Prior rights, offenses and the like
   
10.007   Ordinances repealed not reenacted
   
10.008   Amendments to code
   
10.009   Supplementation of code
   
10.010   Appearance tickets
   
10.011   Official time
   
10.012   Separability of provisions
   
10.013   Annual revision of penalties, fines and fees
 
   
10.999   General penalty
Cross-reference:
   General welfare; ordinances, regulations, see Charter,
Chapter 7, §
7-05
   Resolutions, majority vote; Mayor’s voting rights, see Charter,
Chapter 7, §
7-06
§ 10.001 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   This code shall constitute and be designated as the “Hamtramck City Code.”
Statutory reference:
   Codification authority, see M.C.L.A. 117.5b
§ 10.002 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Terms used in this code, unless otherwise specifically defined, have
the meanings prescribed by the statutes of the state for the same terms.
   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CHARTER.  The Charter of the City of Hamtramck, adopted February 22,
2005, and shall include any amendment thereto, or any revision thereof.
      CITY.  The City of Hamtramck, Michigan.
      CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Hamtramck.
      CODE.  The Hamtramck City Code as designated in §
10.001.
      COMPUTATION OF TIME.  The time within which an act is to be done, as
provided in this code or in any order issued pursuant to this code, when
expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last, except that if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be
excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a
legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.
      COUNTY.  County of Wayne, Michigan.
      JUVENILE. Any person under 17 years of age.
      MINOR. A person under 21 years of age.
      MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION. An act or omission that is prohibited by this
code or any ordinance of the city, but which is not a crime under this code or
any other ordinance of the city, and for which civil sanctions, including
without limitation, fines, damages, expenses and costs may be ordered, as
authorized by Public Act 236 of 1961, being M.C.L.A. § 600.113(1)(c), as
amended. A MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION is not a lesser included offense of any
criminal offense in this code.
      OFFICER, DEPARTMENT, BOARD AND THE LIKE. Whenever any officer,
department, board or other public agency is referred to by title only, the
reference shall be construed as if followed by the words “of the City of
Hamtramck, Michigan.” Whenever, by the provisions of this code, any officer of
the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty,
reference to that officer shall mean and include the officer or his or her
deputy or authorized subordinate.
      ORDINANCES. The ordinances of the City of Hamtramck and all amendments
thereto.
      PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation. Whenever the word PERSON is used in any section of this code
prescribing a penalty or fine, as applied to partnerships or associations, the
word includes the partners, or members thereof, and as applied to corporations
the word includes officers, agents or employees thereof who are responsible for
any violations of the section. The singular includes the plural. The masculine
gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
      STATE. The term THE STATE or THIS STATE shall be construed to mean the
State of Michigan.
§ 10.003 SECTION CATCHLINES AND OTHER HEADINGS.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and
shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of the sections, nor as any part
of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed
when any of the sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
No provision of this code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any
catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, article or division.
§ 10.004 CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.
   (A)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect
any ordinance not in conflict with or inconsistent with this code:
      (1)   Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or
authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city’s
indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city;
      (2)   Containing any administrative provisions of the City Council;
      (3)   Granting any right or franchise;
      (4)   Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening,
paving, widening, vacating and the like, any street or public way in the city;
      (5)   Making any appropriation;
      (6)   Levying or imposing taxes;
      (7)   Establishing or prescribing street grades in the city;
      (8)   Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor;
      (9)   Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city;
      (10)   Extending or contracting the boundaries of the city;
      (11)   Prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city
officers or employees;
      (12)   Prescribing specific parking restrictions, no-parking zones;
specific speed zones; parking meter zones; and specific stop or yield
intersections or other traffic ordinances pertaining to specific streets;
      (13)   Pertaining to rezoning; and
      (14)   Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general
and permanent nature.
   (B)   All these ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force
and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code. The
ordinances are on file in the City Clerk’s office.
§ 10.005 CONTINUATION OF ORDINANCES.
   The provisions of this code, so far as they are the same in substance as
those of heretofore existing ordinances, shall be construed as a continuation
of the ordinances and not as new enactments.
§ 10.006 PRIOR RIGHTS, OFFENSES AND THE LIKE.
   Any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired, or
liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time of
adoption of this code shall not be affected by the adoption, but may be
enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same
extent as if the adoption had not been effected.
§ 10.007 ORDINANCES REPEALED NOT REENACTED.
   No ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore repealed shall be
considered reordained or reenacted by virtue of this code, unless specifically
reenacted. The repeal of any curative or validating ordinances shall not impair
or affect any cure or validation already effected thereby.
§ 10.008 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   (A)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made by
amending the provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in the following language: “That section _____ of the Hamtramck City Code,
is hereby amended to read as follows:...” The new provisions shall then be set
out in full as desired.
   (B)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added,
the following language shall be used: “That the Hamtramck City Code is hereby
amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which the section reads as
follows:...” The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
§ 10.009 SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.
   (A)   By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City Council. A
supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general
parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all
changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary,
replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new
pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be
current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in
the supplement.
   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages.
   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make
formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included
in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a
unified code. For example, the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement, and make changes
in the catchlines, headings and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be
inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subdivision numbers;
      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to
“this chapter,” “this article,” “this division,” and the like, as the case may
be, or to “sections _____ to _____” (inserting section numbers to indicate the
sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance
incorporated into the code); and
      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code; but in no case
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
§ 10.010 APPEARANCE TICKETS.
   The following public servants are hereby authorized to issue and serve
appearance tickets with respect to ordinances of the city, as provided by
Public Act 147 of 1968, being M.C.L.A. § 764.9c(2), as amended, when the public
servant has reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed an offense
in violation of a city ordinance:
   (A)   Health Officer;
   (B)   Building Inspector;
   (C)   Fire Marshal; and
   (D)   Fire Chief.
§ 10.011 OFFICIAL TIME.
   Eastern Standard Daylight Time (EDT), based on the seventy-fifth meridian of
longitude west from Greenwich, shall be the official time of the city. Eastern
Standard Daylight Time (EDT) shall be adopted, beginning at 2:00 a.m. on the
second Sunday in March until the first Sunday in November until 2:00 a.m.
(Ord. 198, passed 1-15-1946; Am. Ord. 208, passed 4-13-1948; Am. Ord. 213,
passed 9-24-1948)
Editor’s note:
   For similar provisions, see federal law amendment in 2007
§ 10.012 SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   Each section, paragraph, sentence, clause and provision of this code is
separable and if any provision shall be held unconstitutional or invalid for
any reason, the decision shall not affect the remainder of this code, or any
part thereof, other than that part affected by the decision.
§ 10.013 ANNUAL REVISION OF PENALTIES, FINES AND FEES.
   All penalties, fines and fees, described in the Hamtramck Code of
Ordinances, and as provided in any special ordinances, new ordinances or
amendments, are subject to change (increase or decrease) each calendar year by
resolution of City Council, as part of the city's annual budgetary process and
as otherwise permitted under state law. Changes to said penalties, fines and
fees may also be made in accordance with state law by resolution of City
Council at such other times as it deems appropriate.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 2-14-2012)
§ 10.999 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this code for which a penalty is
not otherwise specified, either in that provision or elsewhere in the code,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in any court of
competent jurisdiction shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500, or to
imprisonment in the Wayne County Jail for a period of not more than 90 days, or
to both the fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
   (B)   Provisions of this code prescribing any penalty shall not apply to the
failure of any city officer or employee to perform an official duty.
   (C)   The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction
shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this code or any ordinance,
plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under
Public Act 736 of 1961, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8701 et seq., as amended and
other applicable laws.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal
civil infraction violation by this code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a
violation shall be not less than $50 nor more than $500, plus costs and other
sanctions, for each infraction. Costs shall include all expenses, direct and
indirect, to which the city has been put in connection with the municipal civil
infraction. In no case, however, shall costs of less than $10 nor more than
$500 be ordered.
      (2)   (a)   Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations
by a person of any requirement or provision of this code or any ordinance. As
used in this section, REPEAT OFFENSE means a second (or any subsequent)
municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision:
            1.   Committed by a person within any three-year period (unless
some other period is specifically provided by this code or any ordinance); and
            2.   For which the person admits responsibility or is determined to
be responsible.
         (b)   Unless otherwise specifically provided by this code or any
ordinance for a particular municipal civil infraction violation the increased
fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows:
            1.   The fine for any violation which is a first repeat offense
shall be no less than $150 and no more than $500, plus costs.
            2.   The fine for any violation which is a second repeat offense or
any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $500, plus costs.
            3.   Repeat offenses are determined on the basis of the date of the
commission of the violations.
   (D)   A violation includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared
to be unlawful or an offense by this code or any ordinance; and any omission or
failure to act where the act is required by this code or any ordinance.
   (E)   Each act of violation and each day on which any violation of this code
or any ordinance continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject
to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense.
   (F)   In addition to any remedies available at law, the city may bring an
action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent
or abate any violation of this code or any city ordinance. The penalty or
sanction shall be in addition to the abatement of the violating condition, any
injunctive relief, revocation of any permit or license, or other process.
   (G)   The penalties and sanctions provided by this section, unless another
penalty or sanction as expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any
section of this code and/or any addition to this code whether or not the
penalty or sanction is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance.
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS
      
32.   CITY COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND BUREAUS
      
33.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
34.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
35.   ELECTIONS
      
36.   PERSONNEL POLICES
      
37.   TAXATION AND FINANCIAL POLICIES
      
38.   COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT
      
39.   ETHICS
      
40.   MEDICAL SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Standing Rules for City Council
   
30.001   Regular meetings
   
30.002   Chair
   
30.003   Sergeant at arms
   
30.004   Agenda
   
30.005   Call to order
   
30.006   Roll call; vacancy
   
30.007   Rules of debate/addressing the City Council/decorum
   
30.008   Voting on questions
   
30.009   Special committees
   
30.010   Ordinances, resolutions and contracts
   
30.011   Suspension of the rules
   
30.012   Mayor pro tem
   
30.013   Motion to adjourn
   
30.014   Other rules to govern
Standing Rules for Boards and Commissions
   
30.030   Regular meetings
   
30.031   Officers
   
30.032   Agenda
   
30.033   Roll call
   
30.034   Rules of debate
   
30.035   Addressing boards and commissions
   
30.036   Voting on questions
   
30.037   Decorum
   
30.038   Advisory groups
   
30.039   Suspension of the rules
   
30.040   Motion to adjourn
   
30.041   Other rules to govern
   
30.042   Appointment; terms; quorum; removal; replacement
   
30.043   Administrative official; appointment; duties
   
30.044   Nonconflicting
Cross-reference:
   For specific boards and commissions, see Chs.
32 and
153
STANDING RULES FOR CITY COUNCIL
§ 30.001 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   In accordance with the Hamtramck Charter Sec. 7-09, the City Council must
meet regularly at least twice in every month, at least 14 days apart, and at
times and places which the City Council provides by resolution. Special
meetings may be called by the Mayor, or by two or more City Council members, or
by the City Manager. A swearing in ceremony shall be held the first Sunday in
January for the purpose of swearing in new members; an organizational meeting
shall be held on the first Tuesday after January 1 at 7:00 p.m. EST following
election years. Meetings must be held in accordance with the Open Meetings Act.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Res. 2021-64, passed 5-25-2021; Am. Res.
2022-19, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 33.002 CHAIR.
   The Mayor shall be the chair of the City Council and shall preserve order
and decorum at all its regular and special meetings. The Mayor shall state
every question coming before the City Council, announce the decision of the
City Council on all matters, and decide all questions of order; provided,
however, that upon an appeal to the City Council by any of its members, a
majority vote of the City Council shall conclusively determine the question of
order. The Mayor shall vote only were allowed by the Charter and in case of a
tie vote, with the Mayor's name being called last.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Res. 2021-64, passed 5-25-2021; Am. Res.
2022-19, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 30.003 SERGEANT AT ARMS.
   The Police Chief or the Police Chief's representative shall serve as
sergeant at arms and carry out the instructions of the City Council from time
to time and shall, under the direction of the Chair, keep order in the City
Council chambers.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Res. 2021-64, passed 5-25-2021; Am. Res.
2022-19, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 30.004 AGENDA.
   (A)   All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract
documents or other matters to be submitted to the City Council as part of the
agenda shall be delivered to the City Manager by 12:00 noon on Wednesday and
with the final agenda posted by Friday preceding the City Council meeting. With
approval of the Mayor and City Manager, any report, communication, ordinance,
resolution, contract document or other matter presented in appropriate form by
a Council member for inclusion on the agenda within the time limit prescribed
shall appear on the agenda. An item that does not appear on the agenda may not
be considered for approval by the City Council and shall be referred for
consideration at the next regular Council meeting. During the City Council
meeting, items may be removed from the agenda with the consent of the person
placing the item on the agenda.
   (B)   The City Manager may present urgent matters of city business that
cannot wait until the next regular meeting to the Council for its consideration
at the opening of the meeting, and the Council shall amend the agenda to
include those items. No other matters shall be presented to the City Council by
administrative officials except those of an urgent nature, and these, when so
presented, shall have the written approval of the City Manager before
presentation, unless the department head is requested to attend a Council
meeting for inquiry.
   (C)   No resolution, ordinance, or amendment that does not directly address
an agenda item may be considered.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Res. 2021-64, passed 5-25-2021; Am. Res.
2022-19, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 30.005 CALL TO ORDER.
   The Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem shall take the chair at the hour appointed for
the meeting and shall call the City Council to order. In the absence of the
Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem, the City Manager or their designee shall call the
Council to order, whereupon a chairperson shall be elected by the members of
the Council present. Upon the arrival of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem, the
temporary chairperson shall relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the
item then before the City Council.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Res. 2021-64, passed 5-25-2021; Am. Res.
2022-19, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 30.006 ROLL CALL; VACANCY.
   (A)   Before proceeding with the business of the City Council, the City
Clerk shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present and
those absent shall be entered in the minutes.
   (B)   In the event a vacancy on Council occurs, as defined by § 6-11 of the
City Charter, the vacancy shall be filled following § 4-03 of the City Charter.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Res. 2021-64, passed 5-25-2021; Am. Res.
2022-19, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 30.007 RULES OF DEBATE/ADDRESSING THE CITY COUNCIL/DECORUM.
   The rules of parliamentary procedure comprised in the current edition of
Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised shall govern all rules of debate,
addressing the City Council, and decorum, provided they are not in conflict
with the Hamtramck City Charter.
   (A)   Elected officials are only permitted to speak up to five minutes per
agenda item.
   (B)   Any person may address the City Council during a City Council meeting
without prior permission of the City Council or the Chair, subject to the
following.
      (1)   Each person who wishes to address the City Council shall submit a
request form to the City Clerk and be called on a first-come, first-served
basis. When called, they will approach the podium, and shall limit their
remarks for up to three minutes at the beginning of the meeting on any topic
and for two minutes at the end of the meeting on any topic. A person may
request one additional minute at the end of the meeting public comment for a
total of three. All remarks shall be addressed to the City Council as a body
and not to any specific member thereof. Public comment will be accepted by
postal mail, dropped off, or E-mail. The maximum time allotted for total public
comment shall be 30 minutes prior to agenda items and no maximum set for after
the agenda items have been completed; however, if a significant portion of the
public comments are related to a specific topic, one member representing each
view point must be nominated by each side, and each such person will be
allotted five minutes each to express their respective viewpoint during the
after-agenda public comment period. The City Council shall have the right, by
majority vote, to terminate the public comment if they deem the time elapsed to
be excessive. Public comments will be heard starting first with in-person
comments, followed by comments received by postal mail, dropped off, or e-
mailed; if not enough time is available to hear all postal mail, dropped off,
or E-mailed comments, prior to the agenda, the remainder of those comments
shall be posted in the meeting minutes.
      (2)   The City Clerk must keep track of the time limits and cut the
public comment after the allotted time has elapsed. A person in the middle of
their comment may finish their allotted time as to not be cut off in the middle
of their comment.
      (3)   No person, other than the City Council and the person having the
floor, shall be permitted to enter any discussion, either directly or through a
Council member, without the permission of the Chair. No questions shall be
asked a Council member except through the Chair. Council members shall have the
opportunity to respond to comments by individual members of the public
immediately after the comments, provided that the responses shall not exceed
two minutes per Council member. Information presentations of longer than five
minutes may be placed on the agenda at the discretion of the City Manager to
take place at the beginning of the meeting.
   (C)   While the City Council is in session, the members shall preserve order
and decorum. A Council member shall not, by conversation or otherwise, delay or
interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the City Council, disturb any Council
member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the City Council or its
Chair. Every Council member wishing to speak shall address the Chair and, upon
recognition by the Chair, shall confine himself or herself to the question
under debate, avoiding all personalities, indecorous language, personal,
impertinent or slanderous remarks, or becomes boisterous, or shows obvious
signs to be under the influence of drugs or alcohol. A Council member violating
this section shall forfeit all remaining opportunities to debate the remainder
of the meeting. The Chair may direct the sergeant at arms to remove the
offending person.
   (D)   If any member of the public makes personal, impertinent, slanderous
remarks, becomes boisterous while addressing the City Council, or shows obvious
signs to be under the influence of drugs or alcohol, the Chair may bar that
person from addressing the City Council for the remainder of the meeting. The
Chair may direct the sergeant at arms to remove the offending person from the
building.
   (E)   Cellular telephone ringers shall be turned off and with repeated
disruptions, the Chair may direct the sergeant at arms to remove the offending
person from the building.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Res. 2021-64, passed 5-25-2021; Am. Res.
2022-19, passed 2-22-2022; Am. Res. 2023-85, passed 6-27-2023; Am. Res. 2023-
127, passed 8-22-2023; Am. Res. 2023-151, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 30.008 VOTING ON QUESTIONS.
   All votes shall be taken by a single word, "yes," "no," or abstention, by a
show of hands or by a call to respond, by voice, "yes," "no," or abstention and
be entered in the minutes to show the names of those voting in the affirmative
and in the negative, except that if the vote is unanimous, the record need
merely so state. A roll call vote shall occur when ordinances are under
consideration, when required by state law or when requested by two or more
members of the Council or the Mayor. In accordance with the Charter, a majority
vote of a quorum shall be required for the passage and final adoption of any
resolution.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Res. 2021-64, passed 5-25-2021; Am. Res.
2022-19, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 30.009 SPECIAL COMMITTEES.
   (A)   The City Council may create special committees by resolution as the
City Council may determine from time to time. Each special committee shall
perform duties and investigate, have charge of and report upon the matters.
   (B)   The administration may recommend or the Mayor may create special
committees from time to time. Each special committee shall perform duties and
investigate, have charge of and report upon the matters.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Res. 2021-64, passed 5-25-2021; Am. Res.
2022-19, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 30.010 ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND CONTRACTS.
   (A)   No ordinance shall be placed on the agenda, nor shall there be any
reading of the ordinance by title or otherwise, without its first being
approved as to form and legality by the City Attorney, if the review is deemed
advisable by the City Manager, and examined and approved by the City Manager
where there are substantive matters of administration involved.
   (B)   Before inclusion on a City Council agenda, resolutions and contract
documents shall have been examined and approved by the City Manager where there
are substantive matters of administration involved.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to alter the procedures
established for initiative and referendum as set forth in the City Charter.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Res. 2021-64, passed 5-25-2021; Am. Res.
2022-19, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 30.011 SUSPENSION OF THE RULES.
   A motion to suspend the rules shall require a two-thirds vote of Council
members, minus the Mayor. A suspension of the rules is always in order through
an acknowledgment of the Mayor to recognize a visiting dignitary or elected
official
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Res. 2021-64, passed 5-25-2021; Am. Res.
2022-19, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 30.012 MAYOR PRO TEM.
   (A)   Following the November election, the Mayor Pro Tem shall be selected
from the body of the Council by resolution of Council at the organizational
meeting held on the first Tuesday after January 1.
   (B)   The appointment to the Office of Mayor Pro Tem shall be for two years.
   (C)   If the Mayor Pro Tem is either unwilling or unable to continue their
term of service the members of the Council shall appoint a Mayor Pro Tem from
the elected body for the remainder of the term.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Res. 2021-64, passed 5-25-2021; Am. Res.
2022-19, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 30.013 MOTION TO ADJOURN.
   A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Res. 2021-64, passed 5-25-2021; Am. Res.
2022-19, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 30.014 OTHER RULES TO GOVERN.
   The Council intends to follow the rules of parliamentary procedure comprised
in the current edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised shall govern
all meetings of the City Council, provided they are not in conflict with the
Hamtramck City Charter, Code of Ordinances, or other applicable state and
federal law. The City Clerk and or City Attorney shall serve as
Parliamentarian.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Res. 2021-64, passed 5-25-2021; Am. Res.
2022-19, passed 2-22-2022)
STANDING RULES FOR BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§ 30.030 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   In accordance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275, and the City Charter, all boards and
commissions shall provide for the day and time of its regular meetings to be
held at the first meeting of each calendar year.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 30.031 OFFICERS.
   All boards and commissions of the city shall elect or reappoint officers for
the commission or board at the first meeting of the calendar year. For the
purposes of this section, a TERM shall mean a period of one calendar year,
January 1 to December 31.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 30.032 AGENDA.
   All reports, communications, resolutions or other supporting documents shall
be submitted with an agenda. The chair of the board or commission shall furnish
each board or commission member and the City Clerk with a copy of the agenda
and supporting documents as legally required. All agendas shall include public
comment. The Clerk shall also make the agenda available to the public.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 30.033 ROLL CALL.
   Before proceeding with the business of the board or commission, the
secretary shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present
and those absent shall be entered in the minutes. If the absence of the member
is excused, it shall be noted in the minutes.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 30.034 RULES OF DEBATE.
   (A)   The chair may not make or second motions but may debate from the
chair, subject only to limitations of debate as are herein imposed on all
members.
   (B)   Every member wishing to speak shall address the chair and, upon
recognition by the chair, shall confine himself or herself to the question
under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. A member
violating this section shall forfeit all remaining opportunities to debate the
subject at hand.
   (C)   Debate shall continue until the chair has recognized all members who
wish to speak. The chair shall determine the order of speakers.
   (D)   A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking
unless it is to call him or her to order, or as herein otherwise provided. If a
member, while speaking, is called to order, he or she shall cease speaking
until the question of order is determined, and, if in order, he or she shall be
permitted to proceed.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 30.035 ADDRESSING BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
   (A)   Any person may address a board or commission during the meeting
without prior permission subject to the following:
      (1)   Interested parties or their authorized representatives may address
the board or commission by written communication with respect to any matter by
delivering to the City Clerk a copy of the written communication before the
meeting; and
      (2)   Interested persons or their authorized representatives may address
the board or commission during a meeting by oral communication.
   (B)   After a motion has been made, no person shall address the board or
commission without first securing the permission of the commission to do so.
   (C)   In accordance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275, each person addressing the board or
commission shall stand and, unless the board or commission grants further time,
shall limit his or her remarks to three minutes at the beginning of the
meeting. A person may also address the board or commission a second time for an
additional three minutes at the close of the meeting.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 30.036 VOTING ON QUESTIONS.
   All votes shall be taken by "yes," "no" or abstention, by a show of hands or
by a call to respond, by voice, "yes," "no" or abstention and be entered in the
minutes to show the names of those voting in the affirmative and in the
negative, except that if the vote is unanimous, the record need merely so
state. A roll call vote shall occur when required by state law or when
requested by two or more members.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 30.037 DECORUM.
   (A)   While the board or commission is in session, the members shall
preserve order and decorum. A member shall not, by conversation or otherwise,
delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the board or commission,
disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the board or
commission or its chair.
   (B)   If any member of the public makes personal, impertinent or slanderous
remarks or becomes boisterous while addressing the board or commission, the
chair may bar that person from addressing the board or commission for the
remainder of the meeting.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 30.038 ADVISORY GROUPS.
   All boards and commissions of the city may create an advisory group provided
that the appointing authority approves of formation of the advisory group and
its membership.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 30.039 SUSPENSION OF THE RULES.
   A motion to suspend the rules shall require a two-thirds vote of members
unless the motion is intended to grant additional time to a member of the
public commenting during the public participation portion of the meeting; in
this case, the motion shall require a simple majority of members present voting
in the affirmative to pass, provided that no speaker is allowed to speak for a
time equal to twice the normal time allotted.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 30.040 MOTION TO ADJOURN.
   A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 30.041 OTHER RULES TO GOVERN.
   (A)   The rules of parliamentary procedure comprised in the current edition
of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised shall govern all meetings of the
city's boards, commissions and committees, provided they are not in conflict
with the charter, this subchapter or resolutions adopted pursuant to this
subchapter.
   (B)   A commission may call upon the City Manager for information and
services from the various city departments as it may require. Commissions may
recommend to the City Council the securing of professional and consulting
services as it may require, however, expenditures shall be limited to budgeted
funds. Any contracts entered into for providing the services shall first be
approved and authorized by the City Council.
   (C)   All boards and commissions shall prepare an annual report of their
activities, accomplishments and a description of how they have attempted to
achieve their objectives. This report shall be presented to the City Council.
(Res. 2018-19, passed 3-13-2018; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 30.042 APPOINTMENT; TERMS; QUORUM; REMOVAL; REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   All appointments shall be conducted by Mayor with the approval of
Council.
   (B)   Members appointed shall be appointed for terms of three years unless
otherwise stated in this code and the terms shall commence on January 1 with
expiration on December 31. Mid term appointment terminates on December 31.
   (C)   The quorum shall be a majority of appointed members attending.
   (D)   All boards shall consist of at least 50% of members as residents of
the City of Hamtramck unless otherwise stated in this code or state law.
Members of boards and commission should reflect the broad ethnic, racial and
religious diversity that exists in the city.
   (E)   Removal. The Mayor may remove a commissioner with approval by the City
Council.
   (F)   Replacement. In the event of death, resignation or other termination
of membership, the Mayor shall appoint a successor for the balance of the
unexpired term.
   (G)   Vacancies. The office of any member shall become vacant upon the
occurrence of one or more of the following events before the expiration of the
term of office:
      (1)   For any reason specified by state law creating a vacancy in public
office;
      (2)   When a member shall miss two consecutive regular meetings of the
commission, unless the absence, shall be excused by the commission and the
reason therefore entered in the proceedings of the commission.
(Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 30.043 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL; APPOINTMENT; DUTIES.
   The City Manager may appoint an administrative official for each commission
or board as a nonvoting ex-officio member. The City Manager shall prescribe the
duties of the administrative official.
(Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 30.044 NONCONFLICTING.
   This subchapter shall apply to all boards and commissions provided they are
not in conflict with state law or other sections of this code.
(Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   Generally
Administrative Departments
   
31.015   Departments; supervision; City Manager
   
31.016   Assessing Department; Director; power and duties
   
31.017   Finance Department; Director; power and duties
   
31.018   Office of the City Clerk; powers and duties
   
31.019   Department of Public Services; Director; power and duties
Cross-reference:
   Fire Department, see
Ch. 34
   Office of Community and Economic Development, see §§
32.060 through
32.062
   Police Department, see
Ch. 33
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 GENERALLY.
   For information concerning city officials, please see the Charter for the
city,
Chapters 4 through
9.
ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
§ 31.015 DEPARTMENTS; SUPERVISION; CITY MANAGER.
   The administrative service of the city shall consist of the following
departments and shall be under the supervision of the City Manager.
   (A)   Assessing Department;
   (B)   Community and Economic Development Department;
   (C)   Finance Department;
   (D)   Fire Department;
   (E)   Office of the City Clerk;
   (F)   Police Department; and
   (G)   Public Services Department.
(Ord. 530, passed 1-23-2007)
§ 31.016 ASSESSING DEPARTMENT; DIRECTOR; POWER AND DUTIES.
   The Assessing Department shall be supervised by the City Assessor, whose
duty it shall be to perform all work in connection with the assessment of
property and preparation of all assessments, tax rolls and tax notices in
accordance with the general property taxation laws of the state.
(Ord. 530, passed 1-23-2007)
§ 31.017 FINANCE DEPARTMENT; DIRECTOR; POWER AND DUTIES.
   (A)   This Department shall be headed by the Director of Finance, who shall,
with the objective that the financial interests of the city are at all times to
be protected, be responsible for financial planning, budgeting, reporting and
control, except insofar as the duties of the Director or the City Treasurer are
regulated by the Charter, ordinance or state law.
   (B)   Division of Finance Department.
      (1)   Treasury Division. The Treasury Division shall be supervised by the
City Treasurer, whose duty it shall be to collect all receivables of any
type—fees, licenses, service charges and taxes. The Treasurer shall receive all
other monies due or coming to the city from assessments, grants and
intergovernmental payments. All monies received by the City Treasurer shall be
deposited daily in the official depository to the credit of the city and shall
be recorded and accounted for on the date received.
      (2)   Accounting and Control Division. The Accounting and Control
Division shall be supervised by the City Controller who shall be a competent
municipal accountant and shall be responsible for the audit and recording of
all financial transactions.
   (C)   The City Manager may assign other duties and responsibilities to the
Department as necessary for the operation of the city; these may be assigned to
an existing division or additional division as deemed necessary.
(Ord. 530, passed 1-23-2007)
§ 31.018 OFFICE OF THE CITY CLERK; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall keep the corporate seal and all documents,
official bonds, papers, files and records of the city which are not entrusted
to some other officer by City Charter, the city ordinances or state statutes.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall:
      (1)   Be the Clerk of the Council, attend City Council meetings and
record the proceedings;
      (2)   Sign all licenses granted after the license fee has been paid to
the City Treasurer and shall register the same;
      (3)   Make and certify, under the seal of the city, copies of papers and
records filed and kept in the office;
      (4)   Have authority to administer oaths and affirmations in matters
pertaining to the affairs of the city, and shall make no charge therefore; and
      (5)   Perform all other duties or functions required by city ordinance or
applicable state law.
   (C)   The City Clerk may appoint deputies to perform any or all of the
duties of the City Clerk.
   (D)   The City Manager may assign other duties and responsibilities to the
Department as necessary for the operation of the city; these may be assigned to
an existing division or additional division as deemed necessary.
(Ord. 530, passed 1-23-2007)
§ 31.019 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICES; DIRECTOR; POWER AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Department of Public Services shall be headed by the Director of
Public Services, who shall be responsible for all matters relating to the
construction, management, maintenance and operation of the physical properties
of the city, except as otherwise provided by this code. The Director shall also
be responsible for all planning in connection with changes or improvements to
the physical properties which are essential to the future growth and
development of the city. Duties shall include responsibility for streets and
signs, sanitation, sewer and water.
   (B)   Division of Public Services Department; code enforcement.
      (1)   The Department shall include a code enforcement division supervised
by a chief code enforcement official whose primary duties and powers shall be
set forth in the city’s Building and Property Maintenance Codes.
      (2)   All construction permits, including those for building, electrical,
plumbing, heating, sewer tapping, water tapping, sidewalk or driveway approach,
street cutting and any other applicable permits required for work to be done on
private property or within the dedicated right-of-way or building setback line
on major streets shall be issued by this division.
      (3)   The chief code enforcement official shall also enforce any other
applicable ordinance code which relates to construction of new or existing
structures; regulates electrical, plumbing, heating, refrigeration and
mechanical work; and regulates the construction, repair and location of signs
or any ordinance or code which by its terms requires enforcement of same.
   (C)   The City Manager may assign other duties and responsibilities to the
Department as necessary for the operation of the city; these may be assigned to
an existing division or additional division as deemed necessary.
(Ord. 530, passed 1-23-2007)
CHAPTER 32: CITY COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND BUREAUS
Section
Parks Advisory Commission
   
32.001   Reserved
   
32.002   Reserved
   
32.003   Officers
   
32.004   Meetings
Youth Council
   
32.020   Reserved
   
32.021   Purpose
   
32.022   Composition
Arts and Culture Commission
   
32.035   Definitions
   
32.036   Purpose
   
32.037   Composition
   
32.038   Reserved
   
32.039   Compensation
   
32.040   Organization and election of officers
   
32.041   Reserved
   
32.042   Reserved
   
32.043   Reserved
   
32.044   Duties
   
32.045   Review of public art
   
32.046   Scope of authority
Human Relations Commission
   
32.075   Purpose
   
32.076   Composition
   
32.077   Reserved
   
32.078   Compensation
   
32.079   Reserved
   
32.080   Duties
Historical Commission
   
32.095   Reserved
   
32.096   Definitions
   
32.097   Purpose
   
32.098   Reserved
   
32.099   Composition
   
32.100   Reserved
   
32.101   Reserved
   
32.102   Compensation
   
32.103   Reserved
   
32.104   Reserved
   
32.105   Reserved
   
32.106   Commission publications
   
32.107   Powers and duties of Commission
City Beautification Commission
   
32.120   Purpose
   
32.121   Composition
   
32.122   Chairperson; by-laws; meetings
Housing Commission
   
32.135   Purpose
   
32.136   Composition and compensation
Senior Citizen Advisory Commission
   
32.150   Purpose
   
32.151   Composition
Cross-reference:
   Standing rules for boards and commissions, see
Ch. 30
PARKS ADVISORY COMMISSION
§ 32.001 RESERVED.
§ 32.002 RESERVED.
§ 32.003 OFFICERS.
   (A)   Within three weeks of appointment, Commissioners shall meet to elect a
chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary.
   (B)   Thereafter, officers are to be elected annually in July.
(Ord. 526, passed 7-11-2006)
§ 32.004 MEETINGS.
   All meetings are to conform to the State Open Meetings Act. During its first
meeting, the Commission will establish a meeting time and schedule, including
one regular meeting per month.
(Ord. 526, passed 7-11-2006)
YOUTH COUNCIL
§ 32.020 RESERVED.
§ 32.021 PURPOSE.
   The primary purpose of the Youth Council is for youth to actively
participate in matters concerning the community. The Youth Council is to
identify issues and concerns of the community's youth and make recommendations
for projects and programs to address them for the betterment of the community.
(Ord. 525, passed 6-27-2006; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 32.022 COMPOSITION.
   (A)   Members appointed shall be appointed for terms of one year.
   (B)   The Commission shall consist of nine members: one member who is over
21 years of age, whose profession is engaged in work connected with youth but
may not serve as an officer or vote, and eight member local students, from the
ages of 13 to 18 years when appointed.
(Ord. 525, passed 6-27-2006; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
ARTS AND CULTURE COMMISSION
§ 32.035 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ART, CIVIC. Visual art pertaining to a person, place or event relating to,
sponsored by or belonging to a city or municipality.
   ART, PUBLIC. One or more pieces of civic, visual or performance art designed
specifically for ownership by the public or display on property owned by the
public.
   ART, VISUAL. The conscious production or arrangement of colors, forms or
other elements in a manner that affects the human senses in a graphic or
plastic medium.
   COMPETITION. A process established by the Arts and Culture Commission to
review specific art work(s) for a specific site, for the purposes of making a
recommendation to the Arts and Culture Commission.
   JURY. An ad hoc committee or individual appointed by the Arts and Culture
Commission to review specific art work(s) for the purposes of making a
recommendation to the Arts and Culture Commission.
   PERFORMANCE ART. Works of art that create a situation and are conducted for
a duration determined by the artist and/or spectator.
   RULES OF PROCEDURE. A written description of the Arts and Culture
Commission's mission statement, objectives, organization of meetings,
membership, terms of service, procedure for the election of officers and
procedures for the review of public art work.
(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 32.036 PURPOSE.
   The objectives of the Arts and Culture Commission are as follows:
   (A)   To enrich the city's civic and cultural heritage, the Arts and Culture
Commission is established to provide a level of expertise and objectivity to
recommend to the City Council works of art to become the property of or for
display upon property owned by the city;
   (B)   To promote a rich, diverse and stimulating cultural environment in
order to enrich the lives of the city's residents, business owners, employees
and visitors and to enhance the city's image both nationally and
internationally;
   (C)   To establish an environment where differing points of view are
fostered, expected and celebrated by providing the opportunity for the
expression through the display of public art;
   (D)   To promote, sponsor and organize festivals, events, activities and
materials that celebrate the cultural diversity and traditions of the various
peoples of the city in order to enrich the lives of the city's residents,
business owners, employees and visitors and to enhance the city's image both
nationally and internationally;
   (E)   To offer assistance to promoters, event organizers, and business
owners engaged in the arts in the city; and
   (F)   To seek grants and funding from all available sources in order to
enrich the lives of the city's residents, business owners, employees and
visitors and to enhance the city's image both nationally and internationally.
(Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 32.037 COMPOSITION.
   Insofar as possible, the members shall represent a major cultural
institution such as the Detroit Institute of Arts, a registered architect of
the state, an artist, an art historian and an art consultant, and shall consist
of seven members.
(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 32.038 RESERVED.
§ 32.039 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the Arts and Culture Commission shall serve without
compensation.
(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005)
§ 32.040 ORGANIZATION AND ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Arts and Culture Commission shall, from its appointed members,
annually elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson whose terms of office shall
be fixed by the Rules of Procedure of the Arts and Culture Commission. The
chairperson shall preside over the Arts and Culture Commission and shall have
the right to vote. The vice-chairperson shall, in absence, or disability of the
chairperson perform the duties of the chairperson and shall have the right to
vote. The City Manager or his or her authorized representative shall act as
secretary of the Arts and Culture Commission, and maintain a record of all of
its proceedings.
   (B)   The Arts and Culture Commission shall, at its first meeting establish
the Rules of Procedure for conducting its business.
(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005)
§ 32.041 RESERVED.
§ 32.042 RESERVED.
§ 32.043 RESERVED.
§ 32.044 DUTIES.
   (A)   With the exception of art works to be placed in museums or art
galleries, the Arts and Culture Commission shall have the responsibility to
review all works of art to become the property of or placed upon property owned
by the city.
   (B)   The Arts and Culture Commission shall have the responsibility to
review publicly owned property for the purposes of consideration for the
display of public art. The Arts and Culture Commission shall recommend to the
City Council the establishment of general guidelines for site selection, and
maintenance program(s) for ensuring the structural integrity and aesthetic
quality of the site and any work of art, including the removal of any work of
art.
   (C)   The Arts and Culture Commission shall have the responsibility to
pursue sources of public funding for arts and cultural education, design
competitions, special events and the like, that may be necessary to advance the
objectives of the Arts and Culture Commission. In fulfilling these duties, the
Arts and Culture Commission may seek assistance from the City Manager or their
designee and others for the completion of applications for grants, scholarships
and other sources of public funding, including the administration of the funds.
The city may also accept private donations and gifts to advance the goals,
objectives and duties of the Arts and Culture Commission.
   (D)   It shall also be the responsibility of the Arts and Culture Commission
to increase public awareness and promote education of the importance of public
art as an enrichment of the quality of life for the residents, business owners,
employees and visitors to the city.
(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 32.045 REVIEW OF PUBLIC ART.
   (A)   The Arts and Culture Commission, within its rules of procedure, shall
establish its vision statement and processes for the review of public art
works. The Arts and Culture Commission may also appoint a jury or hold design
competitions for the selection and review of public art works.
   (B)   The Arts and Culture Commission shall make a recommendation regarding
the proposed public art work to the City Council. However, a positive
recommendation shall not be required to advance the proposed art work for
review by the City Council.
   (C)   In the event that a display and/or installation of civic, public or
visual art is proposed on a site that is within the jurisdiction of another
board of this city, it shall be reviewed by and reported on by that board
before it is presented to the City Council.
(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 32.046 SCOPE OF AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Arts and Culture Commission may select and appoint a jury or hold
a competition for the review of any public art project as provided. The jury or
competition held for any public art project shall serve the Arts and Culture
Commission as an ad hoc committee for the duration of the project only.
   (B)   The Arts and Culture Commission is a non-administrative board serving
to make recommendations to the City Council but may not assume any legislative
or administrative authority in the operation of any city department or publicly
owned property, except as specifically provided in this subchapter.
(Ord. 515, passed 6-13-2005; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
§ 32.075 PURPOSE.
   The Human Relations Commission is established to promote mutual
understanding and respect for multi-culturalism and diversity, advocate for
peace and justice and encourage tolerance and constructive communication in
order to develop a functional, safe and harmonious community. The Commission
will work to safeguard equal opportunity, overcome divisiveness, violence and
all forms of discrimination against people for reasons including nationality,
religion, race, class, physical and mental disability, gender, marital status
and sexual orientation.
(Ord. 507, passed 10-26-2004; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 32.076 COMPOSITION.
   (A)   Composition. There is hereby created and established a commission to
be known as the Human Relations Commission consisting of 12 members. They
should support the purpose of this subchapter. Membership shall not be limited
to residents of the city, but appointments may be made from the entire local
community.
   (B)   Duties. The Human Relations Commission shall:
      (1)   Promote mutual understanding and respect among all residents of the
community;
      (2)   Discourage and prevent by persuasion, prejudice, intolerance and
discriminatory practices against any individual or group;
      (3)   Disseminate information and educational materials consistent with
the purpose of this subchapter;
      (4)   Inform the City Manager or their designee on any complaints and
problems arising between groups or individuals which result or may result in
tensions, discrimination or prejudice in the city;
      (5)   Assist with educational programs and campaigns to assist various
groups and agencies in the community;
      (6)   Cooperate with city, state, federal and other governmental or
private agencies in the promotion of better human relations;
      (7)   Encourage employment practices and hiring procedures in city
government to ensure a diversified work force; and
      (8)   Disseminate important city information as requested, such as voting
materials and other information critical to the health and welfare of the
residents of the city, in languages other than English when possible.
(Ord. 507, passed 10-26-2004; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 32.077 RESERVED.
§ 32.078 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the Human Relations Commission shall serve without
compensation, but subject to approval of the Mayor and City Council and within
the amounts as appropriated by the city, shall be reimbursed for expenses
actually and necessarily incurred in connection with their duties as members of
the Commission.
(Ord. 507, passed 10-26-2004)
§ 32.079 RESERVED.
§ 32.080 DUTIES.
   In order to achieve the purpose set forth in §
32.075, the Human Relations Commission shall:
   (A)   Promote mutual understanding and respect among all residents of the
community;
   (B)   Discourage and prevent by persuasion, prejudice, intolerance and
discriminatory practices against any individual or group;
   (C)   Disseminate information and educational materials consistent with the
purpose of this subchapter;
   (D)   Investigate, collect data and study complaints and problems arising
between groups or individuals which result or may result in tensions,
discrimination or prejudice in the city;
   (E)   Provide conciliation and mediation services as a means to resolve
complaints. May request the City Attorney to issue subpoenas for information
relevant to ongoing investigations;
   (F)   Formulate educational programs and campaign to assist various groups
and agencies in the community;
   (G)   Coordinate programs with schools that promote mutual understanding and
respect in the school system;
   (H)   Cooperate with city, state, federal and other governmental or private
agencies in the promotion of better human relations;
   (I)   Prepare and submit reports to the Mayor and the City Council of its
activities, making at least one complete report annually by January 1, and any
other reports and recommendations requested by Mayor or City Council;
   (J)   Review employment practices and hiring procedures and make
recommendations to the Mayor and City Council on ways to ensure a diversified
work force;
   (K)   Adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind suitable rules and procedures to
carry out the provisions of this subchapter; and
   (L)   Review the dissemination of important city information, voting
materials and other information critical to the health and welfare of the
residents of the city, in languages other than English, and make
recommendations to the city.
(Ord. 507, passed 10-26-2004)
HISTORICAL COMMISSION
§ 32.095 RESERVED.
§ 32.096 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Hamtramck.
   COMMISSION. The Historical Commission as herein created.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Hamtramck.
   SHALL. Always mandatory and not merely directory.
(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998)
§ 32.097 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is enacted for the purpose of establishing an Historical
Commission in the city to identify, assemble, collect and preserve objects,
material, writings, buildings and sites relating to the history and culture of
the city and its citizens, both past and present; and to assist the State
Historical Commission in carrying out its powers and duties under Public Act
271 of 1913, being M.C.L.A. §§ 399.1 through 399.10, as amended.
(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 32.098 RESERVED.
§ 32.099 COMPOSITION.
   The members of the Commission shall have interest, background or education
in issues relating to city history, historic preservation and community
development. The City Historical Commission shall consist of seven members.
(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 32.100 RESERVED.
§ 32.101 RESERVED.
§ 32.102 COMPENSATION.
   Compensation of the members of the Commission, if any, shall be established
by Council resolution in accordance with the provisions of the relevant
portions of the City Charter.
(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998)
§ 32.103 RESERVED.
§ 32.104 RESERVED.
§ 32.105 RESERVED.
§ 32.106 COMMISSION PUBLICATIONS.
   The secretary of the Commission shall be the custodian of the publications
of the Commission, and shall distribute and/or exchange publications with other
municipalities, governments and institutions under the rules and regulations as
shall be established by the Commission. Copies of any of the above items or
other materials of the Commission may be sold by the secretary at prices to be
fixed by the Commission to the public at large. The money arising from the
sales and from certified copies of documents shall be placed in the Historical
Fund.
(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 32.107 POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION.
   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties to be exercised
and performed in conformity with the City Charter and state statutes.
   (A)   In general, it shall be the duty of the Commission to collect,
arrange, catalogue and preserve historical material including books, pamphlets,
maps, charts, manuscripts, papers, records and archives, paintings, statuary
and other objects and materials relating to the history of the city; to procure
and preserve narratives and oral histories of the early residents of the city;
to collect, prepare and display objects indicative of the life, customs, dress
and resources of the early residents of this area; and to make available from
time to time publications, source materials and historical studies relative to
and illustrative of the history of the area.
   (B)   The Commission shall have power, and it is hereby made the duty of all
public officials to assist in the performance of this power, to collect from
the public offices in the city reproductions of any records, files, documents,
books and papers as are not in current use and which are, in the opinion of the
Commission, of historical value. The Commission shall provide for the
classification, arranging and indexing of the reproductions so that they may be
made available for the use of the public.
   (C)   The Commission shall cooperate with and assist the State Historical
Commission in carrying out its powers and duties as established by of the
Public Act 271 of 1913, being M.C.L.A. §§ 399.1 through 399.10, as amended, and
Public Act 10 of 1955, being M.C.L.A. §§ 399.151 et seq., as amended.
   (D)   The Commission may recommend to the Council purchases of historical
material including books, pamphlets, maps, charts, manuscripts, papers, copies
of domestic and foreign records and archives, paintings, statuary and other
objects and material illustrative of and relating to the history of the city;
provided, however, that all purchases shall be accomplished in accordance with
the City Charter and applicable ordinances of the city.
   (E)   The Commission may recommend to the Council the establishment of
Historical Districts or buildings throughout the city, in conformity with all
relevant local, state and federal laws.
   (F)   The Commission may receive any money appropriated to it by the state
and shall deposit the same with the City Treasurer as provided in the City
Charter.
   (G)   Subject to the approval of the City Council, the Commission, in the
name of the city, may acquire and hold by purchase, lease, gift, devise,
bequest or otherwise any historical sites, buildings, landmarks or properties
which it may deem suitable or appropriate for carrying out the objects,
functions or purposes of the Commission. Furthermore, with approval of the
Council, the Commission may use any building or property for the purpose of
housing or displaying any part of its collection of objects or documents
therein. The Commission may locate and erect plaques or markers at historic
sites, buildings or properties in the city with the consent of the owner or
owners of any property and subject to approval of the Council. The disposal of
any real property or building shall be subject to approval of the Council.
   (H)   (1)   The Commission shall make and submit to the Council and to the
Mayor an annual report of the general activities, operation and condition of
the Commission for the preceding year. This report shall include, but not be
limited to, an accounting of all accounts, funds, monies and other property
under the control of the Commission, the number and nature of historical
materials on hand, the number added by gift, purchase and otherwise during the
year and other statistical information and suggestions as may be required by
the City Council. This report shall be verified by affidavit. This report shall
be submitted by the first day of May of every year.
      (2)   The Commission shall, from time to time, as the occasion requires,
either in the annual report, or at any time deemed necessary by the Commission,
advise the city in writing on all matters necessary and proper for the
operation of the Commission and any of its activities or properties.
   (I)   The Commission shall have the right to accept donations of money or
personal property or real estate for carrying out the historical purposes as
provided in this subchapter.
(Ord. 466, passed 4-30-1998; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
CITY BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION
§ 32.120 PURPOSE.
   The Beautification Commission is established to promote the beautification
of the city including but not limited to recommendations for beautification of
streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, yards, lots and buildings; to study,
develop plans for improving the health, sanitation, and cleanliness of the
city; to encourage and recommend the placing, planting and preservation of
trees, flowers, plants, shrubbery and other objects of ornamentation in the
city; to sponsor, plan, promote, coordinate and carry out the annual community
wide clean-ups, and to otherwise promote public interest in the general
improvement of the appearance of the city.
(Ord. 353, passed 3-28-1974; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 32.121 COMPOSITION.
   The City Beautification Commission shall consist of seven members.
(Ord. 353, passed 3-28- 1974; Am. Ord. 514, passed 6-13-2005; Am. Ord. passed
8-10-2021)
§ 32.122 CHAIRPERSON; BY-LAWS; MEETINGS.
   The City Beautification Commission shall immediately after appointment meet
and organize by the election of one of their members a chairperson and by
election of other officers as they deem necessary. They will adopt by-laws for
the orderly conduct of their meetings, and for proper process of their
functions. Meetings of the Commission will be held as often as may be deemed
necessary by a majority of the members of the Commission.
(Ord. 353, passed 3-28-1974)
HOUSING COMMISSION
§ 32.135 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Pursuant to Public Act 18 of 1933, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.651 through
125.709e, as amended by Public Act 80 of 1935, being M.C.L.A. § 125.655, Public
Act 265 of 1937, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.651 through 125.709e and Public Act 5 of
1938, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.651 through 125.709e, a commission is hereby
created in and for the city, to be known as the Housing Commission.
   (B)   The Housing Commission shall have all the powers and duties vested or
permitted to be vested in housing commissions by Public Act 18 of 1933, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.651 through 125.709e, as heretofore or hereafter amended, and
any laws heretofore or hereafter enacted which are supplemental thereto, it
being the intention of this subchapter to vest in the Housing Commission all
powers and duties permitted by law.
(Ord. 173, passed 7-20-1939; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 32.136 COMPOSITION AND COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The Housing Commission shall select and appoint employees as it shall
deem necessary for the proper exercise of its powers, functions and duties.
   (B)   The Housing Commission shall pay the employees compensation.
(Ord. 173, passed 7-20-1939; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
SENIOR CITIZEN ADVISORY COMMISSION
§ 32.150 PURPOSE.
   The Senior Citizen Advisory Commission is established to actively engage
seniors in matters concerning the community. The Senior Citizen Advisory
Commission shall identify issues and concerns of the community's senior
citizens and make recommendations for projects and programs for the betterment
of the community.
(Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 32.151 COMPOSITION.
   The Senior Citizen Advisory Commission shall consist of nine members who are
at least 55 years of age at the time of the appointment.
(Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
CHAPTER 33: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
33.001   Qualifications; powers and duties
   
33.002   Work week
   
33.003   Police Department; Police Chief; power and duties
Disposition of Property in Possession of Police Department
   
33.015   Custody of stolen, lost or abandoned property; property defined
   
33.016   Record of stolen, lost or abandoned property to be kept
   
33.017   Return of property by Chief of Police or his or her duly designated
agent; two or more claimants; liability of Chief of Police or his or her duly
designated agent; property required as evidence
   
33.018   Return of property to accused upon acquittal
   
33.019   Claims of third person
   
33.020   Property coming into possession of police to be transmitted to Chief
of Police or his or her duly appointed agent; disposition of property of
deceased persons
   
33.021   Sale at auction; balance to City Treasurer
   
33.022   Sale of perishable property
   
33.023   Delivery of property to owner pending trial
   
33.024   Perishable property may be delivered to owner; security
   
33.025   Quantities of goods held for sale; delivery to owner
   
33.026   Use of property as evidence
   
33.027   Property not called for within one year to be treated as abandoned
   
33.028   Unclaimed property may be assigned to city departments; method of
effectuating assignment
Civilian Crossing Guards
   
33.040   Appointment
   
33.041   Dress
   
33.042   Qualifications
   
33.043   Rights and benefits
   
33.044   Unlawful to wear uniform when off duty
   
33.045   Unlawful to neglect or refuse to respond to assignment
   
33.046   Unlawful to impersonate civilian crossing guard
 
   
33.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.001 QUALIFICATIONS; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   For information concerning police officers, please see the Charter for
the city,
Chapter 10, §
10-04.
   (B)   For information concerning the Chief of Police, please see the Charter
for the city,
Chapter 9, §
9-16 and
Chapter 10, §
10-03.
§ 33.002 WORK WEEK.
   Except as provided for herein or in any collective bargaining agreement, the
work week of all police officers shall be for each police officer five days in
every seven days, with two days off duty in each seven-day period and two days
leave of absence shall be in addition to a furlough of 20 days in each year, of
which at least ten days shall be consecutive. Provided, however, that this
shall not prohibit the Chief of Police from suspending the leave of absence or
furlough temporarily as a matter of discipline for misconduct or dereliction of
any police officer. Provided, further, that this section shall not apply in
case of an emergency and the existence of an emergency shall be within the sole
determination of the Mayor.
(Ord. 257, passed 5-31-1960)
§ 33.003 POLICE DEPARTMENT; POLICE CHIEF; POWER AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Police Department shall be headed by a Police Chief, who shall be
the commanding officer of the police force and be responsible for the
enforcement of law and order. All police officers shall have the right and duty
to arrest persons for any and all violations of the ordinances of the city. The
divisions of the Police Department and the responsibilities thereof shall be
set forth in departmental regulations.
   (B)   The City Manager may assign other duties and responsibilities to the
Police Department as necessary for the operation of the city; other duties and
responsibilities may be assigned to an existing division or additional division
as deemed necessary.
(Ord. 530, passed 1-23-2007)
DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY IN POSSESSION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.015 CUSTODY OF STOLEN, LOST OR ABANDONED PROPERTY; PROPERTY DEFINED.
   (A)   All property or money alleged or supposed to have been feloniously or
wrongfully obtained or which shall be lost or abandoned, and which shall be
thereafter taken into the custody of any member of the police force or the
police or District Court of the city, or which shall come into custody shall
be, by the member or lay order of the court, given into the custody of the
Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent.
   (B)   The word PROPERTY as used in this subchapter shall not include
animals.
(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)
§ 33.016 RECORD OF STOLEN, LOST OR ABANDONED PROPERTY TO BE KEPT.
   All property and money shall be particularly registered by the Chief of
Police or his or her duly designated agent in a book kept for that purpose,
which shall contain also a record of the names of the persons from whom the
property or money was taken, the names of all claimants thereto, the place
where found, the time of the seizure, the date of the receipt, the general
circumstances connected therewith, and any final disposal of the property and
money.
(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)
§ 33.017 RETURN OF PROPERTY BY CHIEF OF POLICE OR HIS OR HER DULY DESIGNATED
AGENT; TWO OR MORE CLAIMANTS; LIABILITY OF CHIEF OF POLICE OR HIS OR HER DULY
DESIGNATED AGENT; PROPERTY REQUIRED AS EVIDENCE.
   (A)   Upon satisfactory evidence of the ownership of property or money
described in §
33.015, the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent shall deliver
the same to the owner, his or her next of kin, or legal representative, and to
him, her, or them only. If in any case, it is proven impracticable for the
owner, next of kin, or legal representative to appear, the Chief of Police or
his or her duly designated agent may deliver the property or money to any
person having a duly executed power of attorney from the owner or his or her
next of kin, or legal representative, upon the filing of the power of attorney
in the office of the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent and
the signing of a receipt for the property or money.
   (B)   In the event two or more persons claim ownership of any property or
money, the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent may give notice
by registered mail to all claimants of whom he or she shall have knowledge of
the time and place of a hearing to determine the person to whom the property or
money shall be delivered. At the time and place so designated, the Chief of
Police or his or her duly designated agent shall hear and receive evidence of
ownership of the property or money concerned, and shall determine the identity
of the owner. After the hearing, the Chief of Police or his or her duly
designated agent shall deliver the property or money to the person whom the
Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent determines is the owner,
his or her next of kin, or legal representative, and to him, her, or them only.
If, in any case, it is proven impracticable for the owner, next of kin, or
legal representative to appear, the Chief of Police or his or her duly
designated agent may deliver the property or money to any person having a duly
executed power of attorney from the owner, his or her next of kin, or legal
representative, upon the filing of the power of attorney in the office of the
Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent and the signing of a
receipt for the property or money.
   (C)   The Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent shall not be
liable in any official action performed hereunder in good faith.
   (D)   Except as provided in §§
33.023,
33.024 and
33.025 hereof, no property or money in the possession of the Chief of Police or
his or her duly designated agent alleged to have been feloniously obtained or
to be the proceeds of crime shall be delivered under this section if it is
required to be held under the provisions of §
33.019 hereof; nor shall it be delivered within one year after the date of
receipt of the property or money by the Chief of Police or his or her duly
designated agent unless the property or money is not needed as evidence in the
prosecution of a crime.
(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)
§ 33.018 RETURN OF PROPERTY TO ACCUSED UPON ACQUITTAL.
   Whenever property or money shall be taken from persons arrested, and shall
be alleged to have been feloniously obtained, or to be the proceeds of crime,
and whenever so brought with the claimant and the person arrested before any
court for trial, and the court shall be satisfied from evidence that the person
arrested is innocent of the offense alleged, and that the property rightfully
belongs to him or her, the court may, in writing, order the property or money
to be returned, and the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent, if
he or she have it, to deliver the property or money to the accused person
himself or herself, and not to any attorney, agent or clerk of the accused
person.
(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)
§ 33.019 CLAIMS OF THIRD PERSON.
   If any claim to the ownership of the property or money shall be made on oath
before the court, by or in behalf of any other persons than the person
arrested, and the accused person shall be held for trial or examination, the
property or money shall remain in the custody of the Chief of Police or his or
her duly designated agent until the discharge or conviction of the person
accused.
(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)
§ 33.020 PROPERTY COMING INTO POSSESSION OF POLICE TO BE TRANSMITTED TO CHIEF
OF POLICE OR HIS OR HER DULY APPOINTED AGENT; DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY OF
DECEASED PERSONS.
   All property or money taken on suspicion of having been feloniously
obtained, or of being the proceeds of crime, and for which there is no other
claimant than the person from whom the property was taken, and all lost
property coming into possession of any member of the police force, and all
property and money taken from pawnbrokers as the proceeds of crime or from
persons supposed to be insane, intoxicated or otherwise incapable of taking
care of themselves, shall be transmitted as soon as practicable to the Chief of
Police or his or her duly designated agent, to be fully registered and
advertised for the benefit of all parties interested, and for the information
of the public as to the amount and disposition of the property so taken into
custody by the police. Whenever any money or property of deceased persons
coming into the custody of the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated
agent of the Police Department shall remain in his or her hands for the period
of one year without being claimed by the legal representatives of the deceased
person, the money or property, when not exceeding $100 in value, shall be
disposed of as lost or abandoned property as provided in this subchapter.
(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)
§ 33.021 SALE AT AUCTION; BALANCE TO CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   All property, except perishable property, that shall remain in the
custody of the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent for the
period of six months, with the exception of motor vehicles which shall be held
for a period of three months, without any lawful claimant thereto after having
been advertised in some daily newspaper of general circulation published in the
city, shall be sold at public auction, and the proceeds of the sale, having
been retained by the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent for a
period of three months without a lawful claimant, shall then be paid to the
City Treasurer and all money that shall remain in his or her hands for the
period of six months shall be so advertised, and if no lawful claimant appear,
shall be likewise paid to the City Treasurer.
   (B)   All funds received by the City Treasurer shall be credited to the
General Fund. The Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent shall
designate the time and place for holding the auction.
(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)
§ 33.022 SALE OF PERISHABLE PROPERTY.
   All perishable property so taken and unclaimed shall be sold at once.
(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)
§ 33.023 DELIVERY OF PROPERTY TO OWNER PENDING TRIAL.
   Whenever any article of property (except perishable property) other than
money, returned to the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent as
the proceeds of crime, are shown by sufficient evidence to be necessary for the
current use of the owner and not for sale, the Council has power, in its
discretion, to authorize the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated
agent to place the same in the custody of the owner, upon sufficient bonds
being given by the owner in the sum of twice the value of the property,
conditioned for the production of the same at any time within one year when
required for use in court as evidence in any proceedings thereon.
(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)
§ 33.024 PERISHABLE PROPERTY MAY BE DELIVERED TO OWNER; SECURITY.
   Perishable property, returned to the Chief of Police or his or her duly
designated agent as the proceeds of crime, may be delivered to the owner on
ample security being taken by the court for his or her appearance to prosecute
the case.
(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)
§ 33.025 QUANTITIES OF GOODS HELD FOR SALE; DELIVERY TO OWNER.
   (A)   When large quantities of goods held for sale by the owner come into
the possession of the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent as
the proceeds of crime, the same may be delivered to the owner, his or her heirs
or representatives, as provided in §
33.017, upon ample security to prosecute the case.
   (B)   However, goods with an estimated value of $50 or less shall be
retained by the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent until the
discharge or conviction of the accused.
(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)
§ 33.026 USE OF PROPERTY AS EVIDENCE.
   If any property or money placed in the custody of the Chief of Police or his
or her duly designated agent shall be desired as evidence in any criminal
court, the property shall be delivered to any officer who shall present an
order to that effect from the court; but the property shall not be retained in
the court but shall be returned to the Chief of Police or his or her duly
designated agent to be disposed of according to the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)
§ 33.027 PROPERTY NOT CALLED FOR WITHIN ONE YEAR TO BE TREATED AS ABANDONED.
   Any property or money returned to the Chief of Police or his or her duly
designated agent as the proceeds of crime, and which shall not be called for as
evidence by any proceeding in the municipal court within one year from the date
of the return may, unless specially claimed by the owner within that time, be
thereafter treated as other unclaimed abandoned or lost property or money, as
provided this subchapter.
(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)
§ 33.028 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY MAY BE ASSIGNED TO CITY DEPARTMENTS; METHOD OF
EFFECTUATING ASSIGNMENT.
   (A)   After expiration of the time period within which property subject to
the provisions of this subchapter maybe, reclaimed as herein provided and no
claim, has been made, the property may upon the request, of a city department
head or other city official be assigned by resolution of the City Council to a
city department for use by the department.
   (B)   All property thus assigned shall be appraised, identified and
enumerated by the Chief of Police or his or her duly designated agent and
accountable therefor assumed on the records of the department receiving the
property and a record of all transfers of property shall be kept by the Police
Department, the City Controller and any other departments as the City Council
may designate.
(Ord. 340, passed 7-27-1971)
CIVILIAN CROSSING GUARDS
§ 33.040 APPOINTMENT.
   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and authorized and directed to
appoint special officers as he or she may deem necessary to perform police
duties under the direction of and in compliance with rules and regulations as
the Chief of Police shall promulgate.
(Ord. 253, passed 12-15-1959)
§ 33.041 DRESS.
   Civilian crossing guards shall wear badges, dress and insignia as the Chief
of Police shall direct, and shall be equipped in the manner which he or she
deems necessary for the proper discharge of their duties.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-24-1968)
§ 33.042 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Chief of Police shall promulgate rules relating to the qualifications,
appointment, and removal of the civilian crossing guards. Persons shall serve
with compensation as may be provided for by the City Council.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-24-1968)
§ 33.043 RIGHTS AND BENEFITS.
    Civilian crossing guards shall be entitled to all rights and benefits
provided under the provisions of Public Act 317 of 1969, being M.C.L.A. §§
418.101 through 418.941 and the amendments thereto; the same being known as the
worker’s compensation law of state.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-24-1968)
§ 33.044 UNLAWFUL TO WEAR UNIFORM WHEN OFF DUTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any civilian crossing guard to exercise his or her
authority as a guard or to wear the uniform or insignia, or to display his or
her badge in an attempt to exercise his or her authority, except during the
performance of actual authorized police duty.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-24-1968)
§ 33.045 UNLAWFUL TO NEGLECT OR REFUSE TO RESPOND TO ASSIGNMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any civilian crossing guard to knowingly and
willfully neglect or refuse to respond for assignment or duty when called under
rules and regulations as promulgated by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-24-1968)
§ 33.046 UNLAWFUL TO IMPERSONATE CIVILIAN CROSSING GUARD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person not duly appointed and sworn in as a
civilian crossing guard to impersonate the officer, or to wear, carry or
display the badge, designated dress or insignia, of the civilian crossing
guards.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-24-1968)
§ 33.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.
   (B)   Civilian crossing guards. Any person or persons violating any of the
provisions of §§
33.040 through
33.046 shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not to exceed $500 or
imprisonment for a period of not to exceed 90 days, or both a fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 313, passed 9-24-1968)
CHAPTER 34: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
34.001   Qualifications; powers and duties
   
34.002   Work week
   
34.003   Fire Department; Fire Chief; power and duties
Authority of Fire Marshal to Inspect Premises, Buildings,
Structures, Installations, Equipment, Devices and Materials
   
34.015   Definitions
   
34.016   Purpose; application; modification and appeal
   
34.017   General
   
34.018   Powers and duties
   
34.019   Smoke detector devices; hotels, motels, boarding and lodging houses,
dormitories, single- or multiple-family dwelling units
Emergency Response Cost Recovery
   
34.030   Short title
   
34.031   Purpose and intent
   
34.032   Definitions
   
34.033   Liability for costs of the emergency response
   
34.034   Payment of costs
 
   
34.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.001 QUALIFICATIONS; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   For information concerning the Fire Department and its members, please
see the Charter for the city,
Chapter 11.
   (B)   For information concerning the Chief of the Fire Department, please
see the Charter for the city,
Chapter 9, §
9-17.
§ 34.002 WORK WEEK.
   Except as otherwise provided for in a collective bargaining agreement
between the city and the union(s) representing fire personnel, the leave of
absence of uniformed members of the Fire Department shall be for each member,
at least one day of 24 consecutive hours off duty in every 48 hours, the leave
days to be sufficient in number so as to provide an average 56 hour work week
and a furlough of 20 days in each year, of which at least ten days shall be
consecutive. Provided, however, that this shall not prohibit the Fire Chief
from suspending any leave of absence or furlough temporarily as a matter of
discipline for misconduct or dereliction of any firefighter. Provided further,
that this subchapter shall not apply in case of emergency and the existence of
the emergency shall be within the sole determination of the Mayor in
consultation with.
(Ord. 258, passed 5-31-1960)
§ 34.003 FIRE DEPARTMENT; FIRE CHIEF; POWER AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Fire Department shall be headed by a Fire Chief, who shall be
charged with the prevention and extinguishment of fires, the protection of life
and property against fire, and the removal of fire hazards. The Fire Chief
shall be responsible for the maintenance and care of all property used by the
Fire Department.
   (B)   Divisions of Fire Department; Extinguishment Division.
      (1)   The Extinguishment Division shall be responsible for the
extinguishment of fires, the saving of life and property from fire, and the
performance of various miscellaneous public services of an emergency nature.
      (2)   The divisions of the Fire Department and the responsibilities
thereof shall be set forth in departmental regulations.
   (C)   The City Manager may assign other duties and responsibilities to the
Fire Department as necessary for the operation of the city; these may be
assigned to an existing division or additional division as deemed necessary.
(Ord. 530, passed 1-23-2007)
AUTHORITY OF FIRE MARSHAL TO INSPECT PREMISES, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES,
INSTALLATIONS, EQUIPMENT, DEVICES AND MATERIALS
§ 34.015 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. That which the Fire Marshal, by rule or regulation, and as a
result of demonstration or test, designates as acceptable for its intended use.
   BUILDING. As defined in the official Building Code of the city.
   DEPARTMENT or FIRE DEPARTMENT. The Fire Department of the city established
in accordance with the requirements of the Charter of the city.
   DWELLING. As defined in the official Building Code of the city.
   FIRE CHIEF. The person duly appointed and acting according to the provisions
of the Charter of the city.
   FIRE PREVENTION DIVISION. The Fire Prevention Division of the City Fire
Department.
   FIRE MARSHAL. The Fire Marshal of the city, or his or her duly authorized
representative, acting by authority of, and under the direction of the Fire
Chief.
   ORDINANCE. As defined in the Charter of the city.
   OWNER, OCCUPANT, PERSON, FIRM, CORPORATION, COMPANY, ASSOCIATION or
PARTNERSHIP. Shall have its ordinary meaning and shall include the plural as
well as the singular.
   PREMISES. Includes all buildings and structures as well as the ground on
which an occupancy is located.
   STRUCTURE. As defined in the official Building Code of the city.
(Ord. 307, passed 3-28-1967)
§ 34.016 PURPOSE; APPLICATION; MODIFICATION AND APPEAL.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this subchapter to prescribe regulations
consistent with nationally recognized good practice for the safeguarding, to a
reasonable degree, of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion
arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials
and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use or
occupancy of buildings, structures or premises. Compliance with all existing
regulations of the city and laws or regulations of the state or compliance with
approved nationally recognized safety standards shall be deemed to be prima
facie evidence of compliance with this intent and purpose.
   (B)   Application. The provisions of this subchapter shall apply equally to
new and existing conditions except that existing conditions not in strict
compliance with the terms of this subchapter shall be permitted to continue
where, in the judgment of the Fire Marshal, the exceptions do not constitute a
distinct hazard to life or property.
   (C)   Appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling or order of the
Fire Marshal may appeal to the Fire Chief. The appeals shall be made within ten
days of the decision, ruling or order complained of by filing with the Fire
Chief a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and the relief
requested. The Fire Marshal shall forthwith transmit to the Fire Chief all
papers constituting the record upon which the decision, ruling or order
appealed from has been made. The Fire Chief shall fix a reasonable time for
hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof by mail to the principal
party of interest. The Fire Chief shall decide the question within a reasonable
time.
      (1)   Except in case of emergency, the appeal shall act as a stay of any
decision, ruling or order until either approved, modified or set aside by the
Fire Chief. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or be represented by
his or her duly authorized agent.
      (2)   The Fire Chief, upon hearing the appeal, shall either affirm,
modify or set aside any decision, ruling or order. The particulars of any
modification and the decision of the Fire Chief shall be entered upon the
records of the Fire Department and a signed copy shall be furnished the
appellant.
(Ord. 307, passed 3-28-1967)
§ 34.017 GENERAL.
   (A)   Dangerous business. No person, firm, partnership, association, company
or corporation shall carry on a business in the city, or maintain any building,
structure or premises in a manner as to endanger the building, structure or
premises from fire or explosion, or to endanger life or other property.
   (B)   Liability for damages.
      (1)   This subchapter shall not be construed to hold the city responsible
for any damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection or
investigation authorized herein or failure to inspect or investigate, or in the
issuance of permits as authorized by other ordinances, or by reason of approval
or disapproval of any material, equipment, device or installation.
      (2)   The Fire Chief, the Fire Marshal, his or her duly authorized
representative or any employee charged with the enforcement of this subchapter,
while acting for the city, shall not thereby render himself or herself liable
personally, and he or she is hereby relieved from all personal liability for
any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act
required or permitted in the lawful discharge of his or her official duties.
Any suit, instituted against any officer or employee because of an act
performed by him or her in the lawful discharge of his or her duties and under
the provisions of this subchapter shall be defended by the Legal Department of
the city until the final termination of the proceedings. In no case shall the
Fire Chief, the Fire Marshal, his or her duly appointed assistants or any
employee charged with the enforcement of this subchapter be liable for costs in
any action, suit or proceeding that may be instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of this subchapter; and any officer of the Fire Department, acting
in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts
performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in
the performance of his or her official duties in connection therewith.
(Ord. 307, passed 3-28-1967)
§ 34.018 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Police powers. The Fire Marshal, by virtue of his or her office, shall
be vested with full police powers in the city.
   (B)   Authority to enter premises. The Fire Marshal or any inspector of the
Fire Prevention Division may at all reasonable hours, enter any building,
structure or premises, without hindrance, for the purpose of making any
inspection or investigation which, under the provisions of this subchapter, he,
she or they may deem necessary to be made. The management or the person in
control of the premises shall provide assistance as is required in making the
inspection or investigation.
   (C)   Inspections of buildings and premises.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to cause to be inspected by
the Fire Marshal or his or her duly authorized representatives, all buildings,
structures and premises, except the interiors of dwellings, as often as may be
necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any
conditions liable to cause fire, endanger life or property from fire or
explosion, or any violations of the provisions or intent of this subchapter and
of any other regulation affecting the fire or explosion hazard.
      (2)   The Fire Marshal or any inspector of the Fire Prevention Division,
may upon complaint of any person or whenever he, she or they shall deem it
necessary, shall inspect any building, structures or premises within their
jurisdiction.
   (D)   Orders to eliminate dangerous or hazardous conditions.
      (1)   Upon inspection or investigation, and when in the judgment of the
Fire Marshal any building, structure, premises, installation, equipment,
container, device or material is found to be unsafe or in a condition dangerous
to life or property, or in violation of any of the laws of the state or the
ordinances of the city, the Fire Marshal, any inspector of the Fire Prevention
Division and any authorized member of the Fire Department is hereby empowered
to order in writing the violations or dangerous conditions be remedied or
removed in a manner as may be specified by the Fire Marshal.
      (2)   In instances as he or she may deem necessary, the Fire Marshal may
order to close, evacuate or condemn for use, any building, structure, premises,
installation, equipment, device or material in a manner prescribed in division
(F) below.
   (E)   Issuance and service of orders.
      (1)   The issuance of orders for the correction of violations or
abatement of a hazardous or dangerous condition shall be directed to the
person, firm, partnership, association, company or corporation in control of
the premises or installation, or the person responsible for the condition, as
the circumstances may require. It is hereby made the duty of the person, firm,
partnership, association, company or corporation to comply with orders with all
due diligence and dispatch, and within the time limit as specified.
      (2)   The service of the orders may be made to any one or all, the owner,
occupant, person in control of, or person responsible for the condition, either
by personal service, by leaving with any person in charge of the premises, or
by sending a copy of the orders through the mail to the last known address of
the person to whom the orders are directed. Service of orders should meet legal
service requirements if failure to obey is a misdemeanor offense, i.e.
certified mail.
   (F)   Authority to close or condemn for use. The Fire Marshal, acting by
authority of the Fire Chief, shall have the power and it shall be his or her
duty to order closed and/or evacuated any premises, building or structure, or
condemn for use any installation, machinery, equipment, vehicle, device,
container or material which, in his or her judgment, constitutes an immediate
distinct hazard to life or property. In these cases, the Fire Marshal shall
properly placard or affix a red tag, stating the cause for closing and/or
evacuating the premises, structure or building, or condemning for use the
installation, machinery, equipment, vehicle, device, container or material
until the cause for the closing and/or evacuating, or for the condemnation has
been corrected and the removal or the placard or red tag has been approved by
the Fire Marshal in writing.
   (G)   Special assignments. Whenever, in the judgment of the Fire Marshal,
acting under the direction of the Fire Chief, in the interest of the safety of
the people of the city it shall be necessary to have the Fire Department or
other agencies or departments of the city assign for duty members and/or
equipment in any building, structure or premises, the members and/or equipment
shall be assigned to that duty. The cost thereof may be charged by the agency
or department to the owner or occupant creating the condition necessitating the
assignment. Upon failure of the owner or occupant to reimburse the city for
costs, the charge thereof shall be referred to the Legal Department for
collection.
   (H)   Authority to seize and dispose. The Fire Marshal is hereby empowered
and shall have the authority to seize, take, properly dispose of, remove or
cause to be removed at the expense of the owner any material or device creating
an immediate distinct hazard by fire or explosion to life or property.
   (I)   Revocation of permit. The Fire Marshal may revoke a permit or approval
issued if any violation of this subchapter or any ordinance of the city is
found upon inspection, or in case there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which
the permit or approval was based.
   (J)   Authority to promulgate rules and regulations and adopt standards.
      (1)   A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the Office of the
City Clerk of the City of Hamtramck, being marked and designated as the
International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, and Appendices A - N of the
International Fire Code (together “International Fire Code”), be adopted as the
Fire Prevention Code of the City of Hamtramck for regulating and governing the
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from
the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices,
and from conditions hazardous to life and property in the occupancy of
buildings and premises in the City of Hamtramck and providing for the issuance
of permits for hazardous uses or operations; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such uses or operations; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such
International Fire Code, published by the International Code Council, on file
in the Office of the City Clerk are referred to, adopted and made a part of the
City of Hamtramck City Ordinances, as if laid out here in full.
      (2)   In addition to enforcing all the laws of the state and the
ordinances of the city, where he or she is designated as an enforcing officer,
the Fire Marshal is hereby given authority to promulgate and enforce rules and
regulations based upon the official Fire Prevention Code.
   (K)   Duty to abate and control certain hazards. It is made the duty of the
Fire Marshal and he or she is hereby empowered to abate and control the fire
and explosion hazard or hazardous conditions arising from:
      (1)   Defective, unapproved, improperly installed or used equipment,
devices, containers, machinery, vehicles or installation, or using, storing or
handling combustible, flammable, explosive or otherwise hazardous materials;
      (2)   Unlawful amounts of combustible, flammable, explosive or otherwise
hazardous materials;
      (3)   Accumulations of rubbish, wastepaper, boxes, shavings or other
highly combustible or flammable materials;
      (4)   Accumulations of dust or waste material in air conditioning or
ventilating systems or of grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts;
      (5)   Obstructions to or on private roads or walkways, fire escapes,
stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations
of the Fire Department or egress of occupants in case of fire;
      (6)   Any building, structure or premises which for want of repairs,
improper use, lack of adequate exit facilities, automatic or other fire alarm
apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or dilapidated
condition, or from any cause, creates a hazardous condition; and
      (7)   Prohibited acts. It is prohibited to barbeque on porches, balconies
or decks of dwelling units, multiple- or multiple-single dwelling units or any
unit within ten feet of any combustible building, roofs, ceilings, extensions,
overhangs or any other common combustible.
         (a)   To facilitate compliance with provisions of this division the
management or owner of the units shall notify each tenant in writing of the
regulations pertaining to this subchapter, at the time the tenant initially
occupies the unit and from time to time thereafter as requested by the Fire
Prevention Bureau;
         (b)   In multiple-family dwellings or multiple single-family dwellings
which are under individual ownership, (such as condominium or cooperative share
ownership), the owners shall be responsible for giving the notice to the
occupant;
         (c)   A building or portion thereof containing more than two dwelling
units which are not classified as a multiple-single family dwelling unit; and
         (d)   Multiple-single family dwelling units are to mean a building
containing more than one dwelling unit where each unit has a separation between
living areas and had an independent means of egress from the unit.
   (L)   Assistance of other departments.
      (1)   The Chief of Police and his or her assistants are hereby empowered
and it is made their duty to assist the Fire Marshal in the enforcement of any
order for the closing and/or evacuating of any building, structure or premises.
      (2)   Whenever it shall be necessary in the judgment of the Fire Marshal
or his or her authorized representative to call upon any other department or
agency in the city for aid or assistance in carrying out or enforcing any law
of the state or ordinance of the city, they shall have the authority to do so,
and it shall be the duty of the members of the various departments, authorities
or agencies when called upon by the Fire Marshal or his or her duly authorized
representative to perform the duty as may be required of them in order to
enforce the provisions of any law of the state or ordinance of the city and to
make prompt reports in writing of the investigation, inspection and/or action.
These reports shall be kept on file by the Fire Marshal.
   (M)   Authority of other departments. Nothing in this subchapter shall be
construed as limiting the authority of other city departments in making
inspections under their respective regulations. All applicable ordinances and
regulations of the city shall be adhered to.
(Ord. 307, passed 3-28-1967; Am. Ord. 319, passed 10-14-1969; Am. Ord. 443,
passed 7-22-1993; Am. Ord. 2008-13, passed 12-9-2008; Am. Ord. 2011-3, passed
6-14-2011; Am. Ord. 2016-03, passed 9-6-2016; Am. Res. 2018-97, passed 1-8-
2019)
§ 34.019 SMOKE DETECTOR DEVICES; HOTELS, MOTELS, BOARDING AND LODGING HOUSES,
DORMITORIES, SINGLE- OR MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   Each apartment, suite or sleeping area or every single- or multiple-
dwelling unit shall be provided with a minimum of one smoke detector capable of
sensing visible or invisible products of combustion. The detector shall be
approved or listed by a recognized independent testing laboratory and, when
actuated, shall provide an alarm suitable to warn the occupants within the
individual dwelling unit. A minimum of one smoke detector shall be located in
the immediate area of all sleeping quarters.
   (B)   (1)   All multiple-dwellings (three-family or more) shall comply with
this section within six months of the effective date of this section.
      (2)   All single-dwellings shall comply with this section within one year
of the effective date of this section or before any major alteration, addition
or re-occupancy, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. 391, passed 4-1-1980) Penalty, see §
34.999
EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY
§ 34.030 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the Emergency Response
Cost Recovery Ordinance.
(Ord. 2011-1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 34.031 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   This subchapter is for the purpose of ensuring that the city shall, to the
extent permitted by law, recover the costs of an emergency response from the
responsible party.
(Ord. 2011-1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 34.032 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   COSTS OF THE EMERGENCY RESPONSE. The actual costs incurred by the city, and
by any other governmental or intergovernmental entity providing services at the
request or direction of the  City's Fire or Police Department, as the result of
an emergency response, except as may be limited by a policy adopted by the
governing body. Such costs shall include, without limitation:
      (1)   All labor costs (including wages, salaries, fringe benefits, and
reimbursable expenses) of all personnel responding to the incident and all
personnel engaged in the investigation, supervision and report preparation
relating to the incident;
      (2)   All costs for materials, supplies, and equipment utilized or
damaged in connection with an emergency incident and emergency response;
      (3)   All costs for the repair or replacement of publicly-owned property
(real and personal property), buildings, facilities and infrastructure (such as
utilities, roads, sidewalks, safety paths and other infrastructure and public
improvements) damaged or destroyed in connection with or as a direct or
indirect result of an emergency incident and emergency response;
      (4)   Investigation of an emergency incident and fire fighting, emergency
services, cleaning up, boarding-up, inspecting, testing, abating, mitigating,
restoring and crowd control at the site of an emergency response;
      (5)   All costs for labor and services for which the city had to contract
in connection with or as a direct or indirect result of an emergency incident
and emergency response; and
      (6)   Any other expenses incurred by the city, and by any other
governmental or intergovernmental entity providing services at the request or
direction of the City's Fire or Police Department, in connection with or as a
direct or indirect result of an emergency incident and emergency response.
   EMERGENCY INCIDENT. A fire, accident, utility emergency, hazardous material
incident, arson, technical rescue, or other emergency situation.
   EMERGENCY RESPONSE. The dispatch, provision, response, and/or utilization of
police, fire, emergency medical, rescue services and/or other emergency
services by the city, or by any other governmental or intergovernmental entity
providing any such services at the request or direction of the City's Fire or
Police Department, to an emergency incident or any call for assistance from any
person, property owner, government agency, emergency service provider, or other
entity.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES INCIDENT. An incident involving any chemical,
substance, compound, mixture, or other material defined as, designated as,
listed as, or having the same characteristics as any substance, compound,
mixture or material listed as hazardous under the fire code adopted under
Chapter 34 of this code, any other code adopted or enforced by the city, or any
federal or state law or regulation.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company,
association, consortium, governmental entity, public utility company, or any
other legal entity.
   UTILITY EMERGENCY. Downed power lines, pipeline breaks, or other mishaps
occurring in connection with the activities of public utilities or their
suppliers which necessitates an emergency response or monitoring by the city's
police, fire fighting and/or emergency medical/rescue services, or causes
damage to public property.
(Ord. 2011-1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 34.033 LIABILITY FOR COSTS OF THE EMERGENCY RESPONSE.
   The following persons or entities shall be jointly and severally liable for
the cost of an emergency response:
   (A)   The owner, lessor, and/or operator of any commercial, business,
office, retail, manufacturing, or other non-residential property, or any
property within or outside of the city, to which there is an emergency
response, or any residential property within the city to which there is an
emergency response necessitated by unlawful activity caused by or within the
control of the owner, lessor, and/or occupant of the property.
   (B)   Any person or vehicle owner/lessee who owns, leases and/or operates a
motor vehicle, other transporter, or equipment of any kind, the operation of
which results in an emergency response, shall be presumed liable for the costs
of the emergency response.
   (C)   Any person owning, maintaining, or operating a railroad shall be
presumed liable for the cost of the emergency response in the event of an
emergency incident involving the railroad.
   (D)   In the event of a utility emergency, the public utility whose
activities or facilities (including but not limited to, electric lines,
telephone lines, cable lines and pipelines) necessitated the emergency response
shall be liable for the costs of the emergency response.
   (E)   If more than one person is liable for the expense of an emergency
response under the foregoing provisions, all such persons shall be jointly and
severally liable for the cost of the emergency response.
   (F)   In the event of an emergency incident that involves a hazardous
substances incident, to the extent the Michigan Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act (being M.C.L. § 324.20101, et seq.) or any other
law preempts the cost recovery provisions of this section, the liability for
and recovery of costs of the emergency response shall be governed by the
Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act or such other law,
and the city may pursue collection of such costs of the emergency response in a
civil action, pursuant to said laws.
   (G)   Any other person who is found responsible for costs under this section
whose actions are a cause of an emergency incident giving rise to a need for
any emergency response, shall be liable for the costs of the emergency response
for which costs are imposed under this section.
   (H)   This section shall not apply to residents of the city, unless the
resident or residents are convicted of a misdemeanor in connection with any
actions or inactions which are determined to be the proximate cause of the
emergency response situation. Residency shall be determined by the address on
the individual's valid driver's license or state identification card at the
time of the incident.
(Ord. 2011-1, passed 2-8-2011; Am. Ord. 2016-02, passed 7-12-2016)
§ 34.034 PAYMENT OF COSTS.
   (A)   The cost of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person
or persons deemed liable for the expenses of an emergency response. Such charge
constitutes a debt of that person or persons and is collectible by the city in
the same manner as in the case of an obligation under an express or implied
contract. The city may, within 30 days of receiving all or part of the itemized
costs incurred by the city (or other jurisdiction providing mutual aid to the
city) for an emergency response, submit a bill for these costs by first class
mail or personal service to the person or persons liable for the expenses as
enumerated under this subchapter.
   (B)   Any person receiving such a bill shall have the opportunity to appeal
all or any portion of the amount shown on such statement by filing a written
request for same with the City Clerk within 30 days of receipt of an invoice
from the city. The following individuals shall sit as the review board for
purposes of this section: the City Manager, Director of Public Services, Fire
Chief, a member of City Council, and a member of the general public nominated
by the Mayor and approved by City Council. The request must be accompanied by a
written explanation as to why the amount appealed should not be charged to the
appellant. The review board shall hear such appeals. If the review board fails
to determine by a preponderance of the evidence that the appellant was properly
charged for any item, the review board may waive the charge for such item
against the appellant. The findings and decisions of the review board shall be
in writing and filed with the City Clerk and Finance Department. If no written
request for appeal is received within the specified time, the city may proceed
in accordance with applicable laws and ordinances to collect any monies
remaining unpaid at the expiration of 30 days from billing.
   (C)   Any failure by any person or entity to either pay the bill within 30
days of service, or file an appeal as set forth in division (B), above, shall
be considered to be a civil default, and the city may commence a civil suit
against such person or entity to recover the billed expenses of an emergency
response, plus the city's attorney fees, court costs, litigation expenses and
all other costs allowed by law. The recovery of costs of an emergency response
under this subchapter is a separate civil liability of any person liable for
the emergency response, and is separate from and in addition to any criminal
proceedings that may be brought against the person or persons.
   (D)   In addition, the city shall have any other remedy available to the
city by law, including but not limited to requesting the City Attorney to file
a civil action for the recovery of costs.
(Ord. 2011-1, passed 2-8-2011)
§ 34.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.
   (B)   Authority of Fire Marshal to inspect. Any person, firm, partnership,
association, company or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
34.015 through
34.018 or any of the rules, regulations or orders lawfully promulgated or
adopted herein, or failing to comply with any lawfully written corrective
orders issued by the Fire Marshal, any inspector of the Fire Prevention
Division, or any authorized representative shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of not more than $500 or to imprisonment in the Wayne County
Jail for a period of not more than 90 days, or to both fine and imprisonment at
the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation of §§
34.015 though
34.018, or of any rule, regulation or order is continued or permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense punishable upon conviction in the manner
prescribed in this section.
(Ord. 307, passed 3-28-1967)
CHAPTER 35: ELECTIONS
Section
   
35.001   Creation of precincts
§ 35.001 CREATION OF PRECINCTS.
   The city shall be divided into five election precincts, the boundaries and
numbers of which shall be as follows.
   (A)   Precinct No. 1. All that portion of the city bounded upon the south by
the center line of Evaline Street; upon the west by the westerly city limits of
the city; upon the north by the northerly city limits of the city; and upon the
east by the center line of Lumpkin Avenue.
   (B)   Precinct No. 2. All that portion of the city bounded upon the south by
the center line of Evaline Street; upon the west by the center line of Lumpkin
Avenue; upon the north by the northerly city limits of the city; and upon the
east by the center line of Gallagher Avenue.
   (C)   Precinct No. 3. All that portion of the city bounded upon the south by
the center line of Holbrook Street; upon the west by the center line of
Gallagher Avenue; upon the north by the northerly city limits of the city; and
upon the east by the easterly city limits of the city.
   (D)   Precinct No. 4. All that portion of the city bounded upon the south by
the center line of Goodson Street from the center line of Gallagher Avenue to
the center line of Joseph Campau Avenue, north to the line extending west on
the center line of Holbrook Avenue; upon the west by the westerly city limits
of the city; upon the north by the center line of Evaline Street; and upon the
east by the center line of Gallagher Avenue.
   (E)   Precinct No. 5. All that portion of the city bounded upon the south by
the southerly city limits of the city; upon the west by the westerly city
limits of the city; upon the north by the center line of Holbrook Avenue from
the westerly city limits of the city to the center line of Joseph Campau
Avenue, south to the line extending on the center line of Goodson Street from
the center line of Joseph Campau Avenue to the center line of Gallagher Avenue,
north to the line extending on Holbrook Avenue from the center line of
Gallagher Avenue to the easterly city limits of the city; and upon the east by
the easterly city limits of the city.
(Ord. 491, passed 4-15-2003; Am. Res. 2022-50, passed 4-26-2022; Am. Res. 2025-
25b, passed 3-25-2025)
CHAPTER 36: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
   
36.001   Adopted by reference
§ 36.001 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The revised and amended ordinances and policies regulating personnel, copies
of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and
incorporated as part of this Code of Ordinances as fully as if set out at
length herein.
(Am. Ord. 241, passed 12-6-1955; Am. Ord. 246, passed 11-12-1958; Am. Ord. 247,
passed 3-31-1959; Am. Ord. 260, passed 6-31-1960; Am. Ord. 261, passed 11-15-
1960; Am. Ord. 304, passed 12-21-1965; Am. Ord. 361, passed 2-4-1975; Am. Ord.
364, passed 3-11-1975; Am. Ord. 368, passed 9-26-1975; Am. Ord. 479, passed 2-
4-2002) Penalty, see 36.999
CHAPTER 37: TAXATION AND FINANCIAL POLICIES
Section
Income Taxation
   
37.001   Adopted by reference
City Tax Exemption
   
37.015   36 Unit city tax exemption; adopted by reference
   
37.016   Grand Haven Village Homes city tax exemption; adopted by reference
   
37.017   Hamtramck Square III city tax exemption; adopted by reference
   
37.018   Service charge in lieu of taxes for dwelling units for low income
elderly persons
Purchasing Procedures
   
37.030   Purpose and intent
   
37.031   Organization and authority
   
37.032   General purchasing policies
   
37.033   Disposal of personal property
   
37.034   Standards of conduct
Investment and Wire Transfers
   
37.045   Policy
   
37.046   Definitions
   
37.047   Scope
   
37.048   Prudence
   
37.049   Objective
   
37.050   Delegation of authority
   
37.051   Ethics and conflict of interest
   
37.052   Authorized financial dealers and institutions
   
37.053   Authorized and suitable investments
   
37.054   Investment bidding procedure
   
37.055   Collateralization
   
37.056   Safekeeping and custody
   
37.057   Diversification
   
37.058   Maximum maturities
   
37.059   Internal control
   
37.060   Performance standards
   
37.061   Market yield (benchmark)
   
37.062   Reporting
INCOME TAXATION
§ 37.001 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The revised and amended ordinances regulating income taxation and the office
of the Director of Income Taxation, copies of which are on file in the office
of the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of this Code of
Ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 278, passed 11-13-1962; Am. Ord. 292, passed 10-13-1964; Am. Ord. 320,
passed 10-21-1969; Am. Ord. 331, passed 8-25-1970; Am. Ord. 344, passed 3-14-
1972; Am. Ord. 430, passed 9-22-1988)
CITY TAX EXEMPTION
§ 37.015 36 UNIT CITY TAX EXEMPTION; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The revised and amended ordinances regulating 36 unit city tax exemptions,
copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and
incorporated as part of this Code of Ordinances as fully as if set out at
length herein.
(Ord. 511, passed 4-12-2005; Am. Ord. 518, passed 3-14-2006; Am. Ord. 529,
passed 10-24-2006)
§ 37.016 GRAND HAVEN VILLAGE HOMES CITY TAX EXEMPTION; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The revised and amended ordinances regulating the Grand Haven Village Homes
city tax exemption, copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part of this Code of Ordinances as fully
as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 2008-7, passed 5-27-2008; Am. Ord. 2008-12, passed 11-12-2008)
§ 37.017 HAMTRAMCK SQUARE III CITY TAX EXEMPTION; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The ordinance regulating the Hamtramck Square III city tax exemption, copies
of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and
incorporated as part of this Code of Ordinances as fully as if set out at
length herein.
(Ord. 2008-8, passed 5-27-2008)
§ 37.018 SERVICE CHARGE IN LIEU OF TAXES FOR DWELLING UNITS FOR LOW INCOME
ELDERLY PERSONS.
   (A)   Title. This section shall be known and cited as the city tax exemption
section.
   (B)   Preamble. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the
state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its elderly
citizens of low income and to encourage the development of the housing by
providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the
State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (Public Act 346 of 1966 being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1401 et seq., as amended). The city is authorized by this Act
to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or
all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it
chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is
further acknowledged that the housing for elderly persons of low income is a
public necessity, and as the city will be benefitted and improved by the
housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax
exemption for the housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the
continuance of the provisions of this section for tax exemption and the service
charge in lieu of taxes during the periods contemplated in this section are
essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments
which are constructed and financed in reliance on the section and service
charge.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACT. The State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of
1966, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1401 et seq. of the state, as amended.
      ANNUAL SHELTER RENTS. The total collections during an agreed annual
period from all occupants of a housing development representing rents or
occupancy charges exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat or other
utilities furnished to the occupants.
      AUTHORITY. The State Housing Development Authority.
      CONTRACT RENTS. Are as defined by the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development in regulations promulgated pursuant to § 8 of the United
States Housing Act of 1937, as amended.
      ELDERLY PERSONS. A family where the head of household is 62 years of age
or older or a single person who is 62 years of age or older.
      ELDERLY PERSONS OF LOW INCOME. Elderly persons who meet the eligibility
criteria set by the authority and/or federal government.
      HOUSING DEVELOPMENT. A development which contains a significant element
of housing for elderly persons of low income and such elements of other
housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and educational
facilities as the authority determines improve the quality of the development
as it relates to housing for persons of low income.
      HUD. The Department of Housing and Urban Development of the United States
government.
      MORTGAGE LOAN. A loan to be made by the authority or Farmers Home
Administration or the Department of Housing and Urban Development to the
sponsor for the construction and permanent financing of the Housing Development
or a mortgage loan insured by HUD.
      PERSONS OF LOW INCOME. Persons and families eligible to move into a
Housing Development.
      SPONSOR. Persons or entities which have applied to either the authority
for a mortgage loan to finance a housing development or to another governmental
entity for a federally-aided loan, as defined by the Act.
      UTILITIES. Fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service
which are paid by the housing development.
   (D)   Class of housing developments. It is determined that the class of
housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a
service charge shall be paid in lieu of the taxes shall be multiple-dwellings
for elderly persons of low income which are financed or assisted by the
authority or which are federally aided, as defined in the Act.
   (E)   Establishment of annual service charge. Housing developments for
elderly persons of low income and the property on which they shall be
constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after the
commencement of construction. The city, acknowledging that the sponsor and the
authority, in the case of a sponsor receiving a mortgage loan from the
authority, have established the economic feasibility of the housing development
in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this section and the
qualification of the housing developments for exemption from all property taxes
and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this section, will accept
payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property
taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to 7% of the difference between
the annual shelter rent for authority-aided housing developments actually
collected and utilities.
   (F)   Resolution; contractual effect. A resolution of the City Council
granting tax exempt status, as provided in this section, shall be adopted for
each housing development qualified under the terms and provisions of this
section. Notwithstanding the provisions of 15(a)(5) of the Act, to the
contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as
third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept
payments in lieu of taxes as previously described will be effectuated by
enactment of a resolution by the City Council.
   (G)   Payment of service charge. The service charge in lieu of taxes as
determined under this section shall be payable in the same manner as general
property taxes are payable to the city except that the annual payment shall be
paid on or before December 31 of each year.
   (H)   Duration. The tax exempt status of a housing development approved for
the status by resolution of the City Council shall remain in effect and shall
not terminate so long as the mortgage loan for the housing development remains
outstanding and unpaid, or for the period as the authority or other
governmental entity has any interest in the property; provided, the
construction of the housing development commences within one year from the
effective date of the resolution of the City Council approving the housing
development for tax exempt status as provided in this section.
(Ord. 2008-10, passed 7-30-2008)
PURCHASING PROCEDURES
§ 37.030 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   These procedures have been developed within the guidelines specified in the
City Charter. They shall be implemented to clarify and expand general Charter
procurement regulations and shall therefore be in strict conformity to all
rules specified therein. This subchapter is intended to maximize the purchasing
power and value of public funds through a procurement procedure that maintains
a system of quality and integrity and promotes efficiency, effectiveness and
equity in public purchasing. It is the goal of this subchapter to recognize the
obligation to the taxpayers to maximize the purchasing power of public funds to
gain the best value. The city will comply with all applicable federal and state
laws concerning public purchasing.
(Ord. 522, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.031 ORGANIZATION AND AUTHORITY.
   The individual appointed as purchasing manager shall be responsible for the
administration of the procurement system of the city. The purchasing manager
shall be the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee. Procurement authority
and responsibility shall be delegated as follows.
   (A)   City Council.
      (1)   Shall establish purchasing procedures through this subchapter; and
2015 S-3
72   Hamtramck - Administration
      (2)   Shall award all contracts for goods and services of $10,000 or more
in value, except those contracts that may be purchased through cooperatives
such as MiDEAL (Michigan Department of Technology, Management and Budget
Extended Purchasing Program).
   (B)   City Manager.
      (1)   Shall recommend purchasing procedures;
      (2)   Shall establish purchasing procedures; and
      (3)   Shall review and be the final authority on all procurement action
taken by the city, consistent with the Charter and this chapter.
   (C)   Department head - City Manager designee (each department head is the
City Manager’s designee for their department).
      (1)   Shall procure or supervise the procurement of all goods, wares,
equipment, merchandise, materials, supplies, commodities, public improvements
and services as required to maintain city operations according to the policies
and procedures established herein;
      (2)   Shall provide for the maintenance of efficiency, economy and
accountability in the city’s procurement of materials and services;
      (3)   Shall obtain formal bids for all goods and services of $10,000 or
more;
      (4)   Shall obtain competitive informal quotations according to
purchasing procedures;
      (5)   Shall establish and maintain lists of qualified bidders;
      (6)   Shall establish purchasing forms, maintain records, issue and
execute purchase orders;
      (7)   Shall provide for the gainful disposition of surplus and scrap;
      (8)   Shall ensure the availability of budgeted funds for all purchases;
and
      (9)   Shall coordinate the purchasing of all departments, and shall, to
the extent practicable and possible, combine specifications for purchases of
equipment and supplies under single purchases where the consolidation is
economically advantageous to the city.
   (D)   Operating departments.
      (1)   Shall requisition goods and services through the purchasing
manager;
      (2)   Shall assist the purchasing manager in the development of standard
specifications;
      (3)   Shall maintain adequate inventories of materials and supplies;
      (4)   Shall receive and inspect all materials and supplies ordered and
provide receiving verification to the Finance Department in a timely manner;
and
      (5)   Shall establish procedures within their established departments to
ensure adherence to purchasing policies and procedures.
(Ord. 522, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2014-46, passed 6-24-2014)
§ 37.032 GENERAL PURCHASING POLICIES.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Definition and scope of procurement. Procurement activity, as
herein used, shall mean any action taken by the city acting as buyer for
obtaining materials, supplies, services and public improvements (hereafter
goods and services) from a vendor acting as seller, whether by purchase, rent,
lease, lease-purchase or other similar methods of acquisition as may be used by
the city.
      (2)   Rule against subdivision. No purchase shall be subdivided to
circumvent the dollar value limitations imposed by this subchapter, policy or
any guidelines established by the City Manager.
      (3)   Purchases or contracts less than $100.
         (a)   Purchases under $100 shall be made from vendors appearing on an
approved vendor list for copy services, office supplies, maintenance supplies,
small parts, and the like, which are not normally purchased in large enough
quantities to achieve low prices.
         (b)   Factors including, but not limited to, product quality,
serviceability, delivery, emergencies, vendor history, vendor performance,
existing contracts and other considerations of a similar kind normally relevant
to the exercise of good business judgment shall constitute sufficient and good
cause on which to base the decisions.
      (4)   Purchases or contracts of $100 or more, but less than $5,000.
         (a)   Purchases of $100 or more, but less than $5,000 shall be based
upon the solicitation of no less than three verbal, telephonic or internet
price quotations when practical and feasible to do so, and shall be made from
the lowest priced vendor unless good cause exists not to do so.
         (b)   Factors including, but not limited to, product quality,
serviceability, delivery, emergencies, vendor history, vendor performance,
existing contracts and other considerations of a similar kind normally relevant
to the exercise of good business judgment shall constitute sufficient and good
cause on which to base the decisions.
      (5)   Purchasing or contracts of $5,000 or more, but less than $10,000.
Any expenditure for goods and services, the cost of which is $5,000 or more,
but less than $10,000 shall be, based whenever practical or feasible, upon the
solicitation of no less than three written price quotations.
      (6)   Purchases or contracts of $10,000 or more. Any expenditure for
goods and services, the cost of which is $10,000 or more shall be made only
after the approval of the City Council has first been secured.
   (B)   Formal bids. Formal bids shall be required subject to the following
regulations.
      (1)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         FORMAL BID. The submission of a written, sealed price quotation by a
vendor to the city pursuant to the issue of public notice thereof by the city,
and based on written specifications and standard conditions stipulated by the
city for procuring goods and/or services for the city. Bids received by
facsimile and/or over the internet shall be deemed written, sealed price
quotations provided they are forthwith transferred to the City Clerk and kept
confidential until the public bid opening.
      (2)   Scope.
         (a)   The $10,000 bid requirement shall apply to all goods and
services that can be procured through this process.
         (b)   This limit shall apply to one-time purchases.
      (3)   Invitation to bid.
         (a)   An invitation to bid shall be issued and shall include a
purchase description and/or specifications and all material contractual terms
and conditions applicable to the procurement.
         (b)   The invitation to bid shall be mailed or otherwise distributed
by the purchasing manager to a sufficient number of known reliable vendors to
ensure and maintain the integrity and competitiveness of the bid process.
      (4)   Public notice and advertising. Adequate public notice of the
invitation to bid shall be given a reasonable time before the date set forth
therein for the opening of the bids. A minimum of ten days’ notice must be
given before bid opening with the advertisement for bids having been published
at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or within an
appropriate trade publication.
      (5)   Addendums/clarifications. Bid addendums and clarifications may be
issued by the purchasing manager.
      (6)   Bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one
or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation to bid.
The amount of each bid and other relevant information with the name of each
bidder shall be recorded by the City Clerk’s office. Bid tabulations shall be
open to public inspection. A bid opening may be postponed if fewer than three
bids are received.
      (7)   Bid acceptance and evaluation. Bids shall be accepted (except late
bids, which shall not be accepted) without alteration or correction, except as
otherwise authorized by the purchasing procedures adopted by the City Manager,
or the factors stipulated in the invitation to bid. Bids shall be evaluated
based on the requirement set forth in the invitation to bid, which may include
criteria to determine acceptability such as, quality, references,
recommendations by city consultants, workmanship, delivery, inspection, testing
and suitability for a particular purpose.
      (8)   Correction or withdrawal of bids. Correction or withdrawal of
inadvertently erroneous bids before or after award, or cancellation of awards
or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be permitted according to the
purchasing procedures established by the City Manager. After bid opening, no
changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interests
of the city or fair competition shall be permitted. Except as otherwise
provided by regulation, all decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of
bids, or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be
supported by a written determination made by the department head and approved
by the City Manager.
      (9)   Award. The City Manager, after approval by City Council, shall
approve the award of public contracts. The City Manager and City Council shall
retain the right to take any of the following actions:
         (a)   Award a contract to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder
who has submitted a bid most advantageous to the city;
            1.   Definition of responsible bidder. A RESPONSIBLE BIDDER is
herein defined as a person or firm which has the capability in all respects to
perform the contract requirements fully, and which has the integrity and
reliability which will assure good faith performance.
            2.   Definition of responsive bidder. A RESPONSIVE BIDDER is herein
defined as a person or firm which has submitted a bid which conforms in all
material respects to the descriptions, specifications, terms, conditions and
other factors called for in the invitation to bid.
         (b)   Accept or reject in part or in whole any or all bids;
         (c)   Waive any inconsequential informality or defect in the bids;
         (d)   Negotiate any viable modifications in price, terms, conditions
or specifications with the low bidder that would be advantageous to the city;
         (e)   Award a contract to other than the low bidder should the action
be in the best public interest; and
         (f)   Award a contract by division among two or more vendors if the
alternatives are duly indicated in the original invitation to bid.
      (10)   Waiver of bid requirement. The City Council, after review by the
department head, the City Manager and the City Attorney shall retain the right
to waive bid requirements subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   The action is found to be to the advantage and in the best
interests of the city;
         (b)   Sole source procurement. A contract may be awarded by the City
Council for a supply, service, equipment or construction item without
competition when the department head has advised the City Manager in writing
and certified that there is only one source vendor available;
         (c)   Lower prices can be obtained without soliciting competitive
bids;
         (d)   The department head has been engaged in cooperative procurement
bids of goods and/or services in conjunction with another governmental agency
where joint bids have been taken and are advantageous to the city; and
         (e)   Annually, the department head will provide a list of negotiated
purchases for City Council approval, with justification provided for each
purchase and the date of the last formal bid.
      (11)   Change orders. Change orders to contracts authorized by City
Council, including construction contract, shall be authorized without further
City Council approval if there are funds budgeted to cover the change order,
and provided that the change order does not alter the scope of the original
contract and the amount of the change order does not exceed 10% of the original
contract amount.
   (C)   Specifications.
      (1)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         SPECIFICATION. Any description of the physical or functional
characteristics, or of the nature of a supply, service, equipment or
construction items. It may include a description of any requirement for
inspecting, testing or preparing a supply, service, equipment or construction
item for delivery.
      (2)   Responsibility of department head. The department head shall
prepare, issue, revise and monitor the use of specifications for supplies,
services, equipment and construction as required by the city and shall maintain
a standard specifications file.
      (3)   Maximum practicable competition. All specifications shall seek to
promote overall economy for the purposes intended and encourage competition in
satisfying the city’s needs and shall not be unduly restrictive.
      (4)   Specifications prepared by architects and engineers. The
requirements of this section regarding the purposes and non-restrictiveness of
specifications shall apply to all specifications, including, but not limited
to, those prepared by architects, engineers and consultants.
   (D)   Cooperative procurement. The department head shall endeavor to
participate with other governmental agencies in cooperative bids for the
procurement of goods or supplies subject to City Council approval of contract
and waiver of local bids. It shall be the policy of this city to engage in
those joint procurement efforts whenever the activity is feasible and
economically advantageous to the city.
   (E)   Procurement of professional services.
      (1)   The procurement of certain services where technical expertise or
knowledge of a specialized field are critical to the performance of that
service, including but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, planning
consultants, architects, accountants and other similar professionals, shall not
require bidding.
      (2)   The following regulations shall apply:
         (a)   Pursuant to City Charter, the City Council shall be empowered to
appoint the city attorney and other professional consultants; and
         (b)   While competitive bids shall not be required, the following
shall be applicable for non- legal services:
            1.   When the cost of procuring professional services is $10,000 or
more, City Council shall make the appointment;
            2.   When the cost of procuring professional services is less than
$10,000, the City Manager shall have the authority to procure the services of a
professional or consultant known to be competent, reliable and capable of
performing in the best interests of the city the task that he or she has been
employed to do.
      (3)   The procurement of legal services (other than City Manager’s
appointment of the City Attorney) shall be directed by the City Manager after
consultation with the City Attorney.
   (F)   Procurement in cases of emergency.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this procedure, the City
Manager or purchasing manager, or a designee of either, may make or authorize
others to make emergency procurements when there exists a threat to public
health, welfare or safety conditions as defined in regulations or procedures
promulgated by the City Manager, provided the emergency procurements shall be
made with the competition as is practicable under the circumstances.
      (2)   An after-the-fact written determination of the basis for the
emergency and for the selection of the particular vendor shall be included in
the purchase file and disclosed to the City Council.
(Ord. 522, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.033 DISPOSAL OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   The disposal of property function of the city shall be administered by the
department head subject to final approval by the City Manager. Items deemed to
be surplus or scrap shall be disposed of by methods, including but not limited
to, transfer, trade-in, sale or auction. It shall be the policy of the city to
ensure that maximum value is obtained in conformity with procedures adopted by
the City Manager.
(Ord. 522, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.034 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
   Recognizing that city purchases involve the use of public funds, the
following standards shall apply to all purchases made by the city.
   (A)   All vendors, current and prospective, shall be treated equitably.
Procurement decisions shall be based upon price, quality, delivery, references
and recommendation by city consultants, written standards, previous service and
other relevant factors promoting the best interest of the city.
   (B)   Employees shall be prohibited from furnishing to any prospective
bidder information that would give any vendor an unfair advantage over other
prospective vendors.
   (C)   Procurement records shall be retained by the department head and the
procuring department for public review for five years.
   (D)   The standards of employee conduct and behavior in purchasing policies
and procedures shall be regulated by the city’s code of ethics and state law.
   (E)   Unless approved by the City Council, individual members of the City
Council shall be prohibited from doing business with the city while serving as
a member of City Council.
(Ord. 522, passed 6-13-2006)
INVESTMENT AND WIRE TRANSFERS
§ 37.045 POLICY.
   The city’s investment policy is to invest public funds to provide the
average or higher market return while maintaining maximum security, meeting
daily cash flow demands and conforming to state law governing the investment of
public funds.
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.046 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BANK. Any federally or state-chartered bank, savings and loan or credit
union which meets the criteria spelled out in this subchapter.
   BANKING SERVICE AGREEMENT. An agreement between the city and a bank
detailing the services to be provided by the bank.
   BROKER. A person who brings buyers and sellers together for a commission
paid by the initiator of the transaction or by both sides. A BROKER does not
favor either the buyer or seller. BROKERS are active in money markets where
banks buy and sell money and in interdealer markets.
   COLLATERAL. Securities, evidence of deposits or other properties that are
pledged to secure repayment of a loan also refers to securities pledged by a
bank to secure deposits of public money.
   COMPREHENSIVE ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT (CAFR). The city’s official annual
financial report prepared by external auditors. It includes five combined
statements and basic financial statements each individual fund and account
group in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). The
CAFR includes supporting schedules necessary to show compliance with finance-
related legal and contractual provisions, extensive introductory material and a
detailed statistical section.
   CERTIFICATE OF DEPOSIT (CD). A time deposit with a specific maturity
evidenced by a certificate. Large denomination CDs are typically negotiable.
   DEALER. A person who acts as a principal in all transactions, buying and
selling for the dealer’s own account.
   DELIVERY VERSUS PAYMENT. There are two forms of delivery of securities:
delivery versus payment and delivery versus receipt (also called free).
DELIVERY VERSUS PAYMENT is delivery of securities with an exchange of money for
the securities. DELIVERY VERSUS RECEIPT is delivery of securities with an
exchange of a signed receipt for the securities.
   DEPOSITORY AGREEMENT. An agreement between the city and a bank to act as a
depository for the monetary assets of the city.
   DIVERSIFICATION. The division of investment funds among a variety of
securities offering independent returns.
   LIQUIDITY. The ability to convert an asset easily and rapidly into cash
without substantial loss of value.
   MARKET VALUE. The price at which a security is trading and at which it could
presumably be purchased or sold.
   MASTER REPURCHASE AGREEMENT. A written contract covering all future
transactions regarding repurchase or reverse repurchase agreements which
establishes each party’s rights in the transactions. A MASTER AGREEMENT will
often specify the right of the buyer/lender to liquidate the underlying
securities in case of the default by the seller/borrower.
   MONEY MARKET. The venue in which short-term debt instruments are issued and
traded.
   PORTFOLIO. Collection of securities held by an investor.
   PRIMARY DEALER. A government securities dealer which submits daily reports
of market activity and positions and monthly financial statements to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and is subject to informal oversight.
   PRUDENT PERSON RULE. An investment standard where the Treasurer may invest
only in a security if it is one that would be bought by a prudent person of
discretion and intelligence who is seeking a reasonable income and preservation
of capital.
   QUALIFIED PUBLIC DEPOSITORY. A financial institution that does not claim
exemption from the payment of any sales, compensating or ad valorem taxes under
state law, which has segregated for the benefit of the commission eligible
collateral having a value of not less than its maximum liability and has been
approved by the Public Deposit Protection Commission to hold public deposits.
   RATE OF RETURN. The quoted rate on the face of the security, based on its
purchase price or its current market price. The RATE OF RETURN may be the
amortized yield to maturity on a bond or the current income return.
   REPURCHASE AGREEMENT (RP or REPO). An agreement to sell these securities to
an investor with an agreement to repurchase them at a fixed price on a fixed
date.
   RETIREMENT/PENSION FUNDS. Funds set aside for accepting and paying out
pension benefits.
   SAFEKEEPING. Services to customers rendered by banks for a fee under which
securities and valuables of all types and description are held in the bank’s
vaults for protection.
   SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION. An agency created by Congress to protect
investors in securities transactions by administering securities legislation.
   TREASURY NOTE. An intermediate-term coupon bearing United States Treasury
securities having an initial maturity of from one to ten years.
   TRUST AND AGENCY FUNDS. Funds held for a group of agencies.
   WIRE TRANSFER AGREEMENT. Agreement between the city and a depository that
allows depositories to transfer funds between depositories via electronic
means.
   YIELD.
      (1)   The rate of the annual income return on an investment, expressed as
a percentage:
         (a)   Income yield is obtained by dividing the current dollar income
by the current market price for the security; and
         (b)   Net yield or yield to maturity is the current income yield minus
any premium above par or plus any discount from par in the purchase price.
      (2)   The adjustment is spread from the purchase date to the date of the
bond’s maturity.
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.047 SCOPE.
   This investment policy applies to all financial assets of the city under the
control of the city. These funds are accounted for in the city’s Comprehensive
Annual Financial Report (CAFR).
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.048 PRUDENCE.
   (A)   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances
then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence
exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for
investment, considering the probable safety of their capital and the probable
income to be derived.
   (B)   The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall be
the “prudent person” standard and shall be applied in managing an overall
portfolio. Investment officers, acting following written procedures, the
investment policy and applicable law and exercising due diligence, shall be
relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security’s credit risk or
market price changes, provided deviations from expectations are reported
quickly and appropriate action is taken to control adverse developments.
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.049 OBJECTIVE.
   The primary objectives, in priority order, of the city investment activities
shall be:
   (A)   Safety. Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the
investment program. Investments of the city shall be undertaken in a way that
seeks to ensure the preservation of capital in the overall portfolio. To attain
this objective, diversification is required so potential losses on individual
securities do not exceed the income generated from the remainder of the
portfolio;
   (B)   Liquidity. The city’s investment portfolio shall remain sufficiently
liquid to enable the city to meet all operating requirements that might be
reasonably anticipated; and
   (C)   Return on investment. The city’s investment portfolio shall designed
with the objective of obtaining a market rate of return throughout budgetary
and economic cycles considering the city’s investment risk constraints and the
cash flow characteristics of the portfolio.
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.050 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   Authority to manage the city’s investment program is derived from state law.
Management responsibility for the investment program is delegated to the
Treasurer, who may establish written procedures for the operation of the
investment program consistent with this subchapter. Procedures should include
reference to safekeeping, repurchase agreements, wire transfer agreements,
collateral/depositor agreements and banking service agreements. The procedures
shall include explicit deletion of authority to persons responsible for
investment transactions. No person may engage in an investment except as
provided under the terms of this policy and the procedures established by the
Treasurer. The Treasurer shall be responsible for all transactions undertaken
and shall establish a system of controls to regulate the activities of
subordinate officials.
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.051 ETHICS AND CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with proper execution of the
investment program, or which could impair their ability to make impartial
investment decisions. Investment officials shall disclose to the Treasurer any
material financial interests in financial institutions that conduct business
within this jurisdiction and they shall further disclose any large personal
financial/investment positions that could be related to the performance of the
city’s portfolio. Officers and investment officials shall subordinate their
personal investment transactions to those of the city’s treasury, particularly
concerning the time of purchases and sales.
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.052 AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS.
   (A)   The Treasurer will maintain a list of financial institutions
authorized to provide investment services. In addition, the Treasurer will also
maintain a list of approved security brokers/dealers selected by
creditworthiness who maintain an office in the state. These may include primary
dealers or regional dealers which qualify under the Securities and Exchange
Commission Rule 15C3_1. No public deposit shall be made except in a qualified
public depository as established by state law.
   (B)   All financial institutions and brokers/dealers who want to become
qualified bidders for investment transactions must supply the Treasurer with
the following:
      (1)   Audited financial statements;
      (2)   Proof of National Association of Security Dealers certification;
and
      (3)   Proof of state registration.
   (C)   The Treasurer will conduct an annual review of the financial condition
and registrations of qualified bidders.
   (D)   A current audited financial statement is required to be on file for
each bank and broker/dealer in which the city invests.
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.053 AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS.
   The city is empowered by state law to invest in certain types of securities,
and make only those approved investments permitted by state law, (Public Act 7
of 1967, being M.L.C.A. §§ 124.501 through 124.512, Public Act 367 of 1982,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 129.111 through 129.118 and Public Act 121 of 1985, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 129.141 through 129.150).
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.054 INVESTMENT BIDDING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Investments will be made with banks located in or within close
proximity to the city.
   (B)   Investments, whenever possible, will be competitively bid with all
participating banks.
   (C)   Offering reports will be issued to each eligible bank from the
Treasurer’s office. The reports will include the amount of investment, desired
date of maturity, and the time and date that bids are due.
   (D)   Banks may place their bid either by fax to a specified member or in
writing, up to the cutoff time and date for bids. Both the interest rate and
the net amount of interest to be paid must be submitted.
   (E)   Deposits exceeding $100,000 per bank shall be collateralized with
securities pledged at 105% of the amount exceeding $100,000. United States
government securities or repurchase agreements tied to securities of the United
States government are considered an appropriate pledge.
   (F)   Banks which wish to be eligible to receive investments must submit
copies of their quarterly consolidated reports of condition and income to the
City Treasurer on a regular and timely basis.
   (G)   Investments will be awarded to the highest eligible bidder.
   (H)   Funds will be wire transferred to the receiving financial institution
before 2:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Time, or as soon as
possible after the bidding has been closed.
   (I)   Wire transfer charges will not be a billable item and should be part
of the net bid amount.
   (J)   Banks which participate in the bidding process for a particular
investment may receive, upon request, a copy of the worksheet showing all bids
received.
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.055 COLLATERALIZATION.
   (A)   Collateralization will be required on two types of investments:
certificates of deposit and repurchase (and reverse) agreements. To anticipate
market changes and provide a level of security for all funds, the
collateralization level will be no less than 105% of market value of principal
and accrued interest.
   (B)   The city chooses to limit collateral to the approved collateral list
provided in the Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated.
   (C)   Collateral will always be held by an independent third party with
which the entity has a current custodial agreement. A clearly marked evidence
of ownership (safekeeping receipt) must be supplied to the city and retained.
   (D)   The right of collateral substitution is permitted.
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.056 SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.
   (A)   All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase
agreements, entered into by the city shall be conducted on the deliver versus
payment (DVP) basis.
   (B)   Securities will be held by a third party custodian by the Treasurer
and evidenced by safekeeping receipts.
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.057 DIVERSIFICATION.
   The city will diversify its investments by security type and institution.
Except for United States Treasury securities and authorized pools, no more than
50% of the city’s total investment portfolio will be invested in a single
security type or with a single financial institution.
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.058 MAXIMUM MATURITIES.
   (A)   To the extent possible, the city will attempt to match its investments
with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a specific cash
flow, the city will not directly invest in securities maturing more than one
year from the date of purchase. However, the city may collateralize repurchase
agreements using longer dated investments not to exceed seven years to
maturity.
   (B)   Reserve funds may be invested in securities exceeding five years if
the maturities of the investments are made to coincide as nearly as practicable
with the expected use of the funds.
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.059 INTERNAL CONTROL.
   The Treasurer shall establish an annual process of independent review by an
external auditor. This review will provide internal control by assuring
compliance with policies and procedures
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.060 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   The investment portfolio will be designed to obtain a market average rate of
return during budgetary and economic cycles, considering the city’s investment
risk constraints and cash flow needs.
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.061 MARKET YIELD (BENCHMARK).
   (A)   The city’s investment strategy is active.
   (B)   Given this strategy, the basis used by the Treasurer to decide whether
market yields are being achieved shall be the 90-day national average CD as
published in newspapers of national circulation.
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
§ 37.062 REPORTING.
   The Treasurer is charged with the responsibility of including a market
report on the investment activity and returns in the city’s Comprehensive
Annual Financial Report.
(Ord. 521, passed 6-13-2006)
CHAPTER 38: COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND LOCAL LAW
ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
38.001   Short title
   
38.002   Purpose and intent
   
38.003   Definitions
   
38.004   Bias-based provision of police and other city services, on the basis
of appearance, ethnicity, gender, immigration status, manner of dress, national
origin, physical characteristics, race, religious beliefs or sexual orientation
prohibited; exception
   
38.005   Solicitation of immigration status by public servants and police
officers prohibited; exceptions
   
38.006   Solicitation of immigration status by public servants prohibited;
exceptions
   
38.007   Implementation of chapter
 
   
38.999   Penalty
§ 38.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the Community Participation In Local Government
and Local Law Enforcement Chapter.
(Ord. 2008-1, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 38.002 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the policy of the city to respect the rights of and provide equal
services to all persons regardless of appearance, ethnicity, gender,
immigration status, manner of dress, national origin, physical characteristic,
race, religious beliefs or sexual orientation; to ensure the enforcement of
rights under the United States Constitution, including due process and equal
protection; to promote community safety; to encourage victims of crime and
witnesses of crime to cooperate with law enforcement authority without regard
to immigration status or sexual orientation; to prevent bias-based policing;
and to promote the cooperation of all individuals, regardless of their
immutable characteristics, with our City Police Department and city government.
In order to permit members of immigrant communities to access services,
including, but not limited to law enforcement services, that are provided by
the city to which they are entitled; and to ensure that city public servants
are acting consistently with federal law regarding local governments
cooperating with federal immigration authorities, the city enacts this chapter
as an effective way to guide city public servants and police officers in
adhering to rights under the United States Constitution, including, but not
limited to, due process and equal protection and under federal law, while
protecting the safety and health of all members of the community.
(Ord. 2008-1, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 38.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLIGHT VIOLATION. Any unlawful act, or omission or failure to act, which is
designated by this code as a blight violation pursuant to § 41(2) of the State
Home Rule Cities Act, being M.C.L.A. § 117.4(2).
   CITY. The City of Hamtramck.
   CIVIL INFRACTION. An act or omission that is prohibited by the code enacted
by the city, which is not a crime as defined in § 5 of the State Penal Code,
being M.C.L.A. § 750.5, and for which civil sanctions may be ordered.
   CRIMINAL OFFENSE. A felony or misdemeanor as set forth in federal or state
law of city ordinance, but does not mean a blight violation or civil
infraction.
   PERSON. Any individual including, but not limited to, victims and witnesses
of crimes.
   POLICE OFFICER. A sworn member or reserve member of the Police Department or
any person acting upon the direction or any of these members of the Police
Department.
   PUBLIC SERVANT. The City Manager, Mayor, members of the City Council, the
City Clerk, any member of a city agency, board, commission or other voting body
that is established by the City Charter and any appointee, any employee or any
individual who provides services to the city within or outside of its offices
or facilities pursuant to a personal services contract;
(Ord. 2008-1, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 38.004 BIAS-BASED PROVISION OF POLICE AND OTHER CITY SERVICES, ON THE BASIS
OF APPEARANCE, ETHNICITY, GENDER, IMMIGRATION STATUS, MANNER OF DRESS, NATIONAL
ORIGIN, PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS, RACE, RELIGIOUS BELIEFS OR SEXUAL ORIENTATION
PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   Public servants and police officers shall not exercise differential
treatment of individuals in rendering police and other city services based on a
person’s appearance, ethnicity, gender, immigration status, manner of dress,
national origin, physical characteristics, race, religious beliefs or sexual
orientation. A public servant, who is a police officer, shall not base
reasonable suspicion for an investigative detention, probable cause for an
arrest or any other police action, solely on a person’s appearance, ethnicity,
gender, immigration status, manner of dress, national origin, physical
characteristic, race, religious beliefs or sexual orientation. A public
servant, who is a police officer, may take into account the reported
appearance, gender, ethnicity and immigration status, manner of dress, national
origin, physical characteristics, race, religious beliefs or sexual orientation
for the purpose of identifying a described individual.
(Ord. 2008-1, passed 1-22-2008) Penalty, see §
38.999
§ 38.005 SOLICITATION OF IMMIGRATION STATUS BY PUBLIC SERVANTS AND POLICE
OFFICERS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   Public servants and police officers:
   (A)   Shall not solicit information concerning immigration status for the
purpose of ascertaining a person’s compliance with federal immigration law;
   (B)   Shall not solicit information concerning immigration status from a
person who is seeking police and other city services, or is a victim or is a
witness; and/or
   (C)   Notwithstanding the prohibitions set forth in divisions (A) and (B)
above of this section, public servants, who are police officers, are expressly
permitted to engage in the following activities, which shall not constitute a
violation of this chapter:
      (1)   Solicit information concerning immigration status when performing
public safety functions while assisting federal law enforcement in the
investigation of a criminal offence under the United States Code or other
federal law; and/or
      (2)   Solicit information concerning immigration status from the subject
of a criminal offense or when processing an arrested person.
(Ord. 2008-1, passed 1-22-2008) Penalty, see §
38.999
§ 38.006 SOLICITATION OF IMMIGRATION STATUS BY PUBLIC SERVANTS PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   A public servant is prohibited from inquiring into the immigration
status of any person or engaging in activities designed to ascertain the
immigration status of any person, while acting within the scope of his or her
authority or employment, as a public servant.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the prohibitions set forth in division (A) above of
this section, public servants are expressly permitted to engage in the
following activities, which shall not constitute a violation of this chapter:
      (1)   Solicit information concerning immigration status where
specifically required by a federal, state or city law or program as a condition
of eligibility for the service sought;
      (2)   Solicit information concerning immigration status for the purpose
of completing I-9 Forms, and when relevant, in making hiring and payroll
withholding decisions, including, but not limited to, completing I-9 Forms,
questioning a person to complete the I-9 Form, obtaining documents that support
the I-9 Form, and allowing federal authorities to audit an I-9 Form in
accordance with law;
      (3)   Solicit information concerning immigration status for a subpoena
issued in a criminal proceeding, civil litigation or an administrative
proceeding for the production of city documents or for testimony of a public
servant, including where related to immigration issues or other security
issues; or
      (4)   Solicitation of information concerning immigration status by a
public servant, who is a police officer, as set forth in §
38.005.
(Ord. 2008-1, passed 1-22-2008) Penalty, see §
38.999
§ 38.007 IMPLEMENTATION OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall be implemented by the City Manager or his or her designee
though ongoing training and educational programs to inform public servants
regarding its prohibitions and requirements.
(Ord. 2008-1, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 38.999 PENALTY.
   People may file a formal complaint with the city if they have information
that they believe, in good faith, establishes a violation of this chapter. Any
complaint must be in writing, and filed with the City Manager or his or her
designee. The complaint may be filed by mail or electronic mail, hand
delivered, through an elected official or by a third party. The complaint
statement need not be in English, and in the case of complaints not filed in
English, the city shall cause the complaint to be translated into English at no
expense to the complainant. The City Manager shall investigate all complaints
and either affirm or deny the complaint within ten working days of the receipt
of the complaint, in writing and report the disposition to City Council by or
before the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting. If the complaint is
denied, the City Manager shall explain, in detail, how the investigation was
conducted and why the complaint was denied. If the complaint is affirmed,
appropriate disciplinary action shall be taken against the employee or official
for violation of city policy. Any disciplinary action shall be carried out in
accordance with the provisions of the City Charter and other laws, city
personnel rules, civil service rules, union contracts or other departmental
agency rules and regulations and may include discipline up to and including
discharge from public service. A copy of the denial or affirmation shall be
mailed to the complainant at the address provided by the complainant in their
written complaint. In addition, all employees shall receive a copy of this
chapter and shall sign a statement acknowledging the receipt of the copy with
in 30 days of the effective date of this chapter or at the time of hire. The
city shall, on an on going and annual basis, provide diversity training for all
employees and officials. No employee and official shall be exempt, and the City
Manager shall maintain a record of all training including the list of attendees
at the training sessions.
(Ord. 2008-1, passed 1-22-2008)
CHAPTER 39: ETHICS
Section
   
39.001   Title
   
39.002   Intent and purpose
   
39.003   Definitions
   
39.004   Fair and equal treatment
   
39.005   Prohibited conduct
   
39.006   Matter regarding disclosure of conflicts of interest, actual and
potential
   
39.007   Public disclosure, contents
   
39.008   Disclosure of campaign contributions
   
39.009   Duties of Clerk
   
39.010   Request for opinion from the City Attorney
   
39.011   Delivery of copies of Ethics Code to public servants
   
39.012   Complaint procedure
   
39.013   Where to seek review
 
   
39.999   Penalty
§ 39.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Ethics Chapter of the city.
(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)
§ 39.002 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to uphold, promote and demand the highest
standards of ethics from all its employees and officials, whether elected,
appointed or hired. City officers and employees (public servants) shall
maintain the highest standards of personal integrity, truthfulness, honesty and
fairness in carrying out their public duties; avoid any improprieties in their
roles as public servants including the appearance of impropriety; and never use
their city position or powers for improper personal gain.
   (B)   It is further the intent of this chapter that a public servant,
regardless of whether specifically prohibited by this chapter, shall avoid any
action, which might result in or create the appearance of:
      (1)   Using public office or employment for private gain personal or
monetary;
      (2)   Giving improper preferential treatment to any person or
organization;
      (3)   Impeding government efficiency or economy;
      (4)   A lack of independence or impartiality of action;
      (5)   Making a government decision outside of official channels; or
      (6)   Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity
of the city.
   (C)   It is not the intent of this chapter to in any way limit the right or
ability of any public servant to exercise his or her discretion in making
legitimate policy decisions which are within their discretion so long as the
action does not provide a special benefit to that person, relieve the public
servant of a particular duty, or treat that person differently than other
similarly situated city residents.
(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)
§ 39.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. A business entity includes any corporation, partnership, sole
proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-
employed individual, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust
or any legal entity organized for profit.
   CITY. The City of Hamtramck, a Michigan municipal corporation.
   COMPENSATION. Payment in any form for real or personal property or services
of any kind.
   ELECTED OFFICER. Any person who is elected at a general or special election
to any public office of the city and any person appointed to fill a vacancy in
any office.
   INTEREST. Any right, title or share in something, either personal,
financial, legal or equitable, which is owned, held or controlled, in whole or
in part, directly or indirectly, by a public servant.
   PUBLIC SERVANT. Every individual appointed, hired or otherwise selected to
an office, position, committee, board, task force or similar multi-member body
with the city, or any subdivision thereof, whether the individual is paid or
unpaid and any person elected or appointed to any public body of the city.
PUBLIC SERVANT includes elected officer.
   PUBLIC BODY. The City Council, and any board, authority, commission,
committee, department, office or other agency of the city, and including the
city.
   QUESTION THE EMPLOYMENT STATUS. Imply, infer, suggest or otherwise state
that an employee should be dismissed from employment with the city.
(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)
§ 39.004 FAIR AND EQUAL TREATMENT.
   No public servant shall request, use or permit the use of any consideration,
treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which is the general practice to
grant or make available to the public at large. All public servants shall treat
all citizens of the city with courtesy, impartiality, fairness and equality
under the law. In addition, no elected official may question the employment
status of any employee under the control of the City Manager unless that
employee’s contract or appointment is before the City Council and a resolution
approving the action has been moved and seconded.
(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008) Penalty, see §
39.999
§ 39.005 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   The following shall constitute violations of this chapter.
   (A)   General prohibition against conflict of interest. In order to avoid
impropriety, or an appearance of conflict of interest, no current public
servant should be involved in any activity that might be seen as conflicting
with the conduct of official city business or as adverse to the interests of
the city. Even the appearance of the following prohibited conduct alone may be
sufficient to constitute a violation of this ethics chapter.
   (B)   Disclosure of confidential information and/or benefitting from
confidential information. No public servant shall disclose or use any
confidential, privileged or proprietary information gained by reason of his or
her position for a purpose which is for other than a city purpose; provided,
that nothing shall prohibit the disclosure or use of information which is a
matter of public knowledge, or which is available to the public on request. For
purposes of this division, the term CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION shall mean any
information, oral or written, which comes to the attention of, or is available
to, the public servants only because of his or her position with the city, and
is not a matter of public record.
   (C)   Improper use of city personnel and property. No public servant shall
employ or use any person under his or her official control or direction for the
personal benefit, gain or profit of the public servant or other. No public
servant shall use city-owned vehicles, equipment, materials, money or property
for personal or private convenience or personal gain. Nothing herein shall
prohibit the use of city equipment or motor vehicles by public servants in
accordance with written policies established by the City Council, City Manager
or city department head concerned, nor shall this chapter be deemed to prohibit
private use of surplus city property legally disposed of by the city or its
departments in compliance with established procedures.
   (D)   Beneficial interest in business transaction or participation in a
contract. No public servant shall participate or benefit from (monetarily or
personally) in his or her capacity as a public servant in the making of a
contract in which he or she has a financial interest, direct or indirect, or
perform in regard to a contract some function which requires the exercise of
discretion on behalf of the city. No public servant shall participate in
contracts, loans, grants, rate-fixing or issuing permits involving a business
in which he or she has a substantial interest; however this provision shall not
apply in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Contracting with the city where:
         (a)   The contract is awarded pursuant to sealed bids;
         (b)   The public servant is not involved directly or indirectly or
otherwise refrains from participation in the decision on the award of the
contract; and
         (c)   The City Council, after reviewing the circumstances, determines
the award of the contract would be in the best interest of the city.
      (2)   Where the interest of the public servant in the business involves
the holding of less than 1% of the securities in a publicly traded business or
less than 5% of privately or closely held business and where the public servant
will not have any involvement in the transaction on behalf of the contracting
business.
   (E)   Engaging in certain private employment. No city employee or public
servant shall engage in or accept private employment or render services for,
any private interest when the employment or service is incompatible with the
proper discharge of official duties or would tend to impair independence or
judgment or action in the performance of official duties.
   (F)   Acceptance or solicitation of compensation, gifts, favors, rewards or
gratuity. No public servant may, directly or indirectly, give or receive, or
agree to give or receive, any compensation, gift, favor, reward, or gratuity
for a matter connected with or related to the public servant’s services with
the city which would tend to influence the manner in which the public servant
performs his or her official duties, except this prohibition shall not apply
to:
      (1)   Attendance of a public servant at a hosted meal when provided in
conjunction with a meeting directly related to the conduct of city business or
where official attendance by the city official as a city representative is
required or in the best interest of the city;
      (2)   An award publicly presented in recognition of public service
presented to the public servant; and
      (3)   Any gift valued at $100 or less, which cannot reasonably be
presumed to influence the judgment of the public servant.
   (G)   Improper use of position. No public servant shall knowingly use his or
her office or position to secure personal benefit, gain or profit, or use his
or her position to secure special privileges or exceptions for himself,
herself, or for the benefit, gain or profits of any other persons. No public
servant shall represent his or her individual opinions as those of the city.
(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008) Penalty, see §
39.999
§ 39.006 MATTER REGARDING DISCLOSURE OF CONFLICTS OF INTEREST, ACTUAL AND
POTENTIAL.
   The following disclosure requirements are established to avoid both actual
and potential conflict between the private self-interests and the public
interest of public servants.
   (A)   Self interest. No public servant, either on his or her behalf or on
behalf of any other person, shall have an interest in any business transaction
with any public body of the city, unless the person shall first make full
public disclosure of the nature of the interest.
   (B)   Disclosure and disqualification. Whenever the performance of official
duties shall require a public servant to deliberate and vote on any matter
involving his or her financial or personal interest, that person shall publicly
disclose the nature and extent of the interest and is disqualified from
participating in the deliberations and voting on the matter.
   (C)   Dual employment. No public servant shall engage in employment with, or
render services for, any person or entity, which has business transactions with
any public body of the city, without first making full public disclosure of the
nature and extent of the employment or services.
   (D)   Dual representation. A public servant shall make full public
disclosure of business involving the city when attempting to use his or her
official position to secure special privileges or exemptions for self or
others.
(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008) Penalty, see §
39.999
§ 39.007 PUBLIC DISCLOSURE, CONTENTS.
   Whenever a public disclosure is required by this chapter, it may be made
orally on the record at a meeting of the public body involved, or in a writing
filed with the Clerk, in both of which cases it shall be made a part of the
record of a regular City Council meeting, and in either event shall include:
   (A)   The identity of all persons involved in the interest; and
   (B)   The source and amount of income derived from the interest that may be
considered as resulting from employment, investment or gift. The person
required to file a disclosure statement in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter must verify, in writing, under penalty of perjury, the information
in the statement is true and complete as far as he or she knows.
(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008) Penalty, see §
39.999
§ 39.008 DISCLOSURE OF CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   Within 15 days after each municipal election, every elected officer,
and candidate for elected office, shall file a completed disclosure form with
the City Clerk. All elected officers of the city shall file, annually within
ten days of the filing deadline established by the state, a report with the
City Clerk listing all contributions, other receipts or in-kind contributions
received in any calendar year by the officer’s candidate committee. If the
candidate or elected officers or candidate for office has not received any
contributions, other receipts or in-kind contribution for the period covered
under any period in which a report is required by this chapter, the candidate
or elected officer shall file a sworn, notarized statement within ten days of
the filing deadline established by the state, in a form determined by the
Clerk, reflecting this fact. The Clerk shall make all candidates for elected
office in the city aware of this provision at the time they file for candidacy.
All elected officers of the city shall be made aware of this provision within
five days of assuming their respective office. The form for reporting
contributions shall consist of the forms developed by the State Secretary of
State for reporting campaign contributions or their successors. At the time of
adoption of this chapter, those forms are:
      (1)   Candidate Itemized Contributions Schedule 1A;
      (2)   Candidate Other Receipts Schedule 1A-1; and
      (3)   Candidate In-Kind Contributions Schedule 1-IK.
   (B)   Failure to comply with this section of the chapter may result in a
penalty established by City Council resolution.
(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008; Am. Ord. 2009-1, passed 3-24-2009) Penalty,
see §
39.999
§ 39.009 DUTIES OF CLERK.
   The Clerk shall examine all disclosure statements filed pursuant to this
chapter and report irregularities immediately to the person filing the
statement to the City Manager and the City Attorney. Acceptance of a statement
by the Clerk shall not constitute approval of the statement. The Clerk shall
maintain a current list of all disclosure statements required to be available
for public disclosure. The Clerk shall preserve all disclosure statements for a
period of at least three years after the date on which they are filed. The
Clerk shall make available to the public all statements that are required to be
available for inspection during regular business hours. The Clerk shall also
accept all complaint alleging violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)
§ 39.010 REQUEST FOR OPINION FROM THE CITY ATTORNEY.
   (A)   Any elected official may request the City Attorney provide an advisory
opinion interpreting the effect or application of this chapter generally, or on
questions directly relating to the propriety of their conduct in a particular
situation.
   (B)   Any other public servant may request, with the approval of the City
Manager, that the City Attorney provide an advisory opinion interpreting the
effect or application of this chapter generally, or on questions directly
relating to the propriety of their conduct in a particular situation.
(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)
§ 39.011 DELIVERY OF COPIES OF ETHICS CODE TO PUBLIC SERVANTS.
   The Clerk shall deliver a copy of this chapter to each public servant as
soon as practicable after the enactment of this chapter, and to each new public
servant at the time of employment or taking office. The Clerk shall also
request that each person sign and return an acknowledgment of receipt of a copy
of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)
§ 39.012 COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any citizen of the city may submit a compliant in writing and under
oath, alleging that one or more public servants have violated or may have
violated any provision of this chapter within one month of the alleged
violation.
   (B)   The complaint must be signed by the complainant and notarized, and
must contain the following:
      (1)   The complainant’s legal name and current mailing address;
      (2)   The name or names of any public servants who committed or may have
committed the alleged violation;
      (3)   A summary of the facts giving rise to the complaint;
      (4)   Some explanation of why those facts constitute or may constitute a
violation of the ethics chapter; and
      (5)   Any one filing a false complaint will be subject to the penalty(s)
for perjury.
   (C)   The complaints must be filed with the City Clerk. Upon receipt, the
Clerk shall promptly provide a copy of the complaint to the public servant
named therein and to the City Attorney.
   (D)   The City Attorney will evaluate the complaint, applying the law of the
standards of conduct to the facts alleged in the complaint.
   (E)   Within 14 days from receipt of the complaint, the City Attorney shall:
      (1)   Issue a report including a copy of the complaint, concluding
whether facts alleged in the complaint, if true, would rise to a violation of
this chapter, and require the public servant named in the complaint issue a
formal statement, in writing and addressed to the City Attorney, outlining his
or her position.
      (2)   The City Attorney shall determine whether the public servant named
in the complaint did commit a violation of the ethics chapter and file a formal
complaint with the Thirty-First District Court; or
      (3)   Dismiss the complaint.
   (F)   The City Attorney shall promptly provide a formal complaint or a
dismissal of the complaint to the appropriate city department.
   (G)   If a complaint is filed against the City Attorney and any of his or
her designees, the City Council shall designate a neutral body to investigate
the complaint and if necessary prosecute the violation.
(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008) Penalty, see §
39.999
§ 39.013 WHERE TO SEEK REVIEW.
   (A)   Civil penalty. If ordered to pay a civil penalty, an appeal may be
taken in the form of a trial de novo in the District Court, which shall hear
the case in accordance with the Civil Rules for Courts of Limited Jurisdiction
(CRLJ) and applicable local rules of the District Court. This appeal may be
taken by filing in the District Court, a notice of appeal within 14 days of the
date of the final written order. The person filing the appeal shall also,
within 14 days, serve a copy of the notice of appeal on the person who issued
the final written order and/or the City Attorney, or his or her designee, and
file acknowledgment or affidavit of service in the District Court.
   (B)   Discipline or removal. If a public servant is disciplined or removed
from office, then the person disciplined or removed from office may seek
whatever remedies exist at law or equity.
   (C)   Termination of contracts. If termination of contract(s) is ordered,
the person whose contract(s) was/were terminated may seek whatever remedies
exist at law or in equity.
(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)
§ 39.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Upon a finding of a violation of any provision of this chapter, the
City Attorney is empowered to take any one or more of the following actions:
      (1)   Discipline up to and including termination or removal from any
position whether paid or unpaid, excluding elected positions, only after notice
and hearing as provided by law; and/or
      (2)   Termination or invalidation of contract(s) entered into in
violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Upon a finding of a violation of the applicable provisions of this
chapter, the District Court is empowered to assess the following penalties:
      (1)   Any public servant who violated a provision of this chapter may be
subject to fine of up to $500 for each violation;
      (2)   Any public servant who fails to make any disclosure required by §
39.008 may be fined $10 per day, up to a maximum of $500, from the first day
the disclosure is due until the disclosure is filed; and
      (3)   Any public servant who is found to have violated a provision(s) of
this chapter shall be deemed guilty of misconduct.
   (C)   The various penalties provided under this division are cumulative to
other remedies provided under state law or under the Charter and ordinances of
the city.
(Ord. 2008-11, passed 8-26-2008)
CHAPTER 40: MEDICAL SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT
Section
   
40.01   Fees
   
40.02   Responsibility for payment
§ 40.01 FEES.
   (A)   The following fees shall be assessed to and paid by any person
utilizing the services of an emergency vehicle owned, operated or requested by
the city and any of its departments for purposes of transporting that person to
a facility for emergency medical treatment:
      (1)   Basic ambulance service: $425;
      (2)   Advance life support system (1): $600;
      (3)   Advance life support system (2): $725;
      (4)   Reimbursement for mileage: $10.50/mile;
      (5)   Reimbursement to city for extrication equipment: $500;
      (6)   Reimbursement to city for oxygen treatment: $50.
   (B)   City Council shall review these fees as part of the city's annual
budget process set forth in the Uniform Budget and Accounting Act and may make
such changes to the above charges by resolution in instances where the federal
or state government increases Medicare/Medicaid reimbursement rates for the
above services.
(Ord. 2011-6, passed 10-25-2011)
§ 40.02 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT.
   Any person held in custody, confined or incarcerated by the city, including
but not limited to: individuals who are i) under arrest, ii) incarcerated, iii)
imprisoned, iv) escaped from confinement, v) under supervised release, vi) on
medical furlough, vii) residing in a mental health facility or halfway house,
viii) living under home detention, ix) or confined completely or partially in
any way under a penal statute or rule; shall be solely responsible for the
payment of any medical services rendered to, and received by, that person
during the course of his or her confinement with the city, or at the city's or
the court's direction, including without limitation, transportation to and from
a medical treatment facility, and any treatment deemed necessary by his or her
treating physician, whether or not requested by the prisoner; and shall be
required to reimburse the city, in full for any fees or charges incurred for
such services, if not paid directly to medical facility or practitioner by the
prisoner or his or her insurance carrier.
(Ord. 2011-6, passed 10-25-2011)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE, REFUSE AND LITTER
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   WASTEWATER
      
53.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
54.   TREES AND SHRUBS
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE, REFUSE AND LITTER
Section
Garbage, Refuse and Litter
   
50.001   Short title
   
50.002   Purpose and intent
   
50.003   Definitions
   
50.004   Responsibility of owner
   
50.005   Responsibilities of city
   
50.006   Collection charges
   
50.007   Collection rules
   
50.008   Preparation for collection
   
50.009   Mechanical container
   
50.010   Disposal of extraordinary refuse
   
50.011   Prohibitions
   
50.012   Rejection of waste
   
50.013   Litter
   
50.014   Nuisance declaration
   
50.015   Enforcement
Bulk Refuse Containers on Public Rights-of-Way
   
50.030   Generally
   
50.031   Definitions
   
50.032   Permit required
   
50.033   Application
   
50.034   Fees
   
50.035   Regulations
 
   
50.999   Penalty
GARBAGE, REFUSE AND LITTER
§ 50.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter may be cited as the Refuse and Litter Subchapter.
(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)
§ 50.002 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The City Council intends that this subchapter be liberally construed
for the purpose of providing a sanitary and satisfactory method of storing,
collecting and disposing of waste generated or transported within the city in
an effort to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   All persons shall dispose of their residential and commercial refuse,
segregate those items as required and prepare the items for proper collection
and disposal as required by this subchapter or the rules.
(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.003 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Generally. SHALL is always mandatory. Masculine forms shall include
the feminine. Singular forms shall include the plural.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   BULK REFUSE CONTAINER. Includes containers, roll-off dumpsters, boxes,
shipping containers and other containers used to hold things for transport or
storage holding over eight cubic yards, including licensed vehicles or trailers
parked in the right-of-way overnight.
   CITY. The City of Hamtramck, Wayne County, Michigan.
   CODE OFFICIAL. Any person authorized to enforce this subchapter or his or
her designee.
   COMMERCIAL REFUSE. A solid waste material resulting from the rejected,
unwanted, discarded or abandoned material generated by commercial
establishments and industrial establishments and uses, such as office
buildings, personal service establishments, technical and scientific research
facilities, professional service offices, clinics, schools and churches. The
definition includes REFUSE.
   CONSTRUCTION REFUSE. All unwanted, rejected, discarded, abandoned or surplus
materials resulting from the alteration, repair, demolition or construction of
buildings or structures.
   GARBAGE. Decomposable animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any substance defined as a hazardous substance or hazardous
waste under any federal or state law or regulation.
   LITTER. All waste, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris or
other foreign substance of every kind and description.
   MECHANICAL CONTAINER. Any dumpster or other refuse container with a capacity
of two cubic yards or greater used to store refuse which is capable of being
emptied by mechanical means; this includes gondola-type containers.
   PERSON. Any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint adventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or corporations; or any
officers, agents, employees, factors or any kind of person representatives of
any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself, herself or for any
other person under either personal appointment or pursuant to law.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure designed
or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant and shall
include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox
belonging or appurtenant to the dwelling, house, building or other structure.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways, gutters, sewers and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds, buildings and city-owned real property.
   REFUSE. All decomposable and non-decomposable solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish and ashes.
   RUBBISH. Non-decomposable solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
   RULES. The policies and procedures established by the city in accordance
with this subchapter.
   SPECIAL COLLECTION. Any collection of waste at a time other than the
regularly scheduled once per week collection, or of a volume or quantity of
waste exceeding the limitations of this subchapter whether requested by an
owner or occupant or done by the city to eliminate a violation of a city
ordinance.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
   WASTE. Refuse or yard waste.
   YARD WASTE. Residential grass clippings, leaves, weeds, twigs, prunings,
shrub clippings, garden waste, old potting soil and dirt incidental to minor
yard work, Halloween pumpkins, brush, branches, tree trimmings, Christmas trees
and small shrubs and bushes with dirt removed from root systems. Christmas
trees shall not be considered yard waste during the months of December and
January.
   YARD WASTE COLLECTION SEASON. A period each year scheduled by the city
during which a separate yard waste collection service is provided throughout
the city.
(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)
§ 50.004 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
   (A)   If the city has not provided a refuse container for a semi-automated
system, the property owner shall be responsible for providing the proper amount
of suitable watertight containers placed and maintained in the manner that
meets the rules.
   (B)   Stationary receptacles, large steel drums, paint pails, cardboard
barrels, cardboard boxes, paper bags and other containers of a like nature are
not approved receptacles and collection may not be made by the city when the
receptacles are used.
   (C)   A receptacle that is broken or otherwise fails to meet the
requirements of this subchapter may be deemed to be rubbish and may be
collected as that by the city without notice to the users.
   (D)   All containers shall be kept clean and disinfected to minimize any
offensive odor.
   (E)   The property owner, through the city, may purchase additional refuse
containers that exceed the amount permitted by the city. The owner shall then
be responsible for paying the monthly fee for the additional collection. The
city shall place the additional collection charge on the water bill or tax
bill.
   (F)   The property owner, through the city, shall purchase additional refuse
containers to replace damaged or stolen containers. The city shall issue
replacement containers and shall place the charge on the water bill or tax bill
if the container was not paid in advance of delivery of the container.
   (G)   The property owner shall be responsible for the disposal of all waste
generated from his or her property or any waste on his or her property that is
in violation of this subchapter.
   (H)   The owner or occupant of property abutting public property shall be
presumed to have generated any waste placed for collection on public property.
For purposes of determining ownership of property, the city shall presume that
the person whose name appears on the most recent tax assessment roll of the
city is the owner of the property. The property owner shall be responsible for
advising the City Assessor of any changes in ownership of property.
   (I)   A property owner may create or permit the creation of a compost pile.
Compost piles may include a combination of yard and garden waste, such as
weeds, branches, bark, grass clippings, leaves, stalks, stems, brush, vines,
wood ashes, woods chips, coffee grounds, tea leaves, shredded raw fruit,
vegetable waste, eggshells and nutshells. Any other items in a compost pile
shall be prohibited. Compost piles shall not exceed 36 square feet. Compost
piles shall be maintained in a manner that does not emit offensive odors,
impair the health, comfort or welfare of the people, or create a animal or
rodent harborage.
   (J)   The property owner shall be responsible for all additional charges
that may be incurred for collecting refuse or abating nuisances related to his
or her property.
(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.005 RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITY.
   (A)   All waste accumulated in the city shall be collected by and disposed
of by the city or a city designated or licensed contractor, provided that the
waste is properly prepared and stored in accordance with the rules. Waste that
is not properly prepared and stored in accordance with the rules shall be
collected only at additional expense to the property owner. This subchapter
shall not prohibit or deny the actual producers of waste, or the owners of
premises upon which waste has accumulated, from personally or contracting for
the collecting, conveying and disposing of the waste, provided the producers or
owners comply with the provisions of this subchapter and the rules.
   (B)   The city shall permit the transportation of waste through the city
provided the vehicles or the containers used to transport the waste do not
permit the escape of the waste, give off offensive or unwholesome smells, or
shall not otherwise constitute a nuisance. Transportation of garbage or other
decomposable refuse shall be in watertight containers.
   (C)   Any company transporting waste through the city shall obtain a general
business license from the City Clerk. Vehicles used for collection and
transportation of waste within or through the city shall be plainly marked,
watertight, covered and conform to all laws regulating axle and load
limitations. The city may designate the route to be taken by trucks or haulers
of waste through the city and to a disposal site.
   (D)   The city shall establish a limit of the amount of refuse regularly
collected from nonresidential sources and may require the property owner to
contract for private disposal if the limit is regularly exceeded. The property
owner shall provide evidence, as determined by the city, of compliance with
this order.
   (E)   The city may not collect waste placed in receptacles that exceeds the
weight limitations, is placed outside of the receptacles unless the refuse is
considered a bulky item or otherwise does not conform to the provisions of this
subchapter or the rules.
   (F)   The city shall not be responsible for collection of frozen waste
adhering to the receptacle or for any resulting damage to receptacles.
(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017; Am. Ord., passed
5-11-2021) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.006 COLLECTION CHARGES.
   (A)   The City Council shall establish a fee schedule to provide for
services that are extraordinary or special by passing along the cost of the
services that are provided by a contractor with a 20% administrative fee.
   (B)   All statements for charges authorized by this subchapter shall be
rendered monthly or may be included in the water billing, if that is the
responsibility of the property owner, at the discretion of the City Treasurer.
   (C)   All charges for services rendered pursuant to this subchapter are
hereby made a lien on all premises served thereby. Whenever any charge shall be
delinquent for three months, the City Treasurer shall certify the delinquency
to the City Assessor and the charges shall be entered upon the next tax roll as
a charge against the premises, and shall be collected and the lien thereof
enforced in the same manner as special assessments against the premises.
   (D)   When, in the opinion of the code official a prohibited accumulation of
refuse is of the gravity as to constitute a menace to public health, safety or
welfare, the official may, with at least 24 hours' notice to the owner of the
property on which the accumulation exists, order the removal of the
accumulation at the expense of the property owner. The city shall collect the
expense in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)
§ 50.007 COLLECTION RULES.
   (A)   All yards, alleys, streets, vacant lots or other places in the city
shall be kept free from garbage, bulky waste and rubbish. Garbage, bulky waste
and rubbish shall be deposited in an appropriate container or placed for
collection as set out in this chapter.
   (B)   The owner or occupants of any dwelling, house, building or structure
of any kind or description whatsoever shall provide a covered, watertight
container with handles, not exceeding a 30-gallon capacity, for receipt of
garbage and rubbish, but not compostables, or shall have approved containers
compatible with the city-authorized mechanical handling equipment. The property
street number shall be placed on each container.
   (C)   For composting purposes, compostables will not be collected by the
city from any premises unless it is placed in a container approved by the
Director of the Department of Public Services or his designee. Compostables
will be collected according to the schedule established by the Department of
Public Services.
   (D) The city will not collect bulky waste or containers holding garbage,
bulky waste, rubbish or compostables which weigh over 50 pounds.
   (E)   All containers shall be placed in the approved pick-up location for
collection at the proper time. No containers, rubbish, bulky waste or other
materials to be disposed of shall be placed in any public street, alley or
other public place, or in front or side yard, earlier than 6:00 p.m. the day
before the regular collection day, and said containers shall be removed from
said places not later than 9:00 p.m. on the collection day. At no time will the
use of paper or plastic bags be permitted as trash containers, except to hold
newspapers as set out in division (G). Except at the collection times noted
above no container shall be placed or stored on public property.
   (F)   Containers and bulky waste on collection day shall be placed between
the curb and the sidewalk, or in the alley, unless otherwise authorized. If the
city provides recycling services, except for compostables, the use of plastic
containers will be permitted, provided, that tops of same are secured to
prevent garbage, paper or debris from spilling or otherwise escaping the
confines of such containers.
   (G)   Stacks of newspapers or boxes may be placed at the curb without being
in a container if said newspapers or boxes are placed in paper bags.
   (H)   Small tree limbs, two inches and less in diameter, shall be collected
only if they have been cut into lengths not to exceed three feet in length and
tied securely into bundles not to exceed three feet in girth.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)
§ 50.008 PREPARATION FOR COLLECTION.
   (A)   Regulation of the time, manner and place of collection and the time
for which receptacles must be placed out for collections and returned to
storage after collections shall be subject to the rules. The code official
shall be authorized to grant certain exemptions from this section in accordance
with the rules.
   (B)   During the week while waste is being stored and accumulated for
ultimate disposal, all waste shall be stored inside of a building. However,
waste may be stored outside of a building in an approved receptacle under the
rules. Outside storage of waste in any front or side yard as defined by the
zoning code is prohibited.
   (C)   All refuse stored in an approved receptacle shall be placed in a
plastic garbage bag meeting the criteria established by the rules.
   (D)   All yard waste shall be stored in an approved receptacle. Yard waste
shall be prepared and placed for collection in accordance with the schedule
adopted by the city.
(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)
§ 50.009 MECHANICAL CONTAINER.
   (A)   Commercial or industrial establishments and churches that generally
generate more than 150 pounds or 93 gallons of commercial refuse per week shall
be responsible for arranging for private disposal. Mechanical containers shall
be used to contain refuse generated by the establishments.
   (B)   All establishments and churches shall notify the City Clerk within two
weeks after the effective date of this subchapter or within two weeks after
receiving a mechanical container or effect changes to their collection that
they have arranged for private disposal, the name of the disposal company, the
size of the container, the frequency of collection, the location of the
container and any other information the city may require.
   (C)   The property owner or person responsible for contracting for a
mechanical container shall be required to register the mechanical container in
accordance with the rules.
   (D)   The city shall require a permit for any mechanical container placed on
public property and the conditions of the permit shall be identified in the
rules.
   (E)   The city shall require an annual registration fee for each mechanical
container placed on public property and may tag the mechanical container. Each
mechanical container shall have its own tag. The fee shall be established by
annual resolution of the City Council upon adoption of the budget.
   (F)   The Department of Public Services shall be authorized to promulgate
any rules that designate the location, placement, size, frequency of
collection, registration and placement of mechanical containers. Mechanical
containers placed on public property shall adhere to the rules. Mechanical
containers placed on private property shall be screened in accordance with the
zoning regulations.
   (G)   The code official shall be authorized to order relocation or removal
of any mechanical container placed on public property that endangers the public
health, safety or welfare. The cost of the relocation or removal shall be
placed solely on the person who ordered the mechanical container.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any establishment for which a mechanical
container is required under this subchapter to permit storage of refuse upon
any portion of the premises outside of buildings that is not confined in a
mechanical container.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful to empty or deliver any mechanical container
within 1,000 feet of any property used or zoned for residential purposes on
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily except in special cases
authorized by the city.
   (J)   All mechanical containers shall be maintained in good repair,
waterproof, rodent-proof, remain free from graffiti and equipped with lids.
Lids shall be closed except when the container is being filled or emptied.
   (K)   All mechanical containers shall have the address of the property that
the container is associated with, prominently displayed, and easily readable.
It is the property owner or person responsible for contracting for a mechanical
container's responsibility to maintain the address on the container.
(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017; Am. Ord., passed
5-11-2021) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.010 DISPOSAL OF EXTRAORDINARY REFUSE.
   (A)   The owner, contractor, occupant or other person responsible for
construction work shall remove from the premises all construction refuse. The
materials shall be removed outside the city limits or disposed of in accordance
with the directions of the code official.
   (B)   Hazardous waste shall be the responsibility of the producer or owner
thereof and shall not be mixed with refuse to be collected by the city,
disposed of, or allowed to be stored or transported without the written
approval of the city and then only under the supervision of a person appointed
by the Department who has knowledge of the safety measures necessary to protect
the public health and safety during the storing, transporting or disposing of
hazardous waste.
(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.011 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person may cast, place, sweep, deposit, dump, bury, scatter or
cause to be cast, placed, swept, deposited, dumped, buried or scattered any
waste of any kind on any public or private property, whether the waste is owned
by the person or not, except as permitted by this subchapter.
   (B)   No person, except when lawfully employed or contracted for that
purpose, may carry, convey or transport any waste through the public property
of the city.
   (C)   No person may interfere in any manner with the properly authorized
collection and disposal of any waste. The interference may include blocking
access to public property, parking or standing in front of a place of
collection, or hindering the efficient operation of persons properly engaging
in the collection and disposal of any waste.
   (D)   No person or persons other than the owner, occupant or occupants of
the premises and the authorized collector of garbage may interfere with the use
of the receptacle or disturb, remove or attempt to remove refuse receptacles,
their covers or their contents and no person may use the receptacle of another
unless permission has been granted, whether same is on public or private
property.
   (E)   No person may deposit or cause to be deposited any waste in a
mechanical container which is not owned, leased or authorized to be used by the
person.
   (F)   No person may place for collection any waste that could ignite waste
in a receptacle, mechanical container or waste collection vehicle.
   (G)   No person may bury or burn refuse unless in accordance any applicable
ordinance or law.
   (H)   No person may bury any dead animal except in accordance with federal
and state law.
   (I)   No person may dispose of yard waste along with regular refuse and
garbage. Yard waste shall be disposed of in a manner prescribed under the
rules.
   (J)   No person shall dump sand, gravel, dirt or similar material upon
public property without first obtaining a permit from the city. The permit
shall provide for the removal of the materials and related equipment within a
reasonable time.
   (K)   No person shall dump sand, gravel, dirt or similar material upon
private property without the property owner's express permission.
   (L)   No person shall place a bulk refuse container on public property
without first obtaining a permit from the city. The code official has authority
to relocate or remove any bulk refuse container placed on public property that
endangers the public health, safety or welfare. The cost of the relocation or
removal shall be placed solely on the person who ordered the bulk refuse
container.
(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.012 REJECTION OF WASTE.
   (A)   If any owner or occupant of any property places any waste which is
rejected by the city waste collector because it does not conform to the
requirements of this subchapter, the city waste collector shall give notice to
the owner or occupant of the premises by tagging the rejected waste. The tag
shall advise the owner or occupant of the reason the waste was not collected
and shall direct the owner or occupant to correct the violation within 24
hours, and it shall warn the owner or occupant that if the violation is not
corrected, the city may make a special collection for which the owner or
occupant shall be charged.
   (B)   If the code official determines the owner or occupant of the premises
upon which rejected waste is located has failed to correct the violation within
the time period specified on the notice, the city may have the city waste
collector make a special collection of the rejected waste.
   (C)   If the city waste collector makes a special collection of rejected
waste, the owner or occupant shall be charged a fee equal to the special
collection charge incurred by the city, plus an administrative fee of 20%. The
owner or occupant of the premises shall be sent an invoice for the costs of
special collection, including the administrative fee, which shall be payable
within 30 days of the date of the invoice. If the invoice is not paid by the
due date on the invoice, then any outstanding balance owed the city shall be
placed immediately on the next water bill or tax bill for the property in
accordance with §
50.006.
(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)
§ 50.013 LITTER.
   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any public
property, except in public waste receptacles. No person shall sweep into or
deposit in any public property the accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public property or private property. Persons owning or
occupying property, including businesses, shall keep the public sidewalk,
alley, and roadway bordering their property free of litter. They shall be
responsible for 24 inches into the roadway from the curb, and half of the
alleyway bordering their property.
   (B)   No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any public property the accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public property or private property. Persons owning or
occupying places of business shall keep the public sidewalk and alley bordering
their business free of litter.
   (C)   No person shall discharge any commercial refuse, industrial water or
any polluted or contaminated waste upon any public property with the city.
   (D)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private
property, whether owned by the person or not, except that the owner or person
in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for
collection in a manner that litter shall be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any public property or upon any private
property.
   (E)   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property, whether owned by the person or not.
   (F)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park, except in public
receptacles and in a manner that the litter shall be prevented from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any
public property. Where public receptacles are not provided, all litter shall be
carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and
properly disposed of elsewhere.
   (G)   No person, while a driver or passenger in any vehicle, shall throw or
deposit litter upon any public property.
   (H)   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle unless the
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load or contents of
litter from being blown or deposited upon any public property, nor shall any
person drive or move any vehicle or truck, the wheels or tires of which carry
onto or deposit mud, dirt, sticky substances or foreign matter of any kind in
any public property.
(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017; Am. Ord., passed
5-11-2021) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.014 NUISANCE DECLARATION.
   (A)   Any accumulation of refuse on any premises not in proper containers,
not properly prepared for collection, or in violation of any part of this
subchapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The code
official is authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any private
property, or the agent of the owner, to properly dispose of any nuisance
located on the owner's property that is dangerous to public health, safety or
welfare. The notice shall be by first class mail, addressed to the owner at his
or her last known address as determined from the tax assessment roll. Failure
of the owner to remove any existing accumulation of refuse or litter within 48
hours upon the date that notice was served upon the property owner shall
authorize the city's waste collector to make a special collection of the refuse
or litter pursuant to §
50.006 of this subchapter. When the city waste collector abates the nuisance,
the owner or occupant shall be charged a fee equal to the special collection
charge incurred by the city plus an administrative fee of 20%. The owner or
occupant of the premises shall be sent an invoice for the costs of the special
collection which shall be collectible in the same manner and subject to the
same interest and penalties as special collection charges in §
50.006. The failure to remove any existing nuisance shall be deemed a violation
of this subchapter subject to a violation and penalty in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Prohibited accumulations shall be disposed of in a manner prescribed
by this subchapter.
(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.015 ENFORCEMENT.
   The City Manager shall designate the code official who shall be responsible
for enforcing the provision of this subchapter. The code official shall be
authorized to designate any other city employee or group of city employees to
enforce all other provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)
BULK REFUSE CONTAINERS ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 50.030 GENERALLY.
   All bulk refuse containers placed upon the public rights-of-way shall be
governed by this subchapter.
(Ord. 2007-534, passed 10-23-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)
§ 50.031 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BULK REFUSE CONTAINER. Includes containers, dumpsters, boxes, shipping
containers and other containers used to hold things for transport or storage
holding over eight cubic yards, including licensed vehicles or trailers parked
in the right-of-way overnight.
   PROVIDER. The person or entity leasing or otherwise providing a bulk refuse
container for use.
(Ord. 2007-534, passed 10-23-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)
§ 50.032 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any provider to place or maintain a bulk refuse
container on, or within, any public right-of-way unless the provider obtains a
bulk refuse container permit from the city and pays the appropriate fees.
(Ord. 2007-534, passed 10-23-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017) Penalty,
see §
50.999
§ 50.033 APPLICATION.
   An application for a bulk refuse container permit shall be made by the
applicant to the city. The applicant shall provide required information,
including the provider's name, address and telephone number; street address
adjacent to where bulk refuse container will be located; intended use of the
bulk refuse container; and the intended period of occupancy of the bulk refuse
container.
(Ord. 2007-534, passed 10-23-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)
§ 50.034 FEES.
   The fee for a permit shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 2007-534, passed 10-23-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017)
§ 50.035 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Bulk refuse container identification. The provider shall paint or
otherwise permanently affix on each bulk refuse container:
      (1)   The name and telephone number of the provider according to the
following standards: the letters and numerals shall be a minimum of three
inches in height, shall be clearly legible from a distance of 30 feet and shall
be painted or otherwise affixed on both long sides of the bulk refuse
container, 12 inches down from the top or lip and 12 inches from the corner;
and
      (2)   A unique identification number for the bulk refuse container.
   (B)   Location. A bulk refuse container shall not be placed in any of the
following locations:
      (1)   Within 40 feet of any bus stop;
      (2)   Within ten feet of any parking space designated for persons with
disabilities;
      (3)   Within 20 feet of any pedestrian crosswalk;
      (4)   Within ten feet of any intersection;
      (5)   Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant; and
      (6)   In any public alley;
      (7)   On any parkway or sidewalk, unless the bulk refuse container
provider demonstrates that an alternative location is not feasible and that
placement of the bulk refuse container on the parkway or sidewalk would not
create a safety hazard, disrupt pedestrian or vehicular traffic or damage
public or private property;
      (8)   On any right-of-way, including alleys, where the bulk refuse
container blocks the flow of traffic, refuse trucks and emergency vehicles;
      (9)   Within 30 feet of a stop sign or traffic-control signal; and
      (10)   Any location in violation of the prohibited parking section of the
State Vehicle Code, Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.674, as amended.
   (C)   Placement, appearance and maintenance of bulk refuse container. The
provider shall upon delivery, place the bulk refuse container immediately
adjacent to the property identified by the street address stated on the permit
application. Upon delivery, have the bulk refuse container free of graffiti.
Graffiti must be removed within three business days of receiving notification
from the city to remove graffiti from the bulk refuse container. The bulk
refuse container shall be free of gaps or holes to prevent the spillage of
materials onto the public way.
   (D)   Safety markings. Bulk refuse containers shall be marked with high-
intensity retro-reflective sheeting or other retro-reflective or prismatic
material a minimum of three feet in length and two inches in width along each
side of each corner both vertically and horizontally.
   (E)   Covering. The provider and/or user shall use a tarpaulin or other
appropriate cover to secure the top of a bulk refuse container when not in use
or while in transit. When transporting or otherwise moving a bulk refuse
container, the provider shall ensure that no portion of the load falls, blows,
drops or in any way escapes.
(Ord. 2007-534, passed 10-23-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 5-9-2017) Penalty,
see §
50.999
§ 50.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Garbage, refuse and litter.
      (1)   Each day that a violation of §§
50.001 through
50.015 exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
      (2)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with any provision of §§
50.001 through
50.015 is responsible for a municipal civil infraction for the first and second
offense of the same provision of §§
50.001 through
50.015 within a period of 365 days. The City Council, by resolution during the
adoption of the annual budget, shall establish a fine structure for a first and
second offense.
      (3)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with any provision of §§
50.001 through
50.015 is responsible for a misdemeanor for the third and any subsequent
offense of the same provision of this subchapter within a period of 365 days.
Upon conviction, the person may be fined up to $500, sentenced to 90 days in
jail, sentenced to community service for a time determined by the judge or any
combination of the above.
      (4)   In addition to any other penalty or sanction provided in §§
50.001 through
50.015, the court may require the defendant to pay the cost of removing all
litter or accumulated refuse which is the subject of the violation and the cost
of damages to any land, wildlife, vegetation or other natural resource or to
any facility damaged by violation of this subchapter. Money collected under
this division shall be distributed to the city.
(Ord. 513, passed 5-9-2005)
   (B)   Roll-off containers on public rights-of-way.
      (1)   Any person violating §§
50.030 through
50.035 shall be subject to a misdemeanor ticket that may result in 90 days in
jail, a $500 fine, or any combination thereof upon conviction. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   Any roll-off container in the public way not bearing the roll-off
container identification, not validly permitted, or not located immediately
adjacent to the street address specified in the permit may be removed by the
city, and all costs associated with removal shall be borne by the provider of
the roll-off container. The owner of a roll-off container, if different from a
provider, shall be jointly and severally liable with the provider for any
violation of §§
50.030 through
50.035.
(Ord. 2007-534, passed 10-23-2007)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
Public Water Service
   
51.001   Scope; duty to enforce
   
51.002   Definitions
   
51.003   Application for service; authorization; permission
   
51.004   Service pipe specifications
   
51.005   Prohibited connections; non-approved water supply
   
51.006   Certified water operator to make connections
   
51.007   Inspection of work
   
51.008   Responsibility for breaking pavement
   
51.009   Cost of service connections
   
51.010   Repairs to be at expense of person receiving service; notice of shut-
off
   
51.011   Meters; all water to pass through
   
51.012   Meters; have single connection
   
51.013   Meters; purchased from city; installation
   
51.014   Meters; removal of; prohibition
   
51.015   Meters; owners of premise responsible for
   
51.016   Taking of water without permission
   
51.017   Supplying water to other premises prohibited
   
51.018   Water shut-off; not to be turned on without permit; violation;
severance of connection
   
51.019   Right of entry; refusal; shut-off; power to require repairs
   
51.020   Obstruction to premises being serviced
   
51.021   One-inch meters
   
51.022   Deductions and rebates prohibited
   
51.023   Water rates
   
51.024   Meter districts
   
51.025   Delinquent bills; shut-off
   
51.026   Lien; assessment
   
51.027   Service shut-off; labor cost; turn-on charge
   
51.028   Meter reading
   
51.029   Use and operation of water system
Collection of Water Deposit
   
51.040   Intent
   
51.041   Collection
   
51.042   Deposit; if not paid
Drinking Water Wells
   
51.050   Prohibition
   
51.051   Filing of copy
   
51.052   Notice to be given
Water Conservation
   
51.060   Determination
   
51.061   Prohibition
   
51.062   Rules; effective period
Cross-Connections
   
51.110   Definitions
   
51.111   Cross-connections prohibited; rules adopted by reference
   
51.112   Inspections
   
51.113   Right of entry; information
   
51.114   Discontinuing cross-connection service
   
51.115   Testing of devices
   
51.116   Protection of potable water supply
   
51.117   Supplemental to State Plumbing Code
 
   
51.999   Penalty
PUBLIC WATER SERVICE
§ 51.001 SCOPE; DUTY TO ENFORCE.
   Every consumer of water, every owner, occupant or person in possession,
charge or control of any building, structure or premises having water service
from or through the city water supply system shall be governed and be subject
to the provisions of this subchapter and such rules and regulations governing
or concerning the use of water as may, from time to time, be adopted. It is
hereby made the duty of the Hamtramck Water Department, under the direction of
the Director of Public Services, to enforce the provisions of this subchapter
and any rules and regulations that may be adopted, as aforesaid.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 51.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. The feeder and supply mains, service pipes,
hydrants, meters and all their appurtenances, through which the city supplies
water to its consumers.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Services.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Services.
   PREMISES. Wherever used in this subchapter, shall be held to include a lot
or part of a lot, a building or a part of a building, a structure, a project or
any parcel or tract of land whatsoever, to which water is being, or is to be,
supplied.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 51.003 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; AUTHORIZATION; PERMISSION.
   (A)   When the introduction of water service is desired from the city water
supply system for any building, structure or premises and before any service
pipe is laid or any connection made with any service or supply pipes of the
city water supply system, an application in writing shall first be made to the
Department.
   (B)   No water main shall be tapped or service laid within the street
boundaries by anyone other than the duly authorized employees of the Department
or their agents and only under the authority of the Department.
   (C)   The application shall set forth a true legal description of the
premises it is proposed to serve, the name and address of the person, firm or
corporation about to perform the work, and the size of the service desired. It
shall also set forth fully the kind of building for which the service is
intended and the applicant shall be required to answer truthfully all questions
regarding the application which may be put to him or her by any officer or
employee of the water supply system.
   (D)   The person, firm or corporation to whom permission is granted to
connect to any service or supply pipe under the provisions of this section,
shall see to it that the service or supply pipe shall be turned off at the curb
stop and the service shall not be turned on, until permission is granted by the
Department.
(Ord. 215, passed 1-30-1948; Am. Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.004 SERVICE PIPE SPECIFICATIONS.
   All service pipes laid in the city shall be of not less than one-inch
internal diameter and all pipes of one-inch and two-inch diameter shall be of
copper tubing or plastic material appropriately grounded and of quality to
conform to the standards recommended by the American Water Works Association
for water service. All service pipes over two-inch internal diameter shall be
of ductile iron and shall conform to the specifications of the American Water
Works Association.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010; Am. Res. 2023-88b, passed 6-27-2023) Penalty,
see §
51.999
§ 51.005 PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS; NON-APPROVED WATER SUPPLY.
   In no case shall there be any connection between water pipes receiving their
supply from the city mains and pipes and pumps or tanks receiving their supply
from any other source. The use of such connection is prohibited whether or not
it is provided with one or more cross-connection control devices.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.006 CERTIFIED WATER OPERATOR TO MAKE CONNECTIONS.
   No person shall make any attachment or connection with the pipes of the city
water supply system nor make any repairs, additions to, or alterations of any
fixtures connected with the service pipes, unless licensed by the State of
Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.007 INSPECTION OF WORK.
   All work performed under this subchapter, by certified water operators,
shall be subject to inspection by the Director of Public Services or his or her
representatives who have authority hereby granted and to order any part of the
work to be discontinued or changed in order that the same shall comply with the
regulations and requirements of the Department.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.008 RESPONSIBILITY FOR BREAKING PAVEMENT.
   In cases where making of taps involves breaking the pavement, the contractor
shall be responsible to restore all right-of-ways and public property to
Department standards. If the contractor is unable or unwilling, the Department
will have the work done and the total charges will be borne by contractor or
property owner.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.009 COST OF SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   The cost of installing service pipes and private supply pipes, including
shut-offs and shut-off boxes, shall be borne by the person making application,
and shall consist of a charge for labor and material.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 51.010 REPAIRS TO BE AT EXPENSE OF PERSON RECEIVING SERVICE; NOTICE OF SHUT-
OFF.
   Every person having service from the city water supply system shall, at his
or her own cost and expense, keep in repair all service pipes, including
private pipes leading from the shut-off stop to the building or premises, and
prevent all waste of water from such pipes. If any such pipes be permitted to
remain out of repair, the Department may shut off the water from the premises,
and whenever the water is so shut off, it shall not be permitted to be again
turned on until the pipe or pipes have been placed in proper repair.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.011 METERS; ALL WATER TO PASS THROUGH.
   All connections with the water mains must be prepared for the use of water
through a meter. A suitable place shall be provided for the installation of
meters that will be agreeable to comply with the rules and regulations of the
Department.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.012 METERS; HAVE SINGLE CONNECTION.
   Meters for terraces and apartment houses will have a single connection with
the water system for metering of all connecting houses.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.013 METERS; PURCHASED FROM CITY; INSTALLATION.
   Meters shall be furnished and installed by the city and all costs, charges
and fees for the meter, attachments and installation shall be established by
resolution of the City Council, and shall be borne by the property owner and
shall be paid at the time the meter is installed or the property owner will
subject to a lien on the property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the control
and ownership of all meters shall remain with the city at all times.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.014 METERS; REMOVAL OF; PROHIBITION.
   All persons are forbidden to interfere with or remove a water meter from any
service any connection without first receiving permission from the Department.
Whenever a meter is removed by permission, it must be immediately returned to
the Department under penalty of having the water shut off.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.015 METERS; OWNERS OF PREMISES RESPONSIBLE FOR.
   The owner of any premises where a meter is installed shall be held
responsible for its care and protection from freezing or damage by hot water
and from injury or interference by any person or persons. The owner of any
premises where a meter is installed shall be liable for the full replacement
costs of any meter and appurtenances that have been damaged or lost.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.016 TAKING OF WATER WITHOUT PERMISSION.
   No person shall take water from any fire hydrant, valve, faucet, pipe or any
other opening connected with the city water supply system, nor shall any person
open any fire hydrant, valve or faucet for the purpose of taking water or for
any other purpose, unless the person shall first have made application for use
of water for such purpose and received permission from the Department or unless
the person is an employee of the city and is acting in the discharge of his or
her duties.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.017 SUPPLYING WATER TO OTHER PREMISES PROHIBITED.
   No person, whether owner or occupant or in possession, charge, or control of
any building, structure or premises, into which water service is introduced, or
to which water is supplied through the city water supply system, shall be
allowed to supply other persons or families or to supply any water from the
building or premises to a building, structure or premises other than the one
from which such water service is introduced, unless permitted to do so by the
Department.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.018 WATER SHUT-OFF; NOT TO BE TURNED ON WITHOUT PERMIT; VIOLATION;
SEVERANCE OF CONNECTION.
   (A)   Where the water supply to any building, structure or premises shall
have been shut off or stopped by or under the direction of the Department, or
in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, the water shall not again
be supplied to the building, structure or premises, or permitted to be turned
on therein, or thereto, unless a permit is first issued for that purpose by the
Department.
   (B)   If it shall be found that the water supply has been turned on, or into
any such building, structure or premises in violation of the provisions of this
subchapter, the Department shall, have the authority to order the severing of
the service or supply pipes by and through which the water is supplied to the
building, structure or premises.
   (C)   Where service or supply pipes are severed in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter, the severing or cutting off shall be done at the
water mains or as near thereto as practicable and no water shall again be
supplied to the building, structure or premises, or be permitted to be turned
on therein, or thereto, until the cost and expense of the severing and also any
other unpaid rates that may be still outstanding have been paid.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.019 RIGHT OF ENTRY; REFUSAL; SHUT-OFF; POWER TO REQUIRE REPAIRS.
   (A)   The officers of the city water supply system and any and every person
delegated or authorized by the Department, shall have free entry and access to
every part of any building, structure or premises, whenever the entry or access
is deemed necessary or advisable. In case any person in possession, charge or
control of any building, structure or premises, into which any officer or
person shall desire entry or access, shall refuse to permit the entry or
access, or shall do or cause to be done any act or thing for the purpose of
preventing the entry or access, the Department may turn off the service from
such building, structure or premises, until notice shall have been given that
entry or access will be permitted or provided, and until the entry or access
has been accomplished.
   (B)   The Department shall have the power and authority to inspect, and make
an examination of all pipes and fixtures connected with the city water supply
system and he or she shall have the power and authority to require any pipes or
fixtures to be repaired, removed, replaced or changed, where the same are
defective or not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or the rules
and regulations of the Department.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.020 OBSTRUCTION TO PREMISES BEING SERVICED.
   No person shall in any manner obstruct, cause or permit to be obstructed,
access to any stop-cock, water meter, proportional, indicating or recording
device, Buffalo or shut-off box, or connection with any water main or service
pipe, by any means, shift or device whatsoever, and in the event the owner or
person in possession, charge or control of the premises, after proper
notifications shall fail to remove the obstruction, the Department may withhold
water service to the building, structure or premises until the obstruction
shall be removed. The Department shall have the power to require that an
outside reading device, if necessary, be installed at the owner's expense if
access to the meter is deemed hazardous to the representative of the
Department.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.021 ONE-INCH METERS.
   (A)   All meters, including one-inch meters, shall be furnished and
installed by the city.
   (B)   The cost, charges and fees of the meter, attachments and installation
shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   The cost, charges and fees of the meter, attachments and installation
shall be borne by the property owner and shall be paid at the time the meter is
installed or the property owner will be subject to a lien on the property.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.022 DEDUCTIONS AND REBATES PROHIBITED.
   No deduction shall be made or rebates allowed to any consumer of water by or
on account of any leakage or alleged leakage in any water pipe, tank or other
apparatus or device. The amount of water registered by any meter controlling
the water supply to any building, structure or premises shall be charged and
paid for in full, irrespective of whether the water, after having been
registered, was lost by leakage accident or otherwise.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.023 WATER RATES.
   The City Council shall by resolution set all water rates.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 51.024 METER DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The city is divided into three districts as follows.
      (1)   District No. 1 covers the area starting at the south boundary line,
including the east and west sides of Joseph Campau up to and including
Holbrook, Lumpkin and Conant, Joseph Campau.
      (2)   District No. 2 covers the area North of Holbrook, east and west of
Joseph Campau up to and including Caniff.
      (3)   District No. 3 covers the area North of Caniff, east and west sides
of Joseph Campau, up to and including Carpenter Avenue.
   (B)   All meter districts, commercial and industrial accounts, to be read
and billed monthly.
   (C)   For the purpose of collecting water rates, the City Council may, by
resolution, create as many water districts as it may deem necessary.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010; Am. Ord. , passed 12-4-2013)
§ 51.025 DELINQUENT BILLS; SHUT-OFF.
   (A)   All bills under this subchapter which have not been paid on or before
the due date set forth on the bill shall be declared delinquent. If payments
are not received on or before the due date, a late fee shall be assessed. If
the water charges against any premises remain delinquent for a period of one
month, the water supply to the premises may be shut off and withheld until the
payment of the delinquent charges is made.
   (B)   Notice of shut-off shall be mailed to the property address and provide
that the water will be shut off if the bill is not paid within ten days of the
date of the notice. The notice shall provide that the owner or tenant of the
property may appeal to the Water Department within ten days of the date of the
notice if they believe the water bill is not delinquent.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010; Am. Ord. , passed 12-4-2013)
§ 51.026 LIEN; ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   As provided for in the Revenue Bond Act 94 of 1933, chapter 141.12
sec. 21 (3), “[a]ll those charges delinquent for 6 months or more, may be
certified annual to the proper tax assessing officer or agency who shall enter
the lien on the next tax roll against the premises to which the services shall
have been rendered, and the charges shall be collected and the lien shall be
enforced in the same manner as provided for in the collection of taxes assessed
upon the roll and the enforcement of the lien for the taxes.”
   (B)   The assessing officer shall enter the amount of each such delinquent
water and sewage assessments, together with 15% transfer fee upon the general
city tax roll covering the premises with legal interest upon which water and
sewer charges have accrued, and such charges shall be collected and such lien
shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for in the collection of
general city taxes assessed on such rolls and the enforcement of the lien
thereof.
   (C)   The City of Hamtramck reserves the right to certify delinquent
properties to the county to preserve the city’s lien rights in accordance with
the state and county tax laws regarding foreclosure requirements.
   (D)   Unpaid charges shall be a personal debt to the City of Hamtramck. The
city reserves the right to collect unpaid charges as allowed through Michigan’s
Act 178 of 1939, chapter 123.162, sec. 2.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010; Am. Ord. , passed 12-4-2013)
§ 51.027 SERVICE SHUT-OFF; LABOR COST; TURN-ON CHARGE
   Whenever the water is turned off from any premises at the request of the
owner or because of a violation of any ordinance, rule or regulation of the
city by the owner or occupant thereof, or the failure to pay a water bill or
charge on the premises, the same shall not be turned on again until the owner
has paid to the city the sum to cover the labor cost, and in cases where
extraordinary labor is required, the additional sum as will compensate for the
additional labor and parts.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 51.028 METER READING.
   The Department shall have charge of the reading of all meters and shall keep
a record of all meter readings. The Department shall keep accounts of the
charges for water furnished to all premises, whether upon a meter or flat rate,
and shall render bills for same. All water charges shall be collected by the
City. All payments made to the City shall be reported to the Department, who
shall credit the sum to the property account.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 51.029 USE AND OPERATION OF WATER SYSTEM.
   Subject to the approval of the City Council, the Department shall from time
to time establish all necessary rules and regulations in respect to the use and
operation of the city water supply system, in accordance with the provisions of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
COLLECTION OF WATER DEPOSIT
§ 51.040 INTENT.
   The intent of this subchapter is to provide for the collection of a water
deposit if an affidavit is filed with the Department indicating that the
premises are leased and that the lessee is responsible for the water account
pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 178 of the Public Acts of Michigan of
1939 (M.C.L.A. § 123.161 et seq., MSA 5.2531(1) et seq.), as amended.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 51.041 COLLECTION.
   The Department shall collect a deposit equivalent to one year's water supply
based upon records and estimates, the deposit to be collected within one week
of an affidavit being filed pursuant to Act 178 of the Public Acts of Michigan
of 1939 (M.C.L.A. § 123.161 et seq., MSA 5.2531(1) et seq.) indicating that a
lessee is responsible for the water bill. Once the deposit is collected the
lessee will be responsible for all charges to the water account. If payment
goes delinquent for two bills submitted by the Department the water will be
shut off until proper payment is made to the city.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 51.042 DEPOSIT; IF NOT PAID.
   If the deposit is not paid within seven days:
   (A)   The water supply will be shut off;
   (B)   The property or specific water account for the failure to post the
deposit, and remain shut off until the deposit is paid.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
DRINKING WATER WELLS
§ 51.050 PROHIBITION.
   The installation of drinking water wells within the city is prohibited.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.051 FILING OF COPY.
   A copy of this subchapter shall be filed with the Wayne County Register of
Deeds.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 51.052 NOTICE TO BE GIVEN.
   Notice of any proposed modification of this subchapter, the lapsing or
revocation of this subchapter shall be given to the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources and Environment.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
WATER CONSERVATION
§ 51.060 DETERMINATION.
   Whenever the Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit shall
determine that the amount of pump age of water from its distribution system has
reached a volume so that, unless restricted, the public health, safety and
general welfare is likely to be endangered, it shall prescribe rules and/or
regulations to conserve the water supply during the emergency.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 51.061 PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any rule
and/or regulation, provided, that before any rule and/or regulation shall
become effective it shall be approved by resolution of the City Council, and
then published in one issue of a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.062 RULES; EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
   (A)   Lawn sprinkling is prohibited on odd/even days by address between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. Monday through Friday.
   (B)   Water used by the city is to be curtailed by restrictions at least
equal to those of the City of Detroit, and it is to be so notified immediately
under the appropriate provisions of our contract.
   (C)   The Board of Water Commissioners of Detroit may relax or waive any
rule whenever in their judgment it may be done safely.
   (D)   This subchapter shall be effective June 1 to September 30, inclusive.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
CROSS-CONNECTIONS
§ 51.110 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BACKFLOW. Water of questionable quality, waste, or other contaminants
entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. A connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances
through which a backflow could occur.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 51.111 CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED; RULES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the
Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment being R 325.11401 to R
325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 51.112 INSPECTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the city to cause inspections to be made of all
properties served by the public water supply where cross-connections with the
public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and re-
inspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established
by the city and as approved by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and
Environment.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 51.113 RIGHT OF ENTRY; INFORMATION.
   The representative of the city shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems
thereof for cross-connections. On request, the owner, lessees, or occupants of
any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent
information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The
refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be
deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connection.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.114 DISCONTINUING CROSS-CONNECTION SERVICE.
   The city is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service
after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of
this subchapter exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply
system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross-
connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 51.115 TESTING OF DEVICES.
   All testable backflow prevention devices shall be tested initially upon
installation in order to confirm that the device is working properly.
Subsequent testing of devices shall be conducted at a time interval specified
by the city and in accordance with Michigan Department of Environmental Quality
requirements. Only individuals approved by the city shall be qualified to
perform such testing. Individual(s) shall certify the results of his or her
testing.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.116 PROTECTION OF POTABLE WATER SUPPLY.
   Potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public
water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by
this subchapter and by the State and the City Plumbing Code. Any water outlet
which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied
by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as:
   WATER UNSAFE
   FOR DRINKING
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.117 SUPPLEMENTAL TO STATE PLUMBING CODE.
   This subchapter does not supersede the State Plumbing Code but is
supplementary to it.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.
   (B)   Public water service. Any violation of or failure to comply with the
provisions of §§
51.001 through
51.029 shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $500 and costs of
prosecution or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both a fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court, and when the fine and costs are
imposed, the court may provide that in default of the payment thereof, the
offender shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days, unless the
fine and costs shall be sooner paid provided, no person shall be imprisoned for
a single violation of this subchapter for a longer period than 90 days.
   (C)   Drinking water wells. Any person or firm found guilty of having
violated any of the provisions of §§
51.050 through
51.052 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days or both a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
   (D)   Water conservation. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of §§
51.060 through
51.062 or of any rule and/or regulation lawfully promulgated therewith, shall
upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine at the discretion of the court.
   (E)   Cross-connection. Any person or customer found guilty of violating any
of §§
51.110 through
51.117 or any written order of the city in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine
of not to exceed $500 for each violation. Each day upon which a violation of
the provisions of §§
51.110 through
51.117 shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional violation for the
purpose of §§
51.110 through
51.117.
(Ord. 2010-2, passed 4-27-2010)
CHAPTER 52: WASTEWATER
Section
   
52.001   Delegation
   
52.002   Purpose
   
52.003   Authority
   
52.004   Definitions
   
52.005   Discharge prohibitions
   
52.006   Fees
   
52.007   Wastewater discharge permits
   
52.008   Monitoring facilities
   
52.009   Inspection, sampling and record-keeping
   
52.010   Confidential information
   
52.011   Statutes, laws and regulations
   
52.012   Enforcement
   
52.013   Reconsideration and appeal
§ 52.001 DELEGATION.
   The City of Detroit, through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, as
the state approved control authority, is authorized to administer and enforce
the provisions of this chapter on behalf of the city. The city has executed and
hereby ratifies its delegation agreement with the City of Detroit through the
Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, which sets forth the terms and
conditions of such delegated authority, consistent with this chapter, and shall
allow the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to perform the specific
responsibilities of Control Authority pursuant to state and federal law.
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)
§ 52.002 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is the protection of the environment, and
of public health and safety by abating and preventing pollution through the
regulation and control of the quantity and quality of wastes admitted to or
discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment system under the
jurisdiction of the city and enabling the city to comply with all applicable
state and federal laws required by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
being 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., and the general pretreatment regulations, being
40 C.F.R. Part 403.
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the
resulting sludge, or will pose a hazard to the health or welfare of the people
or of employees of the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
system which will pass inadequately treated through the system into receiving
waters, the atmosphere or the environment, or otherwise be incompatible with
the system;
      (3)   To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim wastewater or
sludge from the system in an economical and advantageous manner; and
      (4)   To provide for the recovery of the costs from users of the
wastewater collection and treatment system sufficient to administer regulatory
activities and meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or
replacement of the system.
   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of contributors to the
Detroit and city wastewater collection and treatment system through the
issuance of wastewater discharge permits to certain users and through the
enforcement of general requirements for all users, authorizes monitoring and
enforcement, and authorizes fees and penalties.
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)
§ 52.003 AUTHORITY.
   By virtue of the obligations and authority placed upon the city by the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as
amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq; the 1963 Constitution of the State of
Michigan; Public Act 245 of 1929, as amended, being M.C.L.A. § 323.1 et seq;
M.S.A. 3.521 et seq; the 2005 Hamtramck City Charter; the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for the City of Detroit Publicly
Owned Treatment Works (POTW); the Consent Judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of
Detroit et al, Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case
No.77-1100, as amended; and existing or future contracts between the Board of
Water Commissioners and suburban communities or other governmental or private
entities; or by virtue of common law usage of the system, this chapter shall
apply to every user contributing or causing to be contributed, or discharging,
pollutants or wastewater into the wastewater collection and treatment system of
the City of Detroit POTW.
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)
§ 52.004 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER.
         (a)   Responsible corporate officer, where the industrial user
submitting the reports required by this chapter is a corporation, who is either
the president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of a corporation in
charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs
similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or the manager
of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing
more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding
$25,000,000 in second-quarter 1980 dollars, when authority to execute documents
has been assigned or delegated to said manager in accordance with corporate
procedures; or
         (b)   A general partner or proprietor where the industrial user
submitting the reports required by this chapter is a partnership or sole
proprietorship respectively. (See §
52.005(N))
      AVAILABLE CYANIDE. The quantity of cyanide that consists of cyanide ion
(CN) hydrogen cyanide in water (HCNaq), and the cyano-complexes of zinc,
copper, cadmium, mercury nickel and silver, determined by EPA method OIA-1677,
or other method designated as a standard method or approved under 40 C.F.R.
Part 136.
      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). Programs, practices, procedures or other
directed efforts initiated and implemented by the user which can or do lead to
the reduction, conservation or minimization of pollutants being introduced into
the ecosystem, including but are not limited to the Detroit sewer system. BMPs
include, but are not limited to, equipment or technology modifications, process
or procedure modifications, reformulation or redesign of products, substitution
of raw materials, and improvements in housekeeping, maintenance, training, or
inventory control and may include technical and economic considerations.
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quality of dissolved oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure five days at 20º C. expressed in terms of mass and concentration
(milligrams per liter (mg/l)) as measured by standard methods.
      BOARD. The Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit.
      BYPASS. The intentional diversion of a wastestream from any portion of an
industrial user’s treatment facility (see 40 C.F.R. § 403.17).
      CENTRALIZED WASTE TREATMENT (CWT) FACILITY. Any facility that treats any
hazardous or non-hazardous industrial waste received from off-site by tanker
truck, trailer roll-off bins, drums, barges, or any other forms of shipment
including:
         (a)   A facility that treats industrial waste received exclusively
from off-site; and
         (b)   A facility that treats industrial waste generated on-site as
well as industrial waste received from off-site.
      COMPATIBLE INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. Wastewater that is produced by an
industrial user which has a pollutant strength or characteristics similar to
those found in domestic wastewater, and which can be efficiently and
effectively transported and treated with domestic wastewater.
      COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Pollutants which can be effectively removed by the
POTW treatment system to within the acceptable levels for the POTW residuals
and the receiving stream.
      COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A collection of individual samples which are obtained
at regular intervals and collected on a time-proportional or flow-proportional
basis over a specified period and which provides a representative sample of the
average stream during the sampling period. A minimum of four aliquot per 24
hours shall be used where the sample is manually collected. (See 40 C.F.R. §
403, Appendix E)
      CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. The information which would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets of the industrial user. (See §
52.010)
      CONTROL AUTHORITY. The Detroit Water and Sewerage Department which has
been officially designated as such by the state under the provisions of 40
C.F.R. § 403.12. (See 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(a))
      COOLING WATER. The non-contact water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, and whose only function is the exchange
of heat.
      DAYS. Consecutive calendar days for the purpose of computing a period of
time prescribed or allowed by this chapter.
      DEPARTMENT. The City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department and
authorized employees of the Department.
      DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the state.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department or
the Director’s designee.
      DISCHARGER. A person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes, or
permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW.
      DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Waste and wastewater from humans or household operations
which is discharged to, or otherwise enters, a treatment works.
      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or ADMINISTRATOR or EPA ADMINISTRATOR.
The United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the
authorized representatives or employees of the EPA.
      FACILITY. A location, which contributes, causes or permits wastewater to
be discharged into the POTW including, but not limited to, a place of business,
endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or
charitable.
      FATS, OILS OR GREASE (FOG). Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats,
waxes, oils, and any other nonvolatile material of animal, vegetable or mineral
origin that’s extractable by solvent in accordance with standard methods.
      FLOW PROPORTIONAL SAMPLE. A composite sample taken with regard to the
flow rate of the wastestream.
      GRAB SAMPLE. An individual sample collected over a period of time not
exceeding 15 minutes, which reasonably reflects the characteristics of the
stream at the time of sampling.
      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction of
pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under 33 U.S.C.
§ 1317(b), (c) or (d).
      INDUSTRIAL USER. A person who contributes, causes or permits wastewater
to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited to, a place of
business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private,
commercial or charitable but excludes single family and multi-family
residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste
characteristics.
      INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form of energy,
or combination thereof, resulting from any processes of industry,
manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the development, recovery
or processing of natural resources.
      INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge
or discharges from other sources, both:
         (a)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
         (b)   Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued
thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the
Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345, the Solid Waste Disposal
Act (SWDA), as amended, (including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA), and state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries
Act.
      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with 33 U.S.C.
§ 1317 (b) and (c) which applies to a specific class or category of industrial
users.
      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit
issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
      NEW SOURCE.
         (a)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under 33
U.S.C. § 1317(c) which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided, that the
building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site where no
other source is located; the building, structure, facility or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or the production or wastewater generating
processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the
extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source should be considered;
         (b)   Construction on a site where an existing source is located
resulting in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of subsection (a) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces,
or adds to existing process or production equipment; or
         (c)   Construction of a new source has commenced where the owner or
operator has begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site
construction program: any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or
removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities that are necessary for
the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment;
or entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities
or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable
time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified
without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this section.
      PASS THROUGH. Discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, unit of
government, school district, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agent or assigns.
      pH. The intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated
by taking the negative base-ten logarithm of the hydrogen ion activity.
Activity is deemed to be equal to concentration in moles per liter.
      POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar
dirt, or industrial, municipal and agricultural waste which is discharged into
water.
      POLLUTION. The introduction of any pollutant that, alone or in
combination with any other substance, can or does result in the degradation or
impairment of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of
water.
      PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the removal of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction, removal or
alteration may be attained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or
process changes by other means, except as prohibited by federal, state or local
law, rules and regulations.
      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirements
related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on
an industrial user. (See 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(r))
      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. All national categorical pretreatment standards,
the general prohibitions specified in 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(a), the specific
prohibitions delineated in 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(b), and the local or specific
limits developed pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(c), including the discharge
prohibitions specified in §
52.005.
      PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer of any type controlled by a governmental entity.
      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works as defined by 33
U.S.C. § 1292(2)(A) which is owned by a state or municipality, as defined in 33
U.S.C. § 1362, including:
         (a)   Any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment,
recycling, or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid
nature;
         (b)   Sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey
wastewater to a POTW treatment plant; or
         (c)   The municipality, as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362, which has
jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a
treatment works.
      POTW TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater, including recycling and reclamation of wastewater.
      QUANTIFICATION LEVEL. The measurement of the concentration of a
contaminant obtained by using a specified laboratory procedure calculated at a
specified concentration above the detection level. It is considered the lowest
concentration at which a particular contaminant can be quantitatively measured
using a specified laboratory procedure for monitoring of the contaminant.
      REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE. Any sample of wastewater, which accurately and
precisely represents the actual quality, character, and condition of one or
more pollutants in the wastestream being sampled. REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLES shall
be collected and analyzed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136.
      SANITARY WASTEWATER. The portion of wastewater that is not attributable
to industrial activities and is similar to discharges from domestic sources
including, but not limited to, discharges from sanitary facilities and
discharges incident to the preparation of food for on-site non-commercial
consumption.
      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE. Any violation which meets one or more of the
following criteria:
         (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as
those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum limit or the average limit for
the same parameter;
         (b)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken
during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum
limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD,
TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
         (c)   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily
maximum or longer term average) that the Department determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through
including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
         (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health or welfare, or to the environment, or has resulted
in the POTW’s exercise of its emergency authority;
         (e)   Failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone contained in a
local control mechanism, or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance within 90 days after the
scheduled date;
         (f)   Failure to provide required reports such as baseline monitoring
reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and
reports on compliance with compliance schedules within 30 days after the due
date;
         (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
         (h)   Any other violation or group of violations which the Department
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS. Any user of the POTW who:
         (a)   Has an average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons per day or more
of process wastewater excluding sanitary, boiler blowdown, and noncontact
cooling water;
         (b)    Has discharges subject to the national categorical pretreatment
standards;
         (c)    Requires pretreatment to comply with the specific pollutant
limitations of this chapter;
         (d)    Has in its discharge toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to 33
U.S.C. § 1317, or other applicable federal and state laws or regulations, that
are in concentrations and volumes which are subject to regulation under this
chapter as determined by the Department;
         (e)   Is required to obtain a permit for the treatment, storage or
disposal of hazardous waste pursuant to regulations adopted by this state or
adopted under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Federal
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended, and may or does contribute
or allow waste or wastewater into the POTW including, but not limited to,
leachate or runoff; or
         (f)   Is found by the City of Detroit or the city to have a reasonable
potential for adverse effect, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on the POTW operation, the quality of sludge, the
POTW’s effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the POTW.
      SLUG. Any discharge of a non-routine episodic nature including, but not
limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.
      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended.
      STANDARD METHODS. Methods set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, “Guidelines
for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants” or the laboratory
procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of
“Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater” prepared and
published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water
Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation, or methods set
forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, “Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for
Analysis of Pollutants.” Where these two references are in disagreement
regarding procedures for the analysis of a specific pollutant, the methods
given in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 shall be followed.
      STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TOTAL) . The total suspended matter which floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and is
removable by laboratory filtration or as measured by standard methods.
      TOTAL PCB. The sum of the individual analytical results for each of the
PCB aroclors 1016, 1221, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 1260 during any single
sampling event with any aroclor result less than the quantification level being
treated as zero.
      TOTAL PHENOLIC COMPOUNDS. The sum of the individual analytical results
for each of the phenolic compounds of 2-chlorophenol, 4-chlorophenol, 4-chloro-
3-methylphenol, 2,4-dichlorophenol, 2,4-dinitrophenol, 4-methylphenol, 4-
nitrophenol, and phenol during any single sampling event expressed in mg/l.
      TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants designated as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency under the provisions of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C.
§ 1317, or included in the Critical Materials Register promulgated by the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or by other federal or state
laws, rules or regulations.
      TRADE SECRET. The whole, or any portion or phase, of any proprietary
manufacturing process or method, not patented, which is secret, is useful in
compounding an article of trade having a commercial value, and whose secrecy
the owner has taken reasonable measures to prevent from becoming available to
persons other than those selected by the owner to have access for limited
purposes but excludes any information regarding the quantum or character of
waste products or their constituents discharged or sought to be discharged into
the Detroit wastewater treatment plant, or into the wastewater system tributary
thereto.
      UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with limits imposed under this chapter or with national
categorical pretreatment standards due to factors beyond the reasonable control
of the industrial user but excludes noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
      USER. Any person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes or
permits the discharge of wastewater into the POTW as defined herein.
      WASTEWATER or WASTESTREAM. The liquid and water-carried industrial or
domestic wastes of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to or
permitted to enter the POTW including infiltration and inflow waters, storm
water, and cooling water.
      WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS. Permits issued by the Department in
accordance with §
52.007.
      WATERS OF THE STATE. Groundwater, lakes, rivers, streams, all other
watercourses and waters within the confines of this state as well as bordering
this state in the form of the Great Lakes.
   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, the following acronyms shall have the
meanings designated by this section:
BMR    Baseline monitoring report
BOD    Biochemical oxygen demand
C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations
EPA    Environmental Protection Agency
FOG    Fats, oil or grease
l      liter
MDEQ   Mighican Department of Environment Quality
mg     milligrams
mg/l   milligrams per liter
NPDES  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW   Publicly Owned Treatment Works
RCRA   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq
SIC    Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA   Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
TSS    Total suspended solids
U.S.C. United States Code
 
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)
§ 52.005 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   General pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater
which will cause interference or pass through. These general discharge
prohibitions shall apply to all users of the POTW whether or not the user is
subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or to any other federal,
state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. In addition, it shall
be unlawful for a user to discharge into the POTW:
      (1)   Any liquid, solid or gas, which by reason of its nature or
quantity, is sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to
create a fire or explosion hazard or to be injurious in any other way to
persons, to the POTW, or to the operations of the POTW. Pollutants, which
create a fire or explosion hazard in a POTW, include, but are not limited to,
wastestreams with a closed cup flash point of less than 140° F. or 60° C. using
the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;
      (2)   Any solid or viscous substance in concentrations or quantities,
which are sufficient to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other
encumbrances to the operation of the POTW, including, but not limited to,
grease, animal guts or tissues, bones, hair, hides or fleshing, entrails, whole
blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, cement, spent lime, stone or marble
dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, strings, fibers,
spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues,
residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubrication oil, mud or glass
grinding or polishing wastes, or tumbling and deburring stones;
      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 units or greater than
11.5 units;
      (4)   Any wastewater containing petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting
oil, products of mineral oil origin, or toxic pollutants in sufficient
concentration or quantity either singly or by interaction with other pollutants
to cause interference, or pass through, or constitute a hazard to humans or
animals;
      (5)   Any liquid, gas, solid or form of energy, which either singly or by
interaction with other waste is sufficient to create toxic gas, vapor, or fume
within the POTW in quantities that may cause acute worker health and safety
problems, or may cause a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient
to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair;
      (6)   Any substance which is sufficient to cause the POTW’s effluent or
any other product of the POTW, such as residue, sludge, or scum to be
unsuitable for reclamation processing where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and
reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause
the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria guidelines
or regulations developed under 33 U.S.C. § 1345, with any criteria, guidelines,
or developed and promulgated regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Federal Clean Air Act,
the Federal Toxic Substances Control Act, or with state criteria applicable to
the sludge management method being used;
      (7)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate either the
consent judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al, Federal District Court
for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No. 77-1100, or the City of Detroit’s
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit;
      (8)   Any discharge having a color uncharacteristic of the wastewater
being discharged;
      (9)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into a public sewer which
exceeds 150° F. or which will cause the influent at the wastewater treatment
plant to rise above 104° F. (40° C.);
      (10)   Any pollutant discharge which constitutes a slug;
      (11)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in compliance
with applicable federal or state regulations;
      (12)   Any floating fats, oil or grease which are sufficient to cause
interference with or pass through the POTW; or
      (13)   Any solid materials having a specific gravity greater than 1.2 or
a cross section dimension of one-half inch or greater which are sufficient to
cause interference with the POTW.
   (B)   Specific pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of the following limitations:
      (1)   Compatible pollutants. See
Appendix C.
      (2)   Non-compatible pollutants. No user shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of:
 mg/l
                         mg/l
Arsenic (As)             1.0
Cadmium (Cd)             See
                         Appendix C
Chromium (Cr)            25.0
Copper (Cu)              2.5
Cyanide (CN) (available) 1.0
Iron (Fe)                1000.0
Lead (Pb)                1.0
Nickel (Ni)              5.0
Silver (Ag)              1.0
Zinc (Zn)                7.3
Total Phenolic Compounds 1.0 or see
                         Appendix B
All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period
representative of an industrial user’s discharge, and in accordance with 40
C.F.R. Part 136
 
         (a)   The limitation for Total PCB is non-detect. Total PCB shall not
be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA Method 608, and the
quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 ugm/l, unless a higher level is
appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or
more samples indicate detectable levels of Total PCB, the user shall be
required to demonstrate compliance. For purposes of this section, this
demonstration may be made using analytical data showing that the Total PCB
concentration is below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in
accordance with 56-3-66.1(d).
         (b)   The limitation of Mercury (Hg) is non-detect. Mercury (Hg) shall
not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA Method 245.1, and
the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 ugm/l, unless a higher level is
appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or
more samples indicate detectable levels of Mercury, the user shall be required
to demonstrate compliance. For the purposes of this section, this demonstration
may be made using analytical data showing that the mercury concentration is
below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with 56-3-66.1
(d). All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period
representative of an industrial user's discharge, and in accordance 40 C.F.R.
Part 136.
      (3)   Compliance period. Within 30 days of the effective date of this
chapter, the Department shall notify all industrial users operating under an
effective wastewater discharge permit of the requirement to submit a compliance
report within 180 days after the effective date of this chapter. The compliance
report shall demonstrate the user’s compliance or non-compliance with these
limitations, and, in the event of non-compliance, include the submission of a
plan and schedule for achieving compliance with the stated limitation. In no
event shall a compliance schedule exceed 18 months from the effective date of
this chapter. An industrial user who does not demonstrate compliance may
petition the Department for a second extension as part of an administrative
consent order. The Department shall include appropriate monitoring, reporting,
and penalties into an administrative consent order that relates to a second
extension, and shall enter into such an agreement only upon a good-faith
showing by the industrial user of the actions taken to achieve compliance with
this provision.
   (C)   National categorical pretreatment standards. All users shall comply
with the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards and
requirements promulgated pursuant to the act as set forth in 40 C.F.R.
Subchapter N, effluent guidelines and standards, which are hereby incorporated
by reference and with all other applicable standards and requirements,
provided, that where a more stringent standard or requirement is applicable
pursuant to state law or regulation, or to this chapter, then the more
stringent standard or requirement shall be controlling. Affected dischargers
shall comply with applicable reporting requirements under 40 C.F.R. Part 403
and as established by the Department. The national categorical pretreatment
standards which have been promulgated as of the effective date of this section
are delineated in Appendix A.
      (1)   Intake water adjustment. Industrial users seeking adjustment of
national categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of
pollutants in their intake water must comply with the requirements of 40 C.F.R.
§ 403.15. Upon notification of approval by the Department, the adjustment shall
be applied by modifying the permit accordingly. Intake water adjustments are
not effective until incorporated into an industrial user’s permit.
      (2)   Modification of national categorical pretreatment standards. The
Department may apply to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or to the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, whichever is appropriate, for
authorization to grant removal credits in accordance with the requirements and
procedures in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7. The authorization may be granted only when the
POTW treatment plant can achieve consistent removal for each pollutant for
which a removal credit is being sought, provided, that any limitation of such
pollutant(s) in the NPDES permit neither are being exceeded nor pose the
prospect of being exceeded as a result of the removal credit being granted.
Where such authorization is given to the Department, any industrial user
desiring to obtain such credit shall make an application to the Department,
consistent with the provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.7 and of this chapter. Any
credits which may be granted under this section may be subject to modification
or revocation as specified in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7, or as determined by the
Department. A requisite to the granting of any removal credit may be that the
industrial user pay a surcharge based upon the amounts of such pollutants
removed by the POTW, such surcharge being based upon fees or rates which the
Board may establish and, when appropriate, revise from time to time. Permits
shall reflect, or be modified to reflect, any credit granted pursuant to this
section.
      (3)   New sources. Industrial users who meet the new sources criteria
shall install, maintain in operating condition, and start-up all pollution
control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before
beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time and not to exceed 90
days, new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards.
      (4)   Concentration and mass limits. When limits in a categorical
pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit
of production, the Department may convert the limits to equivalent limitations
expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent
concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to
individual industrial users. Equivalent limitations shall be calculated in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. 403.6(c)(3) and/or 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c)(4) and shall
be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of 33 U.S.C. § 317(d) and of
this chapter. Industrial users will be required to comply with the equivalent
limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the
equivalent limitations were derived.
      (5)   Reporting requirements for industrial users upon effective date of
categorical pretreatment standards-baseline report. Within 180 days after the
effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the
final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission
under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users
subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging
into or scheduled to discharge into the Detroit POTW shall submit to the
Department a report containing the information listed in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)
(1-7). Where reports containing this information have already been submitted to
the Director or regional administrator in compliance with the requirement of 40
C.F.R. § 128.140(b), the industrial user will not be required to resubmit this
information. At least 90 days before commencement of any discharge, each new
source and any existing sources that become industrial users after the
promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall submit to
the Department a report which contains the information listed in 40 C.F.R. §
403.12(b)(1-5). In such report, new sources shall include information
concerning the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet
applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall provide estimates of the
information requested in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)(4) and (5).
   (D)   Dilution prohibited. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an
applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no user shall increase the use
of process water, or in any way dilute or attempt to dilute a discharge as a
partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance
with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment
standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation or requirement imposed
by the city, the City of Detroit or by the state.
   (E)   Hauled in wastewater. Any waste material or wastewater which is hauled
into or within the service region for discharge to the POTW is subject to the
requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to, permits,
inspection, monitoring and enforcement. Unloading liquid or solid waste from
hauling vehicles, directly or indirectly, into the POTW, with or without the
benefit of pretreatment, is prohibited unless the person proposing to unload
such waste has applied for and received a permit from the Department for
unloading such waste in accordance with the Board’s rules pertaining thereto.
The discharger shall be subject to applicable terms and conditions, surcharges,
fees or rates as established by the Board. Hauled in wastewater shall only be
discharged at points designated by the POTW after authorization or approval
issued pursuant to the general permit requirements specified in §
52.007. The Department may establish specific limitations for sludge from
municipally owned or operated POTW treatment plants which are different than
the specific limitations in this chapter.
   (F)   Centralized waste treatment.
      (1)   It is unlawful for a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility to
discharge any industrial waste or wastewater into the POTW without a wastewater
discharge permit from the Department. Any authorization granted, or permit
issued, by the Department to a Centralized Waste Treatment (CWT) facility shall
specify the type of wastewater for which treatment is provided, and discharge
approval is sought, from the POTW. Unless such industrial waste or wastewater
is determined by the Department to require further authorization, a centralized
waste treatment (CWT) facility that has submitted an application to, and
received previous approval from, the Department to discharge wastewater is not
required to obtain further authorization from the Department before discharging
such wastewater. An industrial user, that provides centralized waste treatment
services and files an application for the treatment and discharge of such types
of wastewater to the POTW, shall provide the following minimum information in
support thereof:
         (a)   The general nature, source and process(es) generating the type
of wastewater. Any wastewater, which is generated from those processes and is
subject to national categorical pretreatment standards as delineated in
Appendix A, shall be so designated;
         (b)   The identity of the toxic pollutants known or suspected to be
present in the wastewater;
         (c)   At least one sample report showing the results of an analysis
for the EPA priority pollutants for each type of wastewater for which
application is made in division (F)(1) (a) of this section;
         (d)   A statement, that is certified by a professional engineer, which
addresses the treatability and compatibility of the wastewater, received or
collected by the facility’s treatment process(es);
         (e)   The identity of the materials and/or pollutants whose transport
or treatment are regulated by the EPA, by the state, or by any other
governmental agency. Upon request, the Centralized Waste Treatment (CWT)
facility shall provide a copy of its permit and/or license to the Department;
and
         (f)   Other information requested by the Department including, but not
limited to, information required by §
52.007(C)(1) through (18) or by rules adopted by the Board.
      (2)   The discharge from a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility
will be deemed approved for those specific types of wastewater delineated in a
permit and, upon issuance of such permit in accordance with the procedures
contained in §
52.007, will be deemed approved for discharge into the POTW. The Centralized
Waste Treatment (CWT) facility shall comply with all applicable provisions
contained in §
52.007 regarding permits. In furtherance of its obligations as control
authority, the Department may include in the permit a requirement to report at
selected intervals the information mandated in subsections (1)(a) through (f)
of this section.
      (3)   All users granted a permit under this section shall maintain
records which, at a minimum, identify the source, volume, character, and
constituents of the wastewater accepted for treatment and disposal. These
records may be reviewed at any time by the Department.
   (G)   Groundwater discharges. Unless authorization has been granted by the
Department, the discharge of any groundwater into the POTW is prohibited.
      (1)   The Department may authorize the discharge of groundwater resulting
from maintenance and related activities of gas, steam, or electrical utilities
through the use of general permits. Subject to appropriate reporting
requirements, the general permit shall authorize discharge in accordance with
the terms of the permit. Utilities shall comply with this provision within 180
days after its enactment.
      (2)   If a person, who proposes to discharge groundwater resulting from
purge, response activity, or UST projects, has applied for and received a
permit from the Department, the Department may authorize the discharge of such
wastewater. Permits shall be issued in accordance with the procedures contained
in §
52.007 or in accordance with any rules adopted by the Board.
   (H)   Right of revision. The City of Detroit and the city reserve the right
to establish rules or regulations adopted by the Board, additional or more
stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW. These rules
and regulations shall be adopted in accordance with the rule-making procedures
Section 2-111 of the 1997 Detroit City Charter and the 2005 Hamtramck City
Charter, if any. Ninety days after adoption by the Board, industrial users
shall comply with such rules and regulations.
   (I)   Accidental discharges.
      (1)   (a)   Each industrial user, which does not currently have an
approved spill prevention plan or slug control plan, shall provide protection
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated
by this chapter, and all significant industrial users shall submit to the
Department detailed plans which show facilities and operating procedures to be
implemented to provide protection against such accidental discharges.
Facilities and measures to prevent and abate accidental discharges shall be
implemented, provided, and maintained at the owner’s or industrial user’s cost
or expense. Unless the significant industrial user has an approved spill
prevention or slug control plan, all existing significant industrial users
shall complete and submit such a plan within 60 days of the effective date of
this chapter. New significant industrial users shall submit such a plan prior
to the time they commence discharging.
         (b)   For purposes of this section, the information provided shall
include the approximate average and maximum quantities of such prohibited
materials or substances kept on the premises in the form of raw materials,
chemicals and/or waste therefrom and the containment capacity for each. Only
substances that are in a form which could readily be carried into the POTW and
constitute a concentration of 5% or greater in the raw material, chemical
solution or waste material, are required to be reported. Volumes of less than
55 gallons, or the equivalent thereof, need not be reported unless lesser
quantities could cause pass through or cause interference with the POTW.
         (c)   The industrial user shall promptly notify the Department of any
significant changes or modifications to the plan including, but not limited to,
a change in the contact person, or substance inventory.
      (2)   At least once every two years, the Department shall evaluate
whether a significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges,
as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(2)(v). Unless otherwise provided, all
significant users shall complete, implement, and submit such a plan within 30
days of notification by the Department.
   (J)   Notification requirements. Unless a different notice is provided by
this chapter or applicable law, within one hour of becoming aware of a
discharge into the POTW which exceeds or does not conform with federal, state
or city laws, rules, regulations or permit requirements, or which could cause
problems to the POTW, or which has the potential to cause the industrial user
to implement its plan prepared in accordance with division (I)(1) of this
section, the industrial user shall telephone the Department at its control
center and notify the Department of the discharge. The notification shall
include the name of the caller, the location and time of discharge, the type of
wastewater, the estimated concentration of excessive or prohibited pollutants
and estimated volume, and the measures taken, or being taken, to abate the
discharge into the POTW. Within five calendar days after the discharge, the
industrial user shall submit a detailed written report describing the cause of
the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences and when required by the Department, the industrial user’s
wastewater discharge permit may be modified to include additional measures to
prevent such future occurrences. The notification shall not relieve the
industrial user of any expense, cost of treatment, loss, damages or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills,
or any other environmental impairment or any other damage to person or
property.
   (K)   Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
industrial user’s bulletin board, or other prominent place, advising employees
whom to contact in the Department in the event of an actual or excessive or
prohibited discharge.
   (L)   Recovery of costs. Any user discharging in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, which produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes
damage to or impairs the Department’s POTW, or causes the Department to violate
its NPDES permit, shall be liable to the Department for any expense, loss,
damage, penalty or fine incurred by the Department because of said violation or
discharge. Prior to assessing such costs, the Department shall notify the user
of its determination that the user’s discharge was the proximate cause of such
damage, obstruction, impairment, or violation of the city’s NPDES permit and
the Department’s intent to assess such costs to the user. Any notice shall
include written documentation which substantiates the determination of
proximate cause and a breakdown of cost estimates. Failure to pay the assessed
costs shall constitute a violation of this chapter. The charge shall be in
addition to, and not in lieu of, any penalties or remedies provided under this
chapter, or this code, or other statutes and regulations, or at law or in
equity.
   (M)   Hazardous waste notification. All industrial users, who discharge into
the city collection system, shall notify the Department in writing of any
discharge of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 261. The notification must comply with the
requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(p).
   (N)   Authorized representative. The authorized representative, as defined
in §
52.004(A)(2), may designate a duly authorized representative of the individual
designated in §
52.004(A)(2)(a) or (b) where:
      (1)   The authorization is made in writing by the individual defined in §
52.004;
      (2)   The authorization specifies either an individual or a position
having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility where the
industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager,
operator of a well or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent
responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for
the company; and
      (3)   The written authorization is submitted to the Department.
   (O)   Pollution prevention. The Department shall encourage and support
industrial users to develop and implement pollution prevention programs that
are designed to eliminate or reduce pollutant contributions beyond the levels
required by this chapter. The Department may require an industrial user to
implement pollution prevention initiatives or BMP, as part of an enforcement
response, or as necessary to comply with its NPDES permit.
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)
§ 52.006 FEES.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of costs
from users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees established by the Board
shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the operation, maintenance,
improvement or replacement of the system, or as provided by law or by Board
action.
   (B)   The Board shall adopt charges and fees which shall include, but not be
limited to:
      (1)   Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing, operating,
maintaining, or improving the Department’s industrial waste control and
pretreatment programs;
      (2)   User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration or quantity
of specific pollutants in the discharge, and treatment costs including sludge
handling and disposal;
      (3)   Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for hearings including,
but not limited to, expenses regarding hearings officers, court reporters, and
transcriptions; and
      (4)   Other fees, which the Board may deem necessary, to carry out the
requirements contained herein, or as may be required by law.
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)
§ 52.007 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.
   (A)   Required. It shall be unlawful for users to discharge into the POTW
any wastewater which will cause interference or pass through, or otherwise not
comply with the discharge prohibitions of §
52.005. It shall be unlawful for a significant industrial user to discharge
into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the Detroit Water and
Sewerage Department. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the Department
through permit, order, rule or regulation, any discharge must be in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
      (1)   All significant industrial users, which are in existence on the
effective date of this chapter, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit
within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter. Significant industrial
users who are currently operating with a valid wastewater discharge permit are
not subject to this provision. These applications are to include all
information specified in §
52.007(C) and, where applicable, any additional information which may be needed
to satisfy the federal baseline monitoring report requirements of 40 C.F.R. §
403.12(b).
      (2)   All new significant users shall apply for a wastewater discharge
permit at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge. The application
must include all information specified in §
52.007(C) and, where applicable, any additional information that may be needed
to satisfy the federal BMR requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b). Until a
permit is issued and finalized by the Department, no discharge shall be made
into the POTW.
      (3)   Any user, who proposes to discharge any wastewater other than
sanitary or noncontact cooling water into the POTW, shall request approval from
the Department for the discharge(s) at least 30 days prior to the commencement
of the discharge.
   (B)   Permit application or reapplication. The Department may require any
user to complete a questionnaire and/or a permit application and to submit the
same to the Department for determining whether the industrial user is a
significant user, or to determine changes in the wastewater discharges from a
user’s facility. Within 30 days of being so notified, a user shall comply with
the Department’s request in the manner and form prescribed by the Department.
Failure of the Department to so notify a user shall not relieve the user of the
duty to obtain a permit as required by this chapter.
      (1)   A user, which becomes subject to a new or revised national
categorical pretreatment standard, shall apply for a wastewater discharge
permit within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable national
categorical pretreatment standard, unless an earlier date is specified or
required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b). The existing user shall provide a permit
application which includes all the information specified in §
52.007(C) and (G).
      (2)   A separate permit application shall be required for each separate
facility.
      (3)   Existing permittees shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of
90 days prior to the expiration of existing permits on a form prescribed by the
Department.
   (C)   Application or reapplication information. In support of an application
or reapplication for a wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall
submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:
      (1)   Corporate or individual name, any assumed name(s), federal employer
identification number, address, and location of the discharging facility;
      (2)   Name and title of the authorized representative of the industrial
user who shall have the authority to bind the industrial user financially and
legally;
      (3)   All SIC numbers of all processes at this location according to the
Standard Industrial Classification manual, issued by the Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended;
      (4)   Actual or proposed wastewater constituents and characteristics for
each parameter listed in the permit application form. The parameters shall
include those applicable pollutants having numeric limitations as enumerated in
§
52.005(A) and (B), those pollutants limited by national categorical
pretreatment standards regulations for applicable industries and any toxic
pollutants known or suspected to be present in the discharge, regulated in the
previous permit, or specifically requested by the Detroit Water and Sewerage
Department. For each parameter, the expected or experienced maximum and average
concentrations during a one-year period shall be provided. For industries
subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements, the
data requested herein shall be separately shown for each categorical process
wastestream. Combined wastestreams proposed to be regulated by the combined
wastestream formula shall also be identified. Sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to 33
U.S.C. § 1314(g) and contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, as amended. Where 40
C.F.R. Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using
validated analytical methods approved by the administrator.
      (5)   A listing and description of activities, facilities and plant
processes on the premises. Those processes, which are subject to national
categorical pretreatment standards or requirements, shall be so designated. As
pertains to division (C)(4), identify which pollutants are associated with each
process;
      (6)   Restricted to only those pollutants referred to in division (C)(4),
a listing of raw materials and chemicals which are either used in the
manufacturing process or could yield the pollutants referred to in division (C)
(4). Any user claiming immunity from having to provide such information for
reasons of national security shall furnish acceptable proof of such immunity;
      (7)   A description of typical daily and weekly operating cycles for each
process in terms of starting and ending times for each of the seven days of the
week:
      (8)   Denote: the average and maximum 24-hour wastewater flow rates
including, if any, daily, monthly and seasonal variations; each national
categorical process wastestream flow rate and the cooling water, sanitary water
and storm water flow rates separately for each connection to the POTW; and each
combined wastestream;
      (9)   A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by
the size, location, elevation and points or places of discharges into the POTW;
also a flow schematic showing which connections receive each national
categorical process wastestream and which connections receive storm water,
sanitary water or cooling water; also show which lines handle each combined
wastestream. This schematic shall be cross-referenced to the information
furnished in division (C)(8) of this section;
      (10)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production as pertains to processes subject to production based limits
under the national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements only;
      (11)   A statement regarding whether or not the requirements of this
chapter and of the national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements
are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and
maintenance work and/or additional construction is required for the industrial
user to meet the applicable standards and requirements. This statement shall be
reviewed and signed by the authorized representative and, as appropriate,
certified by a qualified professional;
      (12)   Basic information on the program for the prevention of accidental
discharges in accordance with the requirements of §
52.005(I)(1);
      (13)   Proposed or actual hours of operation of each pretreatment system
for each production process;
      (14)   A schematic and description of each pretreatment facility which
identifies whether each pretreatment facility is of the batch type or
continuous process type;
      (15)   If other than Detroit Water and Sewerage Department potable water,
the industrial user’s source of intake water together with the types of usage
and disposal method of each water source, and the estimated wastewater volumes
from each source;
      (16)   If additional construction and/or operation and maintenance
procedures will be required to meet the requirements of this division and the
national categorical pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional construction and/or implement the required
operation and maintenance procedures;
      (17)   Identify whether the user has conducted a waste minimization
assessment or audit of its operations in order to identify all feasible source
reduction and recycling practices that may be employed to reduce or eliminate
the generation of pollutants and other waste at the facility; and
      (18)   Any other information as may reasonably be required to prepare and
process a wastewater discharge permit.
   (D)   Permit issuance. Upon receipt of an application, the Department shall
review the application, determine, and so notify the industrial user in writing
regarding any of the following:
      (1)   The industrial user does not meet the definition of a significant
industrial user and is not required to have a wastewater discharge permit;
      (2)   The industrial user does meet the definition of a significant
industrial user but is found by the Department to have no reasonable potential
for adversely affecting the POTW operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement, and is not required to have a wastewater discharge
permit. The Department shall make such determination in accordance with the
requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6);
      (3)   The application is incomplete or the information only partially
satisfies the information and data required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12 or by the
Department, and that additional information and data are required which shall
be promptly furnished. Where appropriate, the industrial user is notified
regarding specific information that is missing, or that the application is
unacceptable;
      (4)   (a)   The industrial user is required to have a wastewater
discharge permit. The Department shall notify the industrial user of its
determination and the basis of the determination.
         (b)   The Department may withhold issuance of a permit to a
significant user, which has not submitted an adequate or timely report, or
permit application, to the Department as the control authority in accordance
with the reporting requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12, or whose discharge is in
violation of this chapter. If the Department determines that an industrial user
is required to have a wastewater discharge permit and has evaluated and
accepted the data furnished, the industrial user will be notified accordingly
by certified mail. The notification shall contain a copy of the draft permit,
so marked, for the industrial user’s review. An industrial user has 30 days
from the date of mailing to file a response to the draft permit and, in
accordance with the procedures contained in §
52.013, 20 days from the date of mailing to file an appeal regarding a permit
issued as final. Upon disposition by the Department of any contested terms or
conditions, a permit shall be issued as final. Only one facility location shall
be included in each permit.
   (E)   Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall contain all
requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(1)(iii) and shall be deemed to incorporate
all provisions of this chapter, other applicable laws, rules, regulations, and
user charges and fees established by the City of Detroit or the city without
repetition therein. In addition, permits may contain the following:
      (1)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents or
characteristics which are equivalent, more restrictive than, or supplemental to
the numeric limits enumerated in §
52.005, or the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards;
      (2)   Limits on average, and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (3)   Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of
discharge sampling manholes and monitoring facilities by the industrial user;
      (4)   Restrictions on which of the user’s discharge wastestreams are to
be allowed to be discharged at each point of connection to the POTW;
      (5)   Specifications for industrial user monitoring programs which may
include sampling locations, frequency and type of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedules;
      (6)   Requirements for the prevention of accidental discharges and the
containment of spills or slug discharges;
      (7)   Restrictions based on the information furnished in the application;
      (8)   Additional reporting requirements:
         (a)   All permittees shall submit a report on the form prescribed by
the Department, or on an alternative form approved by the Department,
indicating the status of compliance with all conditions enumerated or referred
to in the wastewater discharge permit, or made applicable to the permit by this
chapter. Unless required more frequently, the reports shall be submitted at
six-month intervals on a schedule to be established by the Department.
Analytical data generated by the Department may not be submitted in lieu of the
facility’s own monitoring data as required by the wastewater discharge permit.
         (b)   Permittees not subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards or requirements shall submit a report in accordance with the
requirements of §
52.007(E)(8)(d) and (e). The report shall show the concentration of each
substance for which there is a specific limitation in the permit, or which may
be identified by the Department in accordance with §
52.007(E)(9) and (11).
         (c)   Permittees subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards or requirements shall submit compliance reports at the times and
intervals specified by federal regulations and by the Department. A compliance
report shall be submitted to the Department no later than 90 days following the
final compliance date for a standard, or in the case of a new source, no later
than 90 days, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
POTW, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(d). A report on continued
compliance shall be submitted at six-month intervals thereafter on the schedule
established by the Department and incorporated into the industrial users
discharge permit and in accordance with §
52.007(E)(8)(d) and (e). The reports shall be either on a form prescribed by
the Department or on an alternate form approved by the Department, and shall
indicate the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from
each regulated process which are limited by national categorical pretreatment
standards, or which there is a specific limitation in the permit, or which may
be identified by the Department in accordance with §
52.007(E)(9) and (11). The report shall include a record of measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the
discharges regulated by the permit. The combined wastestream formula may be
used for reporting purposes after the initial information has been furnished to
the Department, provided there have been no changes to the elements composing
the combined wastestream.
         (d)   1.   Reports shall contain the results of representative
sampling performed during the period covered by the report and of the discharge
and analysis of pollutants contained therein, and, for significant industrial
users subject to production based standards, shall be cross-referenced to the
related flow or production and mass as required determining compliance with the
applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be as
prescribed in the applicable general pretreatment regulations, being 40 C.F.R.
Part 403, or by the Department, but no less than is necessary to assess and
assure compliance by the industrial user with the most stringent applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. All sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with applicable regulations contained in 40 C.F.R. Part
136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not include sampling
or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis
shall be performed using validated analytical methods approved by the
administrator.
            2.   If an industrial user monitors any pollutant more frequently
than required by the Department using the procedures as prescribed in this
section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in such report. The
report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met
on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance
practices and/or pretreatment system improvements or changes are necessary to
bring the industrial user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment
standards.
         (e)   1.   This report, and those required under §
52.005(C)(5) and
52.007(E)(8)(b) and (c), shall include the following certification statement:
      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction, or supervision, in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of a fine
and/or imprisonment for knowing violations.”
            2.   The certification shall be signed by the facility’s authorized
representative, as defined in §
52.004(A)(2). If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different
individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the
facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company,
a new authorization satisfying the requirements of the authorized
representative definition must be submitted to the Department prior to, or
together with, any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
         (f)   If sampling performed by a permittee indicates a violation, the
user shall notify the Department within 24 hours of the time the user becomes,
or should have become, aware of the violation. In addition, the user shall
repeat the sampling and analysis, and submit the results of the repeat analysis
to the Department within 30 days after the user becomes, or should have become,
aware of the violation.
      (9)   In the event the Director determines that an industrial user is
discharging substances in quality, quantity or at locations which may cause
problems to the POTW, or the receiving stream, the Department has the authority
to develop and enforce effluent limits applicable to the user. To the extent
the Department seeks to impose restrictions in a permit which are more
restrictive than established in this division, the Department shall provide
written documentation to explain the greater restriction for protection against
pass through, interference, or violation of the NPDES permit;
      (10)   Requirement for pollution prevention initiatives; and
      (11)   Other requirements reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with
this chapter.
   (F)   Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period.
Except as deemed necessary by the Department, or as otherwise provided for
under this chapter, permits shall be issued for a specified period of not more
than five years nor less than one year. The existing permit for significant
industrial users, who timely submit an application for permit reissuance to the
Department, shall be automatically extended until a permit is issued as final.
   (G)   Permit modification.
      (1)   The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to
modification by the Department during the term of the permit as limitations or
pretreatment standards and requirements identified in §
52.005 are amended, or other just cause exists. Just cause for a permit
modification includes, but shall not be limited to, the following:
         (a)   Material or substantial changes to an industrial user’s facility
or operation, or changes in the characteristics of the industrial user’s
effluent. It shall be the industrial user’s duty to request an application form
and apply for a modification of the permit within 30 calendar days of the
change;
         (b)   Change(s) in the Department's NPDES permit;
         (c)   Embodiment of the provisions of a legal settlement or of a court
order;
         (d)   Any changes necessary to fulfill the Department’s role as
control authority;
         (e)   An industrial user’s noncompliance with portions of an existing
permit;
         (f)   A change of conditions within the POTW;
         (g)   A finding of interference or pass through attributable to the
industrial user;
         (h)   Amendments to, or promulgation of, national categorical
pretreatment standards or requirements including 40 C.F.R. Part 403 and those
delineated in
Appendix A of this chapter. Permittees shall request an application form and
apply to the Department for a modified permit within 90 days after the
promulgation of a new or revised national categorical pretreatment standard to
which the industrial user shall be subject. Information submitted pursuant to
this subsection shall be confined to that information related to the newly
promulgated or amended national categorical pretreatment standard or
requirement. However, information previously submitted need not be duplicated,
insofar as the previously submitted information continues to be current and
applicable. In addition, the Department may initiate this action;
         (i)   Changes in the monitoring location (see §
52.008);
         (j)   Typographical errors or omissions in permits;
         (k)   The Department may modify the permit on its own initiative based
on its findings or reasonable belief of the above; or
         (l)   The user may request a modification of the permit.
      (2)   When initiated by the Department, the industrial user shall be
informed of any proposed change in its permit. The Department will issue a
draft permit and an industrial user has 30 days to file a response to the draft
modified permit. Thereafter, the Department will issue a final permit and,
unless appealed in accordance with the procedures contained in §
52.013, the permit will become effective 20 days after issuance.
   (H)   Permit custody and transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued
to a specific person as defined herein for a specific discharge. A wastewater
discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a different
person, new owner, new industrial user, different premises, or a new or changed
operation without notice to and written approval of the Department, and
providing a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or operator. It shall
be the permit holder’s duty to notify the Department of any such change at
least 30 days before the date of the change. Wastewater discharge permits,
which do not receive the written approval of the Department prior to the
change, shall be null and void regardless of reassignment, or transfer, or
sale. If it has occurred, the Department may revoke a permit. If a change takes
place, the Department may require the application for a new or modified permit.
Any succeeding person shall comply with the terms and conditions of any
existing permit which the Department allows to be retained.
   (I)   Permit notification requirements. All industrial users shall promptly
notify the Department in advance of any substantial change in the volume or
character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or
characteristic hazardous waste for which initial notification under 40 C.F.R. §
403.12(p) has been made, request a permit application form, and apply for a
modification of the permit at least 30 calendar days prior to the change.
Failure of the industrial user to so apply shall be considered a violation of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)
§ 52.008 MONITORING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Significant industrial users shall provide, operate and maintain at
their own expense a sampling manhole or special structure to facilitate
monitoring, inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of their discharge by
the Department and the industrial user, and to enable the Department to conduct
such other monitoring and sampling as required for determining compliance with
discharge requirements, limits and standards as provided for in this chapter.
In the event the Department determines that the monitoring facility identified
in the permit application is inadequate, a new monitoring facility must be
identified, or provided, which shall allow for collection of a representative
sample of the wastewater discharged from the facility. Unless otherwise
determined at the discretion of the Department, the facility shall be provided
within 90 days of receipt of notification by the Department. The industrial
user shall provide the Department with:
      (1)   A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by
the size, location, elevation, and points or places of discharges into the
POTW;
      (2)   A flow schematic showing which connections receive each national
categorical process wastestream; which connections receive storm water,
sanitary water or cooling water; and which lines handle each combined
wastestream. This report shall be certified by a professional engineer. If a
significant industrial user fails to install the monitoring facilities within
the prescribed time limits, then the Department may install such structure or
device and the significant user shall reimburse the Department for any costs
incurred therein.
   (B)   The sampling manhole should be situated on the industrial user’s
premises in a location readily accessible to the Department. When such a
location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the industrial user,
the Department may allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or
sidewalk area when there is room and the location will not be obstructed by
landscaping or parked vehicles. It shall be the responsibility of the
industrial user to obtain any necessary approvals which may be required from
other government agencies for the location and construction of monitoring
facilities. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling or monitoring
manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility and any permanently installed sampling and measuring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition at the expense of the industrial user. Whether constructed upon
public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be
provided in accordance with the Department’s requirements and all applicable
local construction standards and specifications (see §
52.007(G)).
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)
§ 52.009 INSPECTION, SAMPLING AND RECORD-KEEPING.
   (A)   For purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, any other
applicable provisions of this code or applicable state or federal laws and
regulations, the Department may inspect the establishment, facility or other
premises of the industrial user. The Department’s employees or authorized
representative shall have access to the industrial user’s premises for purposes
of inspection, sampling, compliance monitoring and/or metering activities.
   (B)   Each such inspection or sampling activity shall be commenced and
completed at reasonable times, and in a reasonable manner. Upon arrival at the
industrial user’s premises, the Department shall inform the industrial user, or
the industrial user’s employees, that sampling and/or inspection is commencing,
and that the facility’s authorized representative has the right to observe the
inspection and/or sampling. The Department shall neither refrain from, nor be
prevented or delayed from, carrying-out its inspection or sampling duties due
to the unavailability of the authorized representative of the facility to
observe or participate in the inspection or sampling activity.
   (C)   While performing work on private property, employees or authorized
representatives of the Department shall observe all reasonable safety, security
and other reasonable rules applicable to the premises as established by the
industrial user. Duly authorized employees or representatives of the Department
shall bear proper credentials and identification, and at the industrial user’s
option may be accompanied by a duly authorized representative of the industrial
user. Duly authorized Department representatives shall not be restricted from
viewing any of the facility site. Department employees or representatives may
take photographs of facilities subject to this chapter. Which shall be
maintained by the Department as confidential in accordance with §
52.010.
   (D)   Where an industrial user has security measures in force, the
industrial user shall make prompt and necessary arrangements with the security
personnel so that, upon presentation of appropriate credentials, personnel from
the Department will be permitted to enter for the purposes of performing their
specific responsibilities.
   (E)   Significant industrial users shall sample and analyze their discharge
in accordance with the provisions of their permit. The Department may require
such samples to be split with the Department for the Department’s independent
analysis.
   (F)   Industrial users shall maintain records of all information from
monitoring activities required by this chapter, or by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(n).
Industrial users shall maintain the records for no less than three years. This
period of record retention shall be extended during the course of any
unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial
user, or the operation of the City of Detroit’s Industrial Waste Program, or
when requested by the department, by the state, or by the EPA.
   (G)   Upon the request of the Department, industrial users shall furnish
information and records relating to discharges into the POTW. Industrial users
shall make such records readily accessible to the Department at all reasonable
times, and allow the Department to copy such records.
   (H)   In the event the Department obtains samples, and analyses are made of
such samples, a copy of the results of such analyses shall be promptly
furnished upon written request by the industrial user’s authorized
representative. When requested by the industrial user, the Department employee
or representative shall leave with the user, a portion of any sample of the
user’s discharge taken from any sampling point on or adjacent to the premises
for the user’s independent analysis. In cases of disputes arising over shared
samples, the portion taken and analyzed by the Department shall be controlling
unless proven invalid.
   (I)   In addition to any other violation caused by the discharge described
herein, in the event a single grab sample of the industrial user’s discharge is
obtained by the Department, and then analyzed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part
136, and found to contain concentrations of pollutants which are two or more
times greater than the numeric limitations as listed in §
52.005(B), or as contained in the facility’s wastewater discharge permit, the
industrial user shall implement its slug control plan, and shall provide a
written report to the Department within 14 days, which describes the cause of
greater concentration and provides a description of the means by which future
discharge concentrations will be held to values of less than two times the
limitation in the future.
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)
§ 52.010 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   (1)   Information and data on an industrial user obtained from written
reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs,
and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agencies without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests
and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Department that the
release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user.
      (2)   When submitted to the Department, all information claimed to be
confidential must be clearly marked confidential. When requested by the person
furnishing the report, the portions of a report determined by the Department to
disclose trade secrets or trade secret processes, and which are clearly labeled
as confidential, shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but
shall be made available upon request to governmental agencies for uses related
to this chapter, to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit, and to the State Disposal System permit and/or the pretreatment
programs, provided, however that information shall be treated as confidential
by the governmental agency, until such time as the information has been
determined to be non-confidential by the governmental agency. Confidential
information on industrial users, which the Department releases pursuant to a
request of another governmental agency, should be handled by the other
governmental agency pursuant to its own confidentiality procedures. The
Department cannot control how another governmental agency handles such
confidential information, and assumes no responsibility for the disposition of
the information released to the governmental agency. The Department will use
sufficient care to inform the other governmental agency of the existence of the
industrial user’s confidentiality claim.
      (3)   The Department shall determine whether the information requested to
be treated as confidential, in fact, satisfies the requirements of confidential
information as defined herein. The decision of the Department shall be made in
writing. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information.
   (B)   Except as otherwise determined by the Department or provided for by
applicable law, all information with respect to an industrial user on file with
the city shall be made available upon request by such user or the user’s
authorized representative during normal business hours.
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)
§ 52.011 STATUTES, LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
   The national categorical pretreatment standards defined in 40 C.F.R. Chapter
I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, shall be and are incorporated by reference
herein and made a part hereof. Unless otherwise provided, any reference in this
chapter to a code, standard, rule, regulation, or law enacted, adopted,
established, or promulgated by any private organization, or by any element or
organization of government other than the city shall be construed to apply to
such code, standard, rule, regulation, or law in effect or as amended or
promulgated, from the date of enactment of this chapter.
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)
§ 52.012 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violations. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any user to:
      (1)   Fail to completely and/or accurately report the wastewater
constituents and/or characteristics of the industrial user’s discharge;
      (2)   Fail to report significant changes in the industrial user’s
operations or wastewater constituents and/or characteristics within the time
frames provided in §
52.007(G)(1);
      (3)   Refuse reasonable access to the industrial user's premises, waste
discharge, or sample location for the purpose of inspection or monitoring;
      (4)   Restrict, lockout or prevent, directly or indirectly, access to any
monitoring facilities constructed on public or private property. The locking or
securing of the monitoring facility shall not constitute a violation pursuant
to this subsection, provided, that upon request reasonable access to the
facility is promptly provided to the Department;
      (5)   Restrict, interfere, tamper with, or render inaccurate any of the
Department’s monitoring devices including, but not limited to, samplers;
      (6)   Fail to comply with any condition or requirement of the industrial
user’s wastewater discharge permit;
      (7)   Fail to comply with any limitation, prohibition, or requirement of
this chapter including any rule, regulation, or order issued hereunder.
Industrial users acting in full compliance with wastewater discharge permits
issued prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be deemed to be in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and such permits shall remain
in effect and be enforceable under this chapter until a superseding permit is
effective. Industrial users shall comply with applicable national categorical
pretreatment standards and requirements on the date specified in the federal
regulations, regardless of compliance schedules.
   (B)   Upsets. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with national categorical pretreatment standards
where the requirements of subsection (1) are met.
      (1)   An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or
other relevant evidence, that:
         (a)   An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause
(s) of the upset;
         (b)   At the time, the facility was being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures;
         (c)   The industrial user has submitted the following information to
the Department, orally or in writing, within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
upset and where this information is provided orally, a written submission must
be provided within five days:
            1.   A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance;
            2.   The period of noncompliance including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
      (2)   In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof;
      (3)   The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to
the extent necessary to maintain compliance with this chapter upon reduction,
loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an
alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the
situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the
treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
   (C)   Bypass. Bypasses are prohibited unless the bypass does not cause a
violation of pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it is for
essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment system.
These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (1) and (2).
      (1)   Notice of anticipated bypass. Industrial users anticipating a
bypass shall submit notice to the Department at least ten days in advance.
      (2)   Notice of unanticipated bypass. An industrial user shall submit
oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes or should
have become aware of the bypass. A written submission shall be provided within
five days of the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware
of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass
including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
      (3)   Prohibition of bypass and enforcement. Bypass is prohibited, and
the Department may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
         (a)   The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
         (c)   The industrial user properly notified the Department as
described in division (C)(2).
      (4)   Bypass approval. Where it meets all conditions in division (C)(3),
the Department may approve an anticipated bypass.
   (D)   Measurements. Where one or more of the measurements taken for any
pollutant defined in §
52.005(B) during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum
non-detect limit for the same parameter, the industrial user may develop and
implement pollution prevention initiatives, or a BMP, as part of its response.
The Department may, as part of an administrative order, also require
development of a BMP as a part of the Department’s enforcement response. Upon
approval of the Department, these pollution prevention initiative, or BMPs
shall be made an enforceable part of the wastewater discharge permit.
Industrial users shall provide, at six-month intervals, analytical results and
certifications in support of its implementation of an approved pollution
prevention initiative or BMPs. Upon demonstration of compliance, the industrial
user may request to be relieved of this implementation requirement.
   (E)   Emergency suspensions and orders. The Department may order suspension
of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge
permit where, in the opinion of the Department, such suspension is necessary to
stop any actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent or significant hazard to the health or welfare of persons or to the
environment, interferes or may interfere with the POTW, or causes or may cause
the City of Detroit to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Any person
notified of a suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or
the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. In the event the Department provides informal notification under
this section, written confirmation and an order shall be provided within 24
hours. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with any
suspension or revocation order, the Department shall take such steps as deemed
necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection or services,
to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or danger to any individual or
the environment. In the event such steps are taken, the Director shall notify
the industrial user within 24 hours in writing of such action and order, and
the specific recourse available. In any event, the Department shall provide the
industrial user with an opportunity for a hearing before the Director, or his
or her designated representative, within ten days of such action. The
industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement to the Department
within 15 days of the occurrence describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. Upon
proof of elimination of the noncomplying discharge, the Department shall
reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the sewer or wastewater
treatment service.
   (F)   Notice of violation. Except in the case of an actual or threatened
discharge as specified in division (E), whenever the Department has reason to
believe that any industrial user has violated or is violating this chapter, the
Department shall serve a written notice stating the nature of the violation
upon such industrial user. Where applicable, the Department shall pursue
appropriate escalating enforcement action as defined within its approved
enforcement response plan. The failure of the Department to issue a notice of
violation shall not preclude the Department from escalating its enforcement
response.
   (G)   Administrative actions. Whenever the Department has reasonable grounds
to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its
wastewater discharge permit, or a pretreatment standard or requirement or any
prohibition of this chapter, the Department, may initiate appropriate
administrative enforcement action, except in the case of emergency or flagrant
violation, in order to compel the industrial user to eliminate or to remedy
such violation as soon as possible.
      (1)   Conferences. The Department may order any person, who violates this
chapter, to attend a conference wherein the Department may endeavor to cause
the user to eliminate or remedy the violation by establishing an enforceable
compliance schedule. The notice of violation shall be served at least ten days
before the scheduled conference and shall set forth the date, time, and place
thereof. The conference shall be conducted by a representative of the
Department. The industrial user shall present a plan and schedule for achieving
compliance with this division. Nothing contained herein shall require the
Department to accept or agree to any proposed plan or schedule, or to prevent
the Department from proceeding with a show cause hearing as set forth in
subsection (2) of this section. If the attendees agree upon a compliance
schedule, the user and the Department’s duly authorized representative may
enter, by consent, into a compliance agreement or an administrative order
setting forth the terms of such agreement. An industrial user must exhibit good
faith and expeditious efforts to comply with this chapter and any procedures,
requirements, and agreements hereunder.
      (2)   Compliance schedules. The user and the Department may agree upon a
schedule which sets forth the terms and conditions, and time periods or
schedules for completion of actions to remedy or to eliminate the causes of
violation. These schedules may be developed as part of a compliance agreement,
administrative consent order. Schedules developed under this subsection shall
adhere to the following conditions:
         (a) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of upgraded or additional pretreatment facilities,
or to the implementation of additional operation and maintenance procedures
required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment
requirements and standards including, but not limited to, hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing construction, and completing construction;
         (b)   No single increment referred to in division (I) shall exceed
nine months;
         (c)   Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress
report to the Department including, at a minimum, whether it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason(s) for delay, and
the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established
schedule; and
         (d)   Any deviations from the compliance schedule may result in the
industrial user being found in violation of this chapter.
      (3)   Administrative orders. The Department may order any industrial
user, who violates or continues to violate this chapter or a duly issued
permit, to install and to properly operate devices, treatment facilities, or
other related appurtenances. In addition, orders may contain such other
requirements as might reasonably be necessary and appropriate to address the
violation including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional
self-monitoring and management practices, implementation of a waste
minimization assessment to identify and implement feasible source reduction,
and recycling practices to reduce the generation or release of pollutants at
the facility. An order may be either an administrative consent order, which is
the result of an agreement, or a unilateral administrative order.
      (4)   Show cause hearing. The Department may order any industrial user,
who violates this chapter or allows such violation to occur, to show cause
before the Department why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A
notice shall be served upon the industrial user specifying the time and place
of a hearing before the Department regarding the violation, the reason(s) why
the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the
industrial user to show cause before the Department why any proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be
served personally, or by registered or certified mail with return receipt
requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made upon any
agent or officer of a corporation, or its authorized representative.
         (a)   Hearing proceeding. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance
with the procedures adopted by the Board. A hearings officer shall conduct the
show cause hearing and take the evidence, and may:
            1.   In the name of the Board, issue notices of hearing requesting
the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence
relevant to any matter involved in such hearing;
            2.   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the Director
for action thereon.
         (b)   Transcript. At any show cause hearing held pursuant to this
division, testimony shall be recorded by a court reporter.
      (5)   Actions. After a show cause hearing has been conducted, the
hearings officer shall issue an order to the industrial user directing any of
the following actions:
         (a)   Immediate compliance with the industrial user’s wastewater
discharge permit or with any applicable limitation, condition, restriction or
requirement of this division, or applicable local, state or federal law or
regulation;    
         (b)   Pretreatment of waste by installation of adequate treatment
equipment or proper operation and maintenance of existing treatment equipment
be accomplished within a specified time period;
         (c)   Submission of compliance reports on effluent quality and
quantity as determined by self- monitoring and analysis during a specified time
period;
         (d)   Submission of periodic reports on effluent quality and quantity
determined by self-monitoring analysis throughout the final period set by a
compliance date;
         (e)   Control of discharge quantities;
         (f)   Payment of costs for reasonable and necessary inspection,
monitoring, and administration of the industrial user’s activities by the
Department during compliance efforts;
         (g)   Any other orders as are appropriate including, but not limited
to, immediate termination of sewer or wastewater treatment services, or
revocation of a wastewater discharge permit, or orders directing that following
a specified time period sewer or wastewater treatment service will be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or operation and
maintenance practices have been employed; and/or
         (h)   A finding the user has demonstrated by a preponderance of the
evidence that a violation either of this chapter or of a duly issued permit did
not occur.
      (6)   Public notification of significant noncompliance. The Department
shall publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the City of Detroit
and the city a list of all industrial users which were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements at any time during the
previous 12 months. All industrial users identified in a proposed publication
shall be provided with a copy of the proposed notice at least 30 days before
publication and allowed an opportunity to comment as to its accuracy.
   (H)   Legal actions.
      (1)   Criminal action. Any user, who violates any provision of this
chapter including the failure to pay any fees, fines, charges or surcharges
imposed hereby, or any condition or limitation of a permit issued pursuant
thereto, or who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or wastewater discharge
permit, or who tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device required under this division, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 for each violation
per day, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both. The
Department is hereby authorized, through its counsel, to seek prosecution of
criminal charges against any person violating any provision of this division.
      (2)   Civil action. Whenever the Department has reasonable grounds to
believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its
wastewater discharge permit, a pretreatment standard or requirement or any
requirement of this chapter, the Director may commence a civil action to compel
compliance in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the user from
discharging, and/or to obtain appropriate relief to remedy the violations. The
Department or Board may also seek additional legal and/or equitable relief. The
commencement of suit neither constitutes an exclusive election of remedies nor
prohibits the Department, Director, Board, or City of Detroit from commencing
action in federal court for discharges believed to be in violation of this
chapter, state and federal requirements contained in the Clean Water Act, the
City of Detroit’s NPDES permit, or other applicable laws or requirements. In
addition, the City of Detroit may recover the reasonable attorney fees, court
costs, court reporters’ fees, and other unusual expenses related to enforcement
activities or litigation against the person found to have violated this
division, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.
      (3)    Fines, costs, and penalties. All fines, costs, and penalties which
are imposed by any court of competent jurisdiction shall be payable to the City
of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department.
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)
§ 52.013 RECONSIDERATION AND APPEAL.
   Through the procedures of reconsideration and appeal, a user may contest
actions, determinations, or decisions of the Department which result from its
construction, application and enforcement of this chapter. The procedures
contained within this section govern reconsideration and appeal with respect to
construction, application, and enforcement of this chapter.
   (A)   Selection of reconsideration or of appeal.
      (1)   Except for those actions, determinations, or decisions which are
expressly identified as subject only to appeal, reconsideration may be
requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized industrial wastewater
discharger or other discharger, who is adversely affected by any action,
determination, or decision that is made by, or on behalf of, the Department by
the Director, or an authorized representative, and that interprets, implements
or enforces the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   An appeal may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee,
authorized industrial wastewater discharge or other discharger, who is
adversely affected by a permit issued as final by the Department, or by an
administrative order entered after a show cause order and hearing, or after a
hearing for reconsideration.
      (3)   Unless otherwise expressly provided for by this chapter, a request
for reconsideration or appeal must be signed by an authorized representative,
and received at the Department’s general offices within 20 days from the date
of the occurrence of the action, determination, or decision in dispute. A
request for reconsideration shall contain the requester’s name and address, a
brief statement of the reason(s), and the factual basis underlying the request.
      (4)   A request for reconsideration shall be filed in triplicate either
by hand delivery or by certified mail to the general offices of the Department.
Where a request for reconsideration or appeal either is not filed within the
time period provided for in this subsection or is improperly made, the action,
determination or decision of the Director, or the Department’s authorized
representative, is final and any right to reconsideration appeal may be deemed
waived.
   (B)   Reconsideration. Within 15 days after receipt of a timely and proper
request for reconsideration, the Department shall notify the applicant of the
time and place for a hearing.
      (1)   A hearing for reconsideration shall be conducted by a hearings
officer who is designated by the Director and may be an employee of the
Department. The decision of the hearings officer shall be in the form of a
recommendation to the Director and embodied in an administrative order. Except
for an administrative consent order that was negotiated and agreed to by both
parties, an administrative order is appealable in accordance with division (C)
of this section.
      (2)   Where improperly or untimely submitted, the Department may reject a
request for reconsideration. The Department shall notify the requester in
writing that the request has been rejected.
      (3)   Unless the date is mutually extended by both parties, the hearing
shall be conducted neither less than ten days nor more than 30 days after
mailing of the notice. For cause and at the discretion of the hearings officer,
the hearing may be continued for a reasonable time.
      (4)   The hearing for reconsideration shall be an informal consultation
and conference where the requester in person, or by counsel, shall present
their argument, evidence, data, and proof in connection with the issue(s) being
reconsidered. The parties shall not be bound by the Michigan Rules of Evidence.
The hearing shall be transcribed and the requester may obtain a copy of the
hearing transcript, as appropriate, from the Department or from the court
reporter.
      (5)   Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the hearings officer
shall issue a final decision, which shall contain a recommendation to the
Director. The hearings officer shall send such decision to the requester by
certified mail.
       (6)   Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass-through,
interference or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of this
state, the filing of a request for reconsideration in accordance with this
section shall stay the action by the Department that is the subject of the
hearing for reconsideration.
   (C)   Appeal. Within 30 days after receipt of a timely and proper request
for an appeal, the Department shall notify the applicant in writing regarding
the time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance
with procedures set by the Board until rules are promulgated pursuant to
Section 2-111 of the 1997 Detroit City Charter. In addition:
      (1)   Any request for an appeal must be made within 20 days of the
Department’s action, determination or decision regarding the request for
reconsideration or any permit issued in accordance with this chapter.
      (2)   Where a request either is not filed within the time period
contained in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination
or decision of the Director, or the Department’s authorized representative, is
final and any right to appeal may be deemed waived. Where untimely or
improperly submitted, the Department may reject the request for an appeal, and
shall notify the requester in writing that such request has been rejected.
      (3)   The Department shall appoint a hearings officer. The hearings
officer shall review the evidence, and within 15 days after the close of the
hearing shall issue a written recommendation to uphold, modify or reverse the
action, determination, or decision of the Department.
      (4)   The written recommendation of the hearings officer shall be
submitted to the Board which shall render a final decision within 30 days of
its next regularly scheduled meeting.
      (5)   In accordance with applicable law, the user or the Department may
appeal any final decision of the Board to a court of competent jurisdiction.
      (6)   Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass through,
interference, or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of this
sate, the filing of a request for appeal in accordance with this section shall
stay the action by the Department that is the subject of the appeal.
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)
APPENDIX A
Aluminum forming                                  40 C.F.R. Part 467
Asbestos manufacturing                            40 C.F.R. Part 427
Battery manufacturing                             40 C.F.R. Part 461
Builder’s paper and board mills                 40 C.F.R. Part 431
Canned and preserved fruits/vegetables            40 C.F.R. Part 407
Canned and preserved seafood processing           40 C.F.R. Part 408
Carbon black manufacturing                        40 C.F.R. Part 458
Cement manufacturing                              40 C.F.R. Part 411
Centralized waste treatment                       40 C.F.R. Part 437
Coal mining                                       40 C.F.R. Part 434
Coil coating                                      40 C.F.R. Part 465
Copper forming                                    40 C.F.R. Part 465
Dairy products processing                         40 C.F.R. Part 405
Electrical and electronic components I and II     40 C.F.R. Part 469
Electroplating                                    40 C.F.R. Part 413
Explosives manufacturing                          40 C.F.R. Part 457
Feed lots                                         40 C.F.R. Part 412
Ferroalloy manufacturing                          40 C.F.R. Part 424
Fertilizer manufacturing                          40 C.F.R. Part 418
Glass manufacturing                               40 C.F.R. Part 426
Grain mills                                       40 C.F.R. Part 406
Gum and wood chemicals manufacturing              40 C.F.R. Part 454
Hospital                                          40 C.F.R. Part 460
Ink formulating                                   40 C.F.R. Part 447
Inorganic chemicals manufacture (I and III)       40 C.F.R. Part 415
Iron and steel                                    40 C.F.R. Part 420
Landfills                                         40 C.F.R. Part 445
Leather tanning and finishing                     40 C.F.R. Part 425
Meat products                                     40 C.F.R. Part 432
Metal finishing                                   40 C.F.R. Part 433
Metal molding and casting                         40 C.F.R. Part 464
Metal products and machinery                      40 C.F.R. Part 438
Mineral mining and processing                     40 C.F.R. Part 436
Nonferrous metals forming                         40 C.F.R. Part 471
Nonferrous metals manufacturing I                 40 C.F.R. Part 421
Nonferrous metals manufacturing II                40 C.F.R. Part 421
Ore mining and dressing                           40 C.F.R. Part 440
Organic chemicals, plastics, and synthetic fibers 40 C.F.R. Part 414
Paint formulating                                 40 C.F.R. Part 446
Paving and roofing material                       40 C.F.R. Part 443
Pesticide chemicals                               40 C.F.R. Part 455
Petroleum refining                                40 C.F.R. Part 419
Pharmaceutical                                    40 C.F.R. Part 439
Phosphate manufacturing                           40 C.F.R. Part 422
Photographic                                      40 C.F.R. Part 459
Plastics molding and forming                      40 C.F.R. Part 463
Porcelain enameling                               40 C.F.R. Part 466
Pulp, paper, and paperboard                       40 C.F.R. Part 430s and 431
Rubber manufacturing                              40 C.F.R. Part 428
Soap and detergent manufacturing                  40 C.F.R. Part 417
Steam electric                                    40 C.F.R. Part 423
Sugar processing                                  40 C.F.R. Part 409
Textile mills                                     40 C.F.R. Part 410
Timber products                                   40 C.F.R. Part 429
Transportation equipment cleaning                 40 C.F.R. Part 442
Waste combustors                                  40 C.F.R. Part 444
 
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)
APPENDIX B
   (A)   An industrial user may elect, in lieu of the total phenols limitation
specified in §
52.005(B)(2), to substitute specific limitations for each of the eight
individual phenolic compounds identified under the total phenols limitation.
The following specific limitations, expressed in mg/l, shall be applied in lieu
of the total phenols limitation, upon election;
2-Chlorophenol          2.0 mg/l
4-Chlorophenol          2.0 mg/l
4-Chloro-3-methylphenol 1.0 mg/l
2,4-Dichlorophenol      5.5 mg/l
2,4-Dinitrophenol       2.0 mg/l
4-Methylphenol          5.0 mg/l
4-Nitrophenol           15.0 mg/l
Phenol                  14.0 mg/l
 
   (B)   Following election, the wastewater discharge permit shall be modified
to incorporate these substituted parameters and an industrial user shall be
responsible for monitoring and reporting compliance with these parameters.
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)
APPENDIX C
   No user shall discharge wastewater containing any of the following
pollutants in excess of the following interim pollutant discharge limitations:
   (A)   Compatible pollutants.
      (1)   Any fats, oil or grease (FOG) in concentrations greater than 1,500
mg/l based on an average of all samples collected within a 24-hour period.
      (2)   Any total suspended solids (TSS) in concentrations greater than
7,500 mg/l.
      (3)   Any biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in concentrations greater than
7,500 mg/l.
      (4)   Any phosphorus (P) in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l.
Unless otherwise stated, all limitations are based upon samples collected over
an operating period representative of a user’s discharge, and in accordance
with 40 C.F.R. Part 146.
   (B)   Non-compatible pollutants cadmium (Cd), 1.0 mg/l.
(Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-23-2009)
CHAPTER 53: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
   
53.001   Generally
   
53.002   Sidewalk construction
   
53.003   Sidewalks on paved streets
   
53.004   Sidewalks made of concrete
   
53.005   Sidewalks ordered to be constructed, reconstructed or replaced by the
City Council
   
53.006   Notification
   
53.007   Charge for construction, reconstruction or replacement; special
assessment; liability
   
53.008   Maintenance
   
53.009   Sidewalks requiring repair
   
53.010   Duty of Department of Public Services
   
53.011   Neglect of owner, agent or occupant
   
53.012   Obstruction or interference with construction and maintenance
   53.013   Snow and ice
 
   
53.999   Penalty
§ 53.001 GENERALLY.
   All sidewalks hereafter built, rebuilt, or repaired in the City of Hamtramck
shall be constructed in the manner, and of the widths and materials in the
following section described to wit.
(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.002 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
   Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete. No sidewalk or crosswalk shall
be less than five feet in width, and when the lines and grades shall have been
officially established, the sidewalks shall conform to the lines and grades.
Before any sidewalk shall be built or repaired, the proper sidewalk inspections
shall be secured from the Building Department.
(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.003 SIDEWALKS ON PAVED STREETS.
   When any street shall be paved, the sidewalks shall be raised or lowered to
conform to the lines and grades that shall be officially established and as
required by the Department of Public Services, under whose direction all
sidewalks shall be constructed and repaired, and shall be relayed to the proper
grade when so officially established.
(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.004 SIDEWALKS MADE OF CONCRETE.
   All sidewalks of concrete shall be made of good material, and the work done
in first class workmanlike manner, and left smooth and even in every part. All
sidewalks being constructed, reconstructed or replaced with concrete must
conform to the following minimum specifications:
   (A)   The foundation shall consist of sand or gravel and must be free from
clay, thoroughly compacted to a thickness of not less than two inches.
   (B)   Walks must not be less than four inches in thickness and on driveways
not less than six inches.
   (C)   All material entering into the composition of the walks must be well
screened and free from dirt.
   (D)   Top dressing shall not be less than one inch in thickness, of a
mixture of cement and sharp sand in proportion of two parts of sand to one part
of cement, which shall conform to the requirements and specifications.
   (E)   The lower stratum, or concrete filling, of the walk shall consist of
clean gravel and cement in the proportion of one part of cement to five parts
of gravel well tamped.
   (F)   The top course shall be placed while the concrete filling is still
moist and be tamped thoroughly up until water comes to the surface, and the
surface then toweled sufficiently to leave it smooth.
   (G)   The concrete filling shall be made from the same cement as the
finishing layer; joints to be made so that no stone shall have more than 25
feet of superficial area in walks five feet wide.
(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.005 SIDEWALKS ORDERED TO BE CONSTRUCTED, RECONSTRUCTED OR REPLACED BY THE
CITY COUNCIL.
   All sidewalks ordered to be constructed, reconstructed or replaced by the
City Council and constructed by the city as delinquent pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter shall be constructed of concrete in the manner
and according to the specifications set forth in §
53.004.
(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.006 NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Whenever the city shall declare it necessary and expedient that a
sidewalk shall be constructed, reconstructed or replaced on any street in front
of, adjacent to, or adjoining private property in the city, it shall be the
duty of the Department of Public Service to notify the owner, agent, or
occupant of the property in front of, adjacent to, or adjoining which the
sidewalk is to be constructed reconstructed or replaced and or repair the same
within 45 days from the date of the notice, in accordance with the
specifications of the Sidewalk Ordinance of the city.
   (B)   The notice may be either personally served within five days after the
date thereof on the parties interested, or it may be served by publication in
the official newspaper of the city at least once within five days from and
after the date of the notice; and it shall not invalidate the notice to include
therein the several separate descriptions of property on the street in front
of, adjoining, or adjacent to which the sidewalk is required to be constructed,
reconstructed or replaced.
   (C)   The Department of Public Services shall keep a record for that purpose
with the date, descriptions, and the like, contained in all notices served
under this chapter and shall file and keep a copy of the notice with the return
of the date and mode of service endorsed thereupon, and also a record of
publication if service be made in that manner.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of every owner, agent, or occupant of any lot or
parcel of a lot when notified by the Department of Public Services to build or
repair sidewalks in accordance with the City Code, to promptly comply with the
notice and construct the sidewalks as ordered, and if the owner, agent, or
occupant shall neglect or refuse to construct the sidewalk within the time
specified in the notice, the city can declare the owner, agent, or occupant of
the premises so notified to be delinquent in the matter of constructing,
reconstructing or replacing the sidewalk, and may order the sidewalk
constructed by either the Department of Public Services or a contractor. Any
costs associated with the delinquency thereof will be charged to the owner,
agent or occupant of the property constructed, and if not sooner paid by such
owner, agent or occupant, will be assessed against the property as hereinafter
provided.
(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.007 CHARGE FOR CONSTRUCTION OR REPLACEMENT; SPECIAL ASSESSMENT; LIABILITY.
   Upon the completion of the construction, reconstruction or replacing of any
sidewalk by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, a bill
for the entire cost thereof shall be mailed by the Department of Public
Services to the owner, agent or occupant of the property constructed, to the
address where notice was provided, demanding payment of the amount due. If said
amount is not paid to the city within 30 days from the date of such bill, the
amount due shall be assessed against such property as a special assessment, in
accordance with the provisions of §
16-05 of the City Charter. If any damage to the city or third party results
from the neglect or refusal of the owner, agent or occupant to construct,
reconstruct or replace as herein provided, such owner, agent or occupant shall
be liable to the city or any damaged third party for the full amount of such
damages.
(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 53.008 MAINTENANCE.
   All sidewalks in the city shall be kept in good repair by the owner, agent,
or occupant of the house, lot, or premises adjacent to or in front of which the
sidewalk lies. Whenever any sidewalk within the limits of the city shall
require repairing or shall become dangerous or inconvenient for travel thereon,
it shall be the duty of the Department of Public Services to notify, by written
or printed notice or partly written and partly printed notice, the owner,
agent, or occupant of the house, lot, or premises in front of or adjacent to
which the sidewalk lies, to repair the same within 45 days from the date of
personal service or posting of the notice. The notice may be served personally
upon the owner, agent, or occupant, or posted in a conspicuous place upon the
premises in front of, adjoining, or adjacent to which the sidewalk lies.
(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.009 SIDEWALKS REQUIRING REPAIR.
   It shall be the duty of every owner, agent, or occupant of any lot or parcel
of land when notified by the Department of Public Services, to repair the
sidewalks in accordance with this subchapter, to promptly comply with the
notice, and repair the sidewalks as ordered. If the owner, agent, or occupant
shall neglect or refuse to repair the sidewalk within the time specified in the
notice, and if it shall appear, from the return and report of the notice made
by the Department of Public Services that after proper service or publication
of the notice the sidewalks have not been repaired by the parties notified
within the 45 days prescribed in the notice, then the city may at once declare
the owner, agent, or occupant of the premises so notified to be delinquent in
the matter of repairing the sidewalk, and may order the sidewalk repaired by
either the city or a contractor, as may be deemed best by the city. Any costs
associated with the delinquency thereof will be charged to the owner; agent or
occupant of the property constructed, and if not sooner paid by such owner,
agent or occupant, will be assessed against the property as provided in this
chapter.
(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.010 DUTY OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICES.
   Whenever it shall appear to the Department of Public Services that by reason
of the extraordinary or dangerous condition of the sidewalk in front of,
adjoining, or adjacent to any lot or premises in the city an emergency exists
which, in the opinion of the Department of Public Services, requires immediate
remedial action in order to protect persons using the sidewalk from injury and
damage and the city from liability therefore, then and in that case the
Department of Public Services shall have the right, and it shall be their duty,
to immediately make temporary repair as shall obviate the danger herein set
forth pending the proceedings for permanent repair provided in this subchapter.
(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 53.011 NEGLECT OF OWNER, AGENT OR OCCUPANT.
   In case any owner, agent, or occupant shall neglect to build or repair any
sidewalk within the time prescribed in the notice of the Department of Public
Services, as provided in this subchapter, and the city, by any suit or
proceedings, is compelled to pay damages for injury to any person or persons on
account of the neglect, the owner, agent, or occupant shall be liable to the
city for the amount of damages so paid, and the same may be collected, if
necessary, by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.012 OBSTRUCTION OR INTERFERENCE WITH CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   No person or persons shall obstruct or interfere with the building,
rebuilding, or repairing of any sidewalk provided for under this subchapter,
nor tamper with or remove any apparatus, tools, grade stakes, or building
material furnished or to be used in connection with the building, rebuilding or
repairing of the sidewalks, nor mutilate, disfigure, or destroy any sidewalk or
part thereof.
(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.013 SNOW AND ICE.
   (A)   Snow and ice removal. The owner, occupant, or responsible agent of any
property, or the owner or responsible agent of any unoccupied or undeveloped
property, is required to keep the sidewalks in front of, and adjacent to such
property, cleared from snow and ice to facilitate pedestrian use. Where there
are no sidewalks, the occupant, owner, or responsible agent aforementioned, is
required to clear a path free from snow and ice where a sidewalk would
otherwise be to facilitate pedestrian use. Whenever any snow or ice has fallen
or accumulated, it shall be cleared within 12 hours after it has fallen or
accumulated. Snow and ice removal shall apply to all residential, commercial,
and industrial properties located within the City of Hamtramck.
   (B)   Discarding of snow and ice. No person within the city shall deposit
snow or ice from any premises sidewalks, driveways leading to the premises, or
any street parking area onto the portion of any street or adjacent public
right-of-way. It shall be unlawful for any person, at any time, to deposit any
accumulation of snow or ice upon the traveled portion of any street or highway,
or upon any public sidewalk, or upon any municipally owned or leased parking
lot, anywhere within the city.
   (C)   Contractfor hire; identification required.
      (1)   Any businesses using a contractor for snow removal are required to
identify their contractor with their yearly business license application.
      (2)   Any vehicle used for hire, gain or reward of snow removal shall be
clearly and plainly marked with the name of the person, company, firm or
corporation that the business license is issued to.
   (D)   Snow emergency.
      (1)   Declaration of. Whenever the City Manager or other designee finds,
on the basis of falling snow, sleet, or freezing rain or on the basis of a
forecast by a weather service, may declare a snow emergency, and initiate the
City of Hamtramck Emergency Operations Plan.
      (2)   Parking.
         (a)   During a snow emergency, in addition to the designated fire
routes, parking is prohibited on the following streets:
            1.   Joseph Campau - between Carpenter and Hamtramck Drive;
            2.   Conant - between Carpenter and Hamtramck Drive;
            3.   Caniff - between Grand Haven and Buffalo;
            4.   Holbrook - between St. Aubin and Buffalo.
         (b)   The City of Hamtramck Police Chief or his or her designee is
authorized to remove or cause to be removed any vehicle that is parked in any
designated fire route, any street where parking is prohibited during a snow
emergency, or any other vehicle that obstructs or otherwise impedes traffic,
where such vehicles are to be found in violation of snow emergency regulations,
traffic ordinances and regulations of the city.
         (c)   1.   In addition to or in lieu of removal, the City of Hamtramck
Police Chief or his or her designee may issue an appearance ticket to the owner
of any vehicle in violation of this section.
            2.   Motor vehicles with handicapped permits and stickers, legally
parked in designated spots, shall be exempt from the provision of this section.
         (d)   Once in effect, the snow emergency parking prohibition shall
remain in effect until such time until terminated by announcement, or until the
listed streets are substantially cleared of snow and ice from curb to curb, for
the length of the entire block.
(Ord. 2014-45, passed 6-24-2014) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.
   (B)   Construction and maintenance. Every person convicted of violating any
of the provisions of §
53.012 may be punished by a fine of not to exceed $500 and costs of prosecution
and or be imprisoned for 90 days or both.
   (C)   Snow and ice removal. 
      (1)   Any violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of §
53.010 may be punished by a fine of not to exceed $500 and costs of prosecution
and or be imprisoned for 90 days or both.
      (2)   Each day the violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 2010-3, passed 4-27-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-45, passed 6-24-2014)
CHAPTER 54: TREES AND SHRUBS
Section
   
54.001   Authority of Department of Public Services
   
54.002   Definitions
   
54.003   Prohibition
   
54.004   Use as anchoring
   
54.005   Excavations
   
54.006   Trimming of branches
   
54.007   Visibility
   
54.008   Duty of Department of Public Services
   
54.009   Violation
   
54.010   Moving of buildings
   
54.011   Permit for tree planting
   
54.012   Removal of trees and shrubs
   
54.013   Deposit; when required
   
54.014   Interference
   
54.015   Rules and regulations
 
   
54.999   Penalty
§ 54.001 AUTHORITY OF DEPARTMENT PUBLIC SERVICES.
   The Department of Public Services shall be charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this chapter and shall have power and control over
all trees, shrubs and plants, planted or to be planted in the public right-of-
ways or places owned by the city, the Department of Public Services shall also
have the right to plant, trim, spray, preserve and remove trees, shrubs or
plants within the public right-of-way or places owned by the city, as may be
necessary to ensure safety or to preserve the symmetry and beauty of such
public grounds. The Department of Public Services and its representatives and/
or employees may remove or cause to be removed, any tree or part thereof which,
in the Department of Public Services sole discretion, is in an unsafe
condition, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 54.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any park, parking lot, parkway or other property under the
control or jurisdiction of the Department of Public Services and the city.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. All of the land lying between property lines on either
side of all public streets, boulevards and alleys.
   TREES. As used in this chapter, shall not be construed to include shrubs
which do not grow higher than 15 feet
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 54.003 PROHIBITION.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall prune, cut, break, deface,
destroy, spray or repair upon any tree or part thereof, or in any manner
interfere with, disturb, or injure any tree, shrub or plant upon the public
rights-of-way or places owned by the city; nor shall any chemicals be used for
control of insects or other diseases, or for any other reason, nor shall any
person, firm or corporation permit any chemicals, either solids or fluids, to
seep, drain or be emptied on or about any tree, shrub or plant that is now or
may hereafter grow upon any public right-of-ways or place owned by the city,
without first obtaining permission from the Department of Public Services.
   (B)   Provided further, that nothing in this section shall be construed so
as to apply to the removal, under the direction of the Department of Public
Services, of any tree, shrub or plant or part thereof, when the removal shall
be necessary for the construction of any sidewalk, sewer, water main, conduit,
or public improvement, after notifying the Department of Public Services as to
the extent of the project proposed.
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.004 USE AS ANCHORING.
   No person, firm or corporation shall be permitted, for the purpose of
anchorage, to use any wire, rope, chain or cables, nor shall any person, firm
or corporation nail, tie, or in any other manner, fasten any cards, signs,
posters, boards or any other article to any tree, shrub or plant that is now or
may hereafter grow upon any public right-of-ways or public places owned by the
city.
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.005 EXCAVATIONS.
   No person, firm or corporation shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or
trenches, or lay any drive within a radius of ten feet from any tree, shrub or
plant that is now or may hereafter be growing upon any public right-of-ways or
places owned by the city, without first obtaining a written permission from the
Department of Public Services. All persons, firms or corporations desiring to
excavate any ditches, tunnels, and trenches by drives shall deposit, with the
Department of Public Services, a sum sufficient to cover the cost of inspection
and damage that may result.
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.006 TRIMMING OF BRANCHES.
   (A)   Every owner of any tree, shrub or plant overhanging the street or
rights-of-way within the city shall trim the branches so that they shall not
obstruct the light from any street lamp, or obstruct the view of any street
intersection, and so that there shall be a clear space of 14 feet above the
surface of the street or right-of-way.
   (B)   The owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or
broken or decayed limbs which may constitute a menace to the safety of the
public. The city shall have the right to trim any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street
from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic-control device
or sign, such trimming to be confined to the area immediately above the right-
of-way.
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.007 VISIBILITY.
   All trees, shrubs or plants, located on any corner lot within the limits of
the city, that obstruct the view of a driver of a vehicle approaching a street
intersection, shall not be permitted to grow to a height of more than three
feet above the street or right-of-way, in order that the view of the driver of
a vehicle approaching a street intersection shall not be obstructed.
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.008 DUTY OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICES.
   It shall be the duty of the Department of Public Services in all cases of
any violation of §
54.007, to notify the owners of any property failing to trim any trees, shrubs
or plants in conformity with §
54.007 and order the owners to cut the same within ten days to the height
specified.
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.009 VIOLATION.
   If any owners of property fail to trim any trees, shrubs, or plants to the
height specified within ten days after being notified so to do, the Department
of Public Services shall order the tree, shrub or plant to be trimmed to the
height herein specified, and the cost thereof if unpaid, shall become a legal
lien against the property.
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 54.010 MOVING OF BUILDINGS.
   Every person, firm or corporation, whether licensed or otherwise, moving any
building or other structure of either wood, metal, stone or concrete, measuring
over eight feet, six inches wide; and 12 feet high, measuring from the surface
of the roadway, along any street or highway or across any public place within
the city, shall file a written notice with the Department of Public Services of
the date of their intentions so to do, stating the time, the place from and to
which the building or structure will be moved, the route proposed to be taken
and shall not in any manner damage any trees or shrubs planted on any street or
highway, and shall deposit, with the Department of Public Services, a sum
sufficient to cover the cost of inspection and damage that may result. The
Department of Public Services shall have authority to refuse issuance of a
permit or change the route if, in their opinion the moving will cause damage to
any property.
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.011 PERMIT FOR TREE PLANTING.
   The Department of Public Services shall have control over all trees located
within the public right- of-way or places owned by the city and the planting
and care thereof, subject to the regulations in the chapter. It is unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation to plant any trees, shrubs or any other plant
in any public right-of-ways within the city, either for themselves or anyone
else, until he or she has secured written permission from the Department of
Public Services, which permission shall be complied with in strict accordance
with the rules and regulations therein. The application for permission shall
designate locations and species of trees, shrubs or plants to be planted and
method proposed to be followed. Every such permit authorized by the Department
of Public Services shall specifically state the extent of the authorization and
conditions to which it is subject. The Department of Public Services shall have
authority to refuse the granting of permission when planting is likely to
create a public danger or a nuisance.
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 54.012 REMOVAL OF TREES AND SHRUBS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Department of Public Services and its
representatives and/or employees to remove or cause to be removed all trees,
shrubs or plants, planted upon the public right-of- way and public places
within the city when, in his or her judgment, removal shall be beneficial to
the peace, health and safety of the public, for public improvements or where
the trees, shrubs or plants are detrimental to the growth of adjacent trees.
The cost for removals shall be from funds provided from general taxation.
   (B)   Where an owner of property abutting a public right-of-way or public
places within the city requests the removal of a tree, the Department of Public
Services is authorized, in its sole discretion, to require as a condition of
granting the approval for such removal, that such property owner make the
removal in accordance with regulations established by the Department of Public
Services, assume all or part of the costs or removing such tree, shrub or
plant, and also require that the tree removed be replaced at some other
approved location by planting another tree, not necessarily of the same type,
or require sufficient funds to be placed in escrow, with the Department of
Public Services to provide for future planting.
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 54.013 DEPOSIT; WHEN REQUIRED.
    Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to remove a live tree for
construction of walks, drives, buildings or any other structures for his or her
own gain, shall deposit with the Department of Public Services a sum equal to
the value of the tree or trees as determined by the Department.
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)
§ 54.014 INTERFERENCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
Department of Public Services or any of its employees, agents or servants,
while engaged in carrying out provision of this chapter and while engaged in
and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, spraying or removing of any
trees, shrubs or plants in or upon any public right-of-way or public place in
the city or private grounds as authorized in this chapter.
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.015 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Department of Public Services may make and publish additional rules
regulations pertaining to planting, removal and care of trees, scrubs or plants
not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. No person, firm or
corporation shall fail to obey such rules or regulations.
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 54.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any provision of
this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 2010-4, passed 4-27-2010)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   LOADING REGULATIONS
      
74.   BICYCLES
      
75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Michigan Vehicle Code
   
70.001   Code adopted
   
70.002   References in Code
   
70.003   Notice to be published
Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act
   
70.015   Adoption
   
70.016   Reference to mean City of Hamtramck
Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan Cities, Townships and Villages
   
70.030   Adoption
   
70.031   Reference to mean City of Hamtramck
 
   
70.999   Penalty
MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE
§ 70.001 CODE ADOPTED.
   The Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1
through 257.923 is adopted by reference.
(Ord. 485, passed 9-19-2002)
§ 70.002 REFERENCES IN CODE.
   References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to local authorities shall mean the
City of Hamtramck.
(Ord. 485, passed 9-19-2002)
§ 70.003 NOTICE TO BE PUBLISHED.
   The City Clerk shall publish this subchapter in the manner required by law
and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the
Michigan Vehicle Code and the fact that a complete copy of the Code is
available to the public at the office of the Clerk for inspection.
(Ord. 485, passed 9-19-2002)
MICHIGAN MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY ACT
§ 70.015 ADOPTION.
   The Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act, as amended and Public Act 300 of
1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.722 is hereby adopted by reference in it entirety
and made part thereof. Notice is hereby given that a copy of the Public Safety
Act and Michigan Compiled Law is available for inspection during business hours
at the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. 462, passed 5-1-1997)
§ 70.016 REFERENCE TO MEAN CITY OF HAMTRAMCK.
   Any references in the Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act and/or Public Act
300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.722 to a city, township or village and/or
governmental unit shall mean the City of Hamtramck.
(Ord. 462, passed 5-1-1997)
UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE FOR MICHIGAN CITIES, TOWNSHIPS AND VILLAGES
§ 70.030 ADOPTION.
   (A)   The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages
promulgated by the Director of State Police and published in the 1979 edition
of the Michigan Administrative Code and amendments thereto is hereby adopted by
reference in its entirety and made a part hereof.
   (B)   Current and future amendments and current and future addenda are
adopted by reference.
   (C)   Notice is hereby given that a copy of the Code is available for
inspection during business hours at the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. 410, passed 2-11-1984; Am. Ord. 461, passed 5-1-1997)
§ 70.031 REFERENCE TO MEAN CITY OF HAMTRAMCK.
   References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan Cities, Townships and
Villages to governmental unit shall mean the City of Hamtramck.
(Ord. 410, passed 2-11-1984)
§ 70.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.
   (B)   Michigan Vehicle Code. The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle
Code are adopted by reference, provided, however, that the city may not enforce
any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of
imprisonment is greater than 93 days.
(Ord. 485, passed 9-19-2002)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.001   Adopted by reference
§ 71.001 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The revised and amended ordinances regulating traffic, copies of which are
on file in the office of the City Clerk, are adopted and incorporated as part
of this Code of Ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 86, passed 3-26-1929; Am. Ord. 179, passed 11-12-1941; Am. Ord. 205,
passed 10-23-1947; Am. Ord. 245, passed 10-29-1957; Am. Ord. 285, passed 10-1-
1963; Am. Ord. 310, passed 9-5-1967; Am. Ord. 311, passed 2-20-1968; Am. Ord.
327, passed 3-10-1970; Am. Ord. 332, passed 8-25-1970; Am. Ord. 333, passed 12-
15-1970; Am. Ord. 339, passed 7-13-1971; Am. Ord. 381, passed 10-17-1978; Am.
Ord. 431, passed 10-6-1988)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
Parking on Public Lots
   
72.001   Restrictions
   
72.002   Removal and impoundment
   
72.003   Registered owner
Prohibited Parking
   
72.005   Prohibited parking
Parking Roadway
   
72.010   Standing or parking close to curb; violations as civil infractions
Impoundment
   
72.015   Impoundment situations
   
72.016   Police Chief action
Parking of Boat, Boat Trailer, Utility Trailers,
and Campers on Residential Streets
   
72.030   Restriction
   
72.031   Violation
   
72.032   Enforcement
Parking Meters
   
72.045   Definitions
   
72.046   Need for parking meters; recommendation
   
72.047   Council approval; effect
   
72.048   Parking meter zones
   
72.049   Parking meters established
   
72.050   Designation of parking spaces
   
72.051   Installation of parking meters
   
72.052   Operation of parking meters
   
72.053   Parking time limits
   
72.054   Meter violations
   
72.055   Towage and storage
   
72.056   Registration plate prima facie evidence that owner is violator
   
72.057   Use of funds
   
72.058   Duties of City Treasurer
Permit Parking Areas
   
72.070   Designation by City Council
   
72.071   Residential disability parking
   
72.072   Use of permit by unauthorized persons
   
72.073   Falsified information to obtain permit
   
72.074   Permit issued
   
72.075   Reserved
   
72.076   Reserved
   
72.077   Fees
   
72.078   Reserved
   
72.079   Threatening a person lawfully parked prohibited
Parking on Private Premises
   
72.090   Unlawful to park without permission
   
72.091   Parking without permission on private premises prima facie evidence
 
   
72.999   Penalty
PARKING ON PUBLIC LOTS
§ 72.001 RESTRICTIONS.
   A person shall not park a vehicle on any parking lot open to the public for
the purpose of doing any of the following:
   (A)   Displaying the vehicle for sale;
   (B)   Washing, polishing, greasing and repairing the vehicle, except for
repairs necessitated by an emergency;
   (C)   Displaying advertising;
   (D)   Selling merchandise from the vehicle except in a duly established
market place or when so authorized or licensed under the ordinances of this
governmental unit; and/or
   (E)   Storage for more than 48 continuous hours.
(Ord. 449, passed 10-20-1994; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020) Penalty,
see §
72.999
§ 72.002 REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT.
   The Police Chief and/or any person or persons designated by the Police Chief
may remove and impound any vehicle from any area where it is parked in
violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 449, passed 10-20-1994; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 72.003 REGISTERED OWNER.
   The registered owner of any vehicle parked in violation of this subchapter
shall be presumed to be the party who committed the violation.
(Ord. 449, passed 10-20-1994; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020)
PROHIBITED PARKING
§ 72.005 PROHIBITED PARKING.
   (A)   A vehicle must not be parked, except if necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the law or the directions of a police
officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk.
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway.
      (3)   Within an intersection.
      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
      (5)   On a crosswalk.
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk, or if there is not a crosswalk, then
within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines at an intersection of
highways.
      (7)   Within 30 feet of the approach to a flashing beacon, stop sign, or
traffic-control signal located at the side of a highway.
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of a
point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by an official sign or marking.
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to a fire station within 75 feet of
the entrance if properly marked by an official sign.
      (11)   Alongside or opposite a street excavation or obstruction, if the
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
      (12)   On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
      (13)   Upon a bridge or other elevated highway structure or within a
highway tunnel.
      (14)   At a place where an official sign prohibits stopping or parking.
      (15)   In a place or in a manner that blocks immediate egress from an
emergency exit conspicuously marked as an emergency exit of a building.
      (16)   In a place or in a manner that blocks or hampers the immediate use
of an immediate egress from a fire escape conspicuously marked as a fire escape
providing an emergency means of egress from a building.
      (17)   On a street or other area open to the parking of vehicles that
results in the vehicle interfering with the use of a curb-cut or ramp by
persons with disabilities.
      (18)   In violation of an official sign restricting the period of time
for or manner of parking.
      (19)   In a place or in a manner that blocks the use of an alley or
parked in the alley.
      (20)   In a place or in a manner that blocks access to a space clearly
designated as a fire lane.
(Ord. passed 8-22-2023)
PARKING ROADWAY
§ 72.010 STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB; VIOLATIONS AS CIVIL INFRACTIONS.
   (A)   Excepting angled parking or as otherwise provided in this chapter,
whoever stands or parks a vehicle in a roadway must ensure that:
      (1)   The vehicle is parallel with the edge of the roadway;
      (2)   The vehicle is headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement;
and
      (3)   The wheels of the vehicle that are closest to the curb are within
12 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway.
   (B)   Whoever parks or stands a vehicle in a manner contrary to divisions
(A)(1), (A)(2), and (A)(3) is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020)
IMPOUNDMENT
§ 72.015 IMPOUNDMENT SITUATIONS.
   The Police Chief and/or a person or persons designated by him or her may
remove and impound a vehicle from public or private property in any of the
following situations:
   (A)   The vehicle is in a condition that the continued operation of the
vehicle would constitute an immediate hazard to the public;
   (B)   The vehicle is parked or standing in a manner as to create an
immediate public hazard or an obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
   (C)   The vehicle is parked in a posted tow away zone;
   (D)   There is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle or any part of
the vehicle is stolen;
   (E)   It is necessary to seize the vehicle to preserve evidence of a crime
or there is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in the
commission of a crime;
   (F)   Removal of the vehicle is necessary in the interest of public safety
because of fire, flood, storm, snow, natural or man-made disaster and other
emergency;
   (G)   The vehicle is hampering the use of private property by the owner or
person in charge of that property or is parked in a manner which impedes the
movement of another vehicle;
   (H)   The driver of the vehicle is taken into custody by the Police
Department and the vehicle would thereby be left unattended;
   (I)   Removal is necessary to permit snow removal, street construction,
cleaning and repair; tree work and other public utility work after at least 24-
hours notice thereof has been posted;
   (J)   A vehicle is unattended and the registered owner of the vehicle has
six or more unpaid outstanding citations for parking violations. In lieu of or
prior to impoundment under this provision, the Police Chief and/or a person or
persons authorized by him or her may attach to the vehicle a device that will
prevent the vehicle from being moved. A fee set by Council resolution shall be
charged for attachment and removal of the device. The device may be removed by
the Police Chief and/or a person or persons designated by him or her if the
violations and fee for attachment and removal are paid, if security is posted
for court appearance on the violations, if the violations are dismissed, or if
it is necessary to impound the vehicle it is unlawful for any person to remove
a device without authorization of the Police Chief and/or a person or persons
designated by him or her;
   (K)   Inoperative vehicles.
      (1)   No person shall park, store, leave or allow to be left upon private
property controlled by him or her, any motor vehicle in a rusted, wrecked, junk
and partially dismantled or inoperative condition whether attended or not,
unless in connection with an auto maintenance or repair business or unless the
vehicle is completely enclosed within a garage.
      (2)   Provided, however, that while no vehicle can be maintained in the
rear yard for a period not to exceed 30 days after notice to remove the vehicle
is served by the city so long as the vehicle is not within 20 feet of an
abutting residential lot.
   (L)   Unregistered vehicles. No person shall park, store, leave or allow to
be left upon the streets, highways or parking lots of the city, any motor
vehicle not displaying current license plates registered to that vehicle; and
   (M)   In any other situation in which impoundment is authorized under the
State Motor Vehicle Code and adopted by the Uniform Traffic Code.
(Ord. 440, passed 1-30-1992; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 72.016 POLICE CHIEF ACTION.
   (A)   If a vehicle is impounded under §
72.015(L), the Police Chief and/or his or her assigns shall proceed in
accordance with the requirements of § 252d of the State Motor Vehicle Code.
   (B)   If a vehicle is impounded under §
72.015(J), the Police Chief and/or his or her assigns shall not require a bond
or cash deposit by the owner of the motor vehicle in excess of $500 in order to
recover the possession of a motor vehicle pending final adjudication of the
case.
(Ord. 440, passed 1-30-1992; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020)
PARKING OF BOAT, BOAT TRAILER, UTILITY TRAILERS, AND
CAMPERS ON RESIDENTIAL STREETS
§ 72.030 RESTRICTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a boat, boat trailer, utility
trailer, or camper for longer than one hour on any residential street or city
owned property in the city.
(Ord. 427, passed 6-30-1988; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020) Penalty, see
§
72.999
§ 72.031 VIOLATION.
   Any person who violates this subchapter shall be responsible for committing
a civil infraction.
(Ord. 427, passed 6-30-1988; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020) Penalty, see
§
72.999
§ 72.032 ENFORCEMENT.
   All of the provisions of this subchapter shall be enforced by any officer of
the City Police Department, Code Enforcement, or Designee of the Chief of
Police.
(Ord. 427, passed 6-30-1988; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020)
PARKING METERS
§ 72.045 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Hamtramck, Wayne County, Michigan.
   CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Hamtramck, Michigan.
   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Department of Public Works in the city.
   OPERATOR. Every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof
or as the agent, employee and permittee of the owner, or is in actual physical
control of a vehicle.
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a
street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually
engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading
merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs and signals or an
involuntary stopping of the vehicle by reason of causes beyond the control of
the operator of the vehicle.
   PARKING METER. Any mechanical device or meter placed or erected for the
regulation of parking by authority of this subchapter. Each PARKING METER
installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking time established by
the city and when operated shall at all times indicate the balance of legal
parking time, and at the expiration of the period shall indicate illegal or
overtime parking.
   PARKING METER SPACE. Any space within a parking meter zone; adjacent to a
parking meter, which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by
lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb or on the surface of the
street adjacent to or adjoining the parking meters.
   PARKING METER ZONE. Any street or part thereof upon which parking meters are
to be installed and placed in operation.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Department in the city.
   STREET. Any public street, avenue, road, alley, highway, lane, path and
other public place or parking lot located in the city and established for the
use of vehicles.
   TREASURER. The City Treasurer in the city.
   VEHICLE. Any device in upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported upon a street, except a device which is operated upon rails or
tracks.
(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 72.046 NEED FOR PARKING METERS; RECOMMENDATION.
   (A)   Where it is deemed that because of traffic congestion or other cause,
the public safety is imperiled, the public convenience can be better served and
traffic regulations can be more adequately enforced with the assistance secured
through the installation and maintenance of parking meters, parking meters may
be installed under and in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   When the Chief of Police deems that conditions on or along any
particular street or streets in the city appear to require the regulation of
traffic by parking meters, he or she shall make or cause to be made through the
Police Department a survey of the situation to determine the need for the
regulation, and if he or she finds a need therefor, he or she shall make a
determination of the fact, and shall file the determination together with his
or her recommendations with the City Council.
   (C)   The recommendations above referred to shall include among other
things:
      (1)   The parking meter zone or zones;
      (2)   Number of parking meter spaces;
      (3)   State the legal parking time in each zone;
      (4)   State the amount of the parking fee for each zone;
      (5)   State the hours during which the use of parking meters shall be in
operation in each zone; and
      (6)   Make any other recommendation that will facilitate the movement or
control of vehicular traffic and eliminate congestion thereof.
(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 72.047 COUNCIL APPROVAL; EFFECT.
   The Council may by appropriate resolution approve, modify prior to approval
and may disapprove any recommendation. If and when the recommendation is
approved by the Council, the recommendations as approved shall be the
equivalent of adoption by the Council and shall have the same force and effect
as though they had been set forth in a resolution in detail, and shall be
deemed to be regulations promulgated by the Council in the control of traffic
on the streets; provided, however, that nothing herein stated shall be deemed
to prevent the Director of the department whose duty it is to enforce this
subchapter to formulate rules and regulations as authorized by the Charter for
the organization and conduct of the department; provided, further, that the
promulgated regulations by the City Council shall not be effective until signs
have been erected sufficient in size and number to apprise the ordinarily
observant person of the existence of the parking meter regulations. Upon the
approval and the regulations becoming effective, the Chief of Police or their
designee, as hereinafter established, shall thereby be authorized and empowered
to install parking meters and enforce the regulations pertaining thereto as
herein authorized.
(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 72.048 PARKING METER ZONES.
   All zones shall be set by City Council resolution.
(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 72.049 PARKING METERS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   All parking shall be under the direction, supervision and control of
the Chief of Police.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall have the following powers, duties and
responsibilities:
      (1)   To see that the provisions of this subchapter and the regulations
promulgated in connection therewith are enforced at all times;
      (2)   To install or cause to have installed parking meters in places and
locations as have been determined by Council approval as herein provided;
      (3)   To see or cause to see that the meters are properly maintained,
serviced and kept in a state of good repair so that they will be ready, and
available for use and operation when required;
      (4)   To cause the parking meter spaces to be individually marked or
painted on the street surface, curb or parking lots and the markings to be
continuously maintained, after the location thereof has been designated as
herein provided;
      (5)   To cause regular collections of the sealed coin boxes or containers
from the meters and to deliver the boxes with seals unbroken to the Treasurer
or to the person or persons designated by the Treasurer for the receipt of the
boxes and the handling thereof and the accounting for the contents thereof in
his or her office;
      (6)   To cause to obtain as often as necessary from the Treasurer the
quantities of sealed coin boxes or containers for inserting in the parking
meters to replace those removed containing coins, and to insert the empty boxes
in the meters for use;
      (7)   To cause to keep a daily record of the sealed coin boxes properly
identified, which have been removed from meters and delivered to the Treasurer;
      (8)   To erect or cause to be erected signs in sufficient number and of
suitable size to apprise the ordinarily observant person of the existence of
the parking meter regulation applicable to the parking meter space and zone;
      (9)   To sign or cause their designee to sign any and all complaints that
may be necessary for the proper enforcement of this subchapter;
      (10)   If the vehicle is not towed away, to cause to have issued a notice
of violation to every person, either as owner or operator involving every
vehicle that is illegally parked under the provisions of this subchapter and
the regulations promulgated thereunder; and
      (11)   To make recommendations from time to time to the Council covering
any matters requiring the Council's help in enabling parking to function more
effectively and efficiently.
   (C)   Any and all of the duties hereinabove specified may be performed by
the Chief of Police or by the person or persons by him or her duly authorized.
(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 72.050 DESIGNATION OF PARKING SPACES.
   (A)   In determining the number of parking spaces that shall be installed in
each parking zone, a minimum of 20 feet in length, or the current industry
standard, shall be allowed for each space for parallel parking when the space
is interior, and a minimum of 18 feet, or the current industry standard, when
the space is at the end of the zone. All parking shall be parallel to curb,
unless the Chief of Police shall determine and the Council shall approve angle
parking in any zone. A minimum of seven feet in width shall be allowed for
parallel parking, and a minimum of eight feet in width shall be allowed for
angle parking.
   (B)   The individual parking spaces shall be designated by lines painted or
durably marked on the surface of the street or on the curbing.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in a way that the vehicle
shall not be entirely within the limits of the space so designated.
(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020) Penalty, see
§
72.999
§ 72.051 INSTALLATION OF PARKING METERS.
   (A)   After the parking meter zones have been established and the number of
parking spaces determined as herein provided, parking meters shall be installed
upon the curb or sidewalk. Each meter shall be so set as to display a signal
showing legal parking upon the deposit of the appropriate coin or coins which
are lawful money of the United States of America, for the period of time
prescribed by appropriate Council regulation. Each meter shall be so arranged
than upon the expiration of the lawful time limit it will indicate by a proper
visible signal that the lawful parking period has expired, and in cases the
right of the vehicle to occupy the space shall cease and the operator or owner
thereof shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Each parking meter shall also indicate by a proper legend the coin to
be deposited; the hours during which the use of the meter is required; the
legal parking time established; and when operated, each meter shall indicate
visibly on and by a dial and pointer, or otherwise, the elapsing legal parking
time, and upon the expiration of the time, shall indicate the illegal or over-
parking.
(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 72.052 OPERATION OF PARKING METERS.
   Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the Fire or
Police Department, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer,
when any vehicle shall be parked in any parking space alongside or next to
which a parking meter is located, the operator of the vehicle shall, upon
entering the parking meter space, immediately, cause to be deposited the proper
fees as is required for the parking meter and as is designated by proper
directions on the meter, and, failure to deposit the proper fees shall
constitute a violation of this subchapter. Upon the deposit of fees the parking
space may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle during the period of time which
has been prescribed for the zone in which the parking space is located. If the
vehicle shall remain parked in any parking space beyond the parking time limit
set for the parking space, and if the meter shall indicate that the time has
elapsed and that parking is illegal, then, and in that event, the vehicle shall
be considered as parking overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time,
and the parking shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020) Penalty, see
§
72.999
§ 72.053 PARKING TIME LIMITS.
   Parking a vehicle in a designated space in a parking meter zone shall be
lawful for the period of time specified for that zone as shown by a sign on the
meter or by one or more signs posted along the street in sufficient number and
of sufficient size to apprise the ordinarily observant person of the existence
of the limited period within which lawful sparking can be had along and upon
the street. The parking meters shall be operated in the parking meter zones as
designated by Council resolution. Parking of a vehicle in any parking meter
space for a period longer than that allowed by the sign shall be deemed to be
illegal and a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020) Penalty, see
§
72.999
§ 72.054 METER VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this subchapter
for any person:
   (A)   To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name
of, or operated by the person to be parked overtime, or beyond the period of
legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as herein described;
   (B)   To deposit in any parking meter any coin for the purpose of parking
beyond the maximum legal parking time for the particular parking meter zone and
space;
   (C)   To permit any vehicle to remain in any parking space adjacent to any
parking meter while the meter is displaying a signal indicating that the
vehicle occupying the parking space has already been parked beyond the period
prescribed for the parking space;
   (D)   To park any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking space
meter or in a position that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area
designated by the lines or markings;
   (E)   To deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy and
impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this subchapter, except persons legally authorized to open the meter; or
   (F)   To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slugs,
device or metal substance; or other substitute for lawful coins.
(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020; Am. Ord.
passed 8-22-2023) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.055 TOWAGE AND STORAGE.
   (A)   Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in any parking meter space
overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time established for the space,
or shall be found parked therein during any period when parking is prohibited
or shall be found parked in violation of any of the provisions of this
subchapter, the vehicle may be removed by, or under the direction of any person
authorized to enforce this subchapter by means of towing the same to the
automobile and vehicle pound, and the removal shall be at the liability of the
owner. Before the owner or person in charge of the vehicle shall be permitted
to remove the same from the pound, he or she shall furnish evidence of his or
her identity and ownership or right to possession, shall sign a receipt for the
vehicle, the enforcing officer may in lieu, or addition, of towing the vehicle
to the pound serve upon the owner or operator of the vehicle, mail, or attach
to the vehicle, a parking violation citation.
   (B)   The violation citation shall state the date and location of where the
violation occurred, the time of violation, the kind of vehicle, the state
license number of each vehicle, and any other facts relevant to the violation.
A copy of the violation citation may be attached to the vehicle in a
conspicuous place, which will notify the owner or operator that the vehicle was
parked in violation of the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953; Am. Ord. 264, passed 6-6-1961; Am. Ord. 357, passed
7-2-1974; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020; Am. Ord. passed 8-22-2023)
§ 72.056 REGISTRATION PLATE PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE THAT OWNER IS VIOLATOR.
   In any prosecution or proceeding hereunder, the registration plate displayed
on a motor vehicle shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that
the registered owner of a vehicle as the person who parked the vehicle at the
place where the violation occurred.
(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 72.057 USE OF FUNDS.
   The fees deposited for parking meters are required and shall be used to
defray the expense of proper regulation of traffic upon the public streets of
the city; to provide for the cost of supervision, regulation, and control of
the parking of vehicles in parking meter zones, and to cover the cost of
purchase, supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation,
maintenance, control and use of parking meters.
(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 72.058 DUTIES OF CITY TREASURER.
   (A)   The monies collected in meter fees shall be delivered to and received
by the City Treasurer and the City Controller or his or her authorized
representative, and accounted for and deposited by the City Treasurer as,
directed in this subchapter.
   (B)   The City Treasurer shall keep a detailed record of all monies received
from day to day from the several respective meters throughout the city, and
shall prepare a monthly summary of the receipts from each of the meters. A copy
of the summary shall be available to the City Controller and to any other city
official on request. He or she shall also prepare a monthly report of
miscellaneous monies received from fines and penalties from overtime parking
and submit the same the City Council.
(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020)
RESIDENTIAL PARKING AREAS
§ 72.070 DESIGNATION BY CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council is authorized to designate by resolution an area or areas
within the city in which parking is allowed by special permit. Unless Council
later changes allowed permitted areas by resolution, all metered areas shall be
designated as such.
(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020; Am. Ord. 8-
22-2023)
§ 72.071 RESIDENTIAL DISABILITY PARKING.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, at their discretion, is authorized to designate
or remove, special residential disability parking areas upon residential
streets.
   (B)   A resident with a disability may request that the city designate an
on-street disability parking space in the vicinity of their residence. When
granted, the city will add signage and designation. An initial installation fee
and yearly processing and maintenance fee shall be charged and be set by
Council annually.
   (C)   Special residential disability parking is exclusively for the resident
granted the designated area. Requests shall only be granted for residents with
current State of Michigan handicapped parking credentials and exclusive to
their registered vehicles only. Special signage shall be designated by the
Chief of Police for these areas other than traditional handicapped parking
signage.
   (D)   Special residential disability parking users are subject to all
additional parking regulations and enforcement, including street sweeping and
snow removal restrictions. Use of a designated residential disability parking
space by other than the registered user is not permitted, and vehicles found to
be in violation are subject to removal at the sole discretion of the city by
any means necessary including but not limited to towing.
(Ord. passed 8-22-2023)
§ 72.072 USE OF PERMIT BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS.
   It is shall be unlawful to permit an unauthorized person to use a parking
permit to falsify information to obtain these permits or to fail to surrender
the permit to the Chief of Police, or any of his or her designees, on his or
her demand if the permits are used in violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020; Am. Ord.
passed 8-22-2023) Penalty, see §
72.999
§ 72.073 FALSIFIED INFORMATION TO OBTAIN PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsify information to obtain a
parking permit, or to fail to surrender the permit to the Chief of Police, or
his or her duly designated agent, on demand if it is used in violation of this
subchapter or to otherwise violate the regulations governing the issuance of
the permits.
(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020) Penalty,
see §
72.999
§ 72.074 PERMIT ISSUED.
   The Chief of Police or their designee, upon application, shall issue a
parking permit to each applicant for each vehicle leased or owned by the
applicant upon presentation of a current vehicle registration with the
appropriate address and fees paid.
(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 72.075 RESERVED.
§ 72.076 RESERVED.
§ 72.077 FEES.
   There shall be a fee each year of the parking permit as set by Council
resolution.
(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 72.078 RESERVED.
§ 72.079 THREATENING A PERSON LAWFULLY PARKED PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to threaten, prevent or hinder any person who has
lawfully parked, or is attempting to lawfully park, a vehicle within the city.
(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020) Penalty,
see §
72.999
PARKING ON PRIVATE PREMISES
§ 72.090 UNLAWFUL TO PARK WITHOUT PERMISSION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave or cause to be parked
or left any automobile or other motor vehicle on the premises of another after
having been warned not to do so by word of mouth or sign or otherwise, however,
the person shall not be held in violation of this subchapter unless a complaint
by the property owner is first made; provided that this section, shall not
apply to employees of the city in the discharge of their official duties.
(Ord. 236, passed 9-7-1954; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020) Penalty, see
§
72.999
§ 72.091 PARKING WITHOUT PERMISSION ON PRIVATE PREMISES PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.
   The presence of an unattended automobile or other motor vehicle on the
premises of one who is not the owner or in control of the automobile or other
motor vehicle shall raise a prima facie presumption that the registered owner
of the automobile or other motor vehicle parked or left or caused to be parked
or left the automobile or other motor vehicle on the premises, and the burden
of proof shall be upon the registered owner to show otherwise.
(Ord. 236, passed 9-7-1954; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020) Penalty, see
§
72.999
§ 72.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Parking on public lots.  Any person who violates any provision of §§
72.001 through
72.003 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not to exceed
$500, or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or by both a fine and imprisonment
in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 449, passed 10-20-1994)
   (B)   Prohibited parking. Any person who shall violate or fail to comply
with any of the provisions of § 72.005 shall be punishable by a municipal civil
infraction.
   (C)   Impoundment. Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
72.015 and
72.016 shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a find of not more than $500
or to imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days or to both a fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 440, passed 1-30-1992)
   (D)   Parking of boat or trailer on residential streets. Any provision of §§
72.030 through
72.032 which describes an act or omission which constitutes a civil infraction
under the terms of the Michigan Vehicle Code, being Public Act 300 of 1949,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 through 257.923, as amended, shall be processed as a
civil infraction and any person found to have committed a civil infraction may
be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $500 and costs.
(Ord. 427, passed 6-30-1988)
   (E)   Parking meters. Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with
any of the provisions of §§
72.045 through
72.051, or
72.054 through
72.058, or the regulations promulgated by the Council in connection therewith,
who shall counsel, aid or abet any violation or failure to comply, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine of not to exceed $500, or imprisonment for not to exceed 90 days, by both
a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 230, passed 2-3-1953)
   (F)   Operation and time limits. Any person who shall violate or fail to
comply with any of the provisions of §§
72.052 and
72.053 shall be punishable by a municipal civil infraction with a fine set by
City Council annually.
   (G)   Permitted parking areas. Any person convicted of violating any of the
provisions of §§
72.070 through
72.079 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 383, passed 11-28-1978)
   (H)   Parking on private premises. Any person, firm or corporation violating
any provision of §§
72.090 and
72.091 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both a fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court.
(Ord. 236, passed 9-7-1954; Am. Res. 2020-32.2, passed 5-26-2020; Am. Ord.
passed 8-22-2023)
CHAPTER 73: LOADING REGULATIONS
Section
   
73.001   Establishment
   
73.002   Application for loading zone
   
73.003   Erection of no parking signs
   
73.004   Installation and maintenance fees
   
73.005   Establishment of installation and maintenance fees
   
73.006   Exemptions
 
   
73.999   Penalty
§ 73.001 ESTABLISHMENT.
   Special loading, shipping or receiving zones in front of entrances may be
provided and established under the conditions herein provided.
(Ord. 365, passed 5-20-1975)
§ 73.002 APPLICATION FOR LOADING ZONE.
   Any owner or occupant of a building adjacent to a street or alley desiring a
certain loading zone immediately in front of an entrance to the building shall
make application to the Chief of Police setting forth all relevant information
and stating the number of feet desired for that purposes. The Chief of Police
shall have authority to grant or refuse the application when in his or her
judgment the public welfare so requires, or to grant the same with the
restrictions or limitations as he or she may deem necessary. In case the
application is granted, the Chief of Police shall issue to the applicant a
permit, or certificate, setting forth the location of the loading, shipping or
receiving zone the number of feet fixed for the zone and other limitations that
may be pertinent. The permit may, at any time, be withdrawn or modified by the
Chief of Police whenever in his or her judgment the public welfare so requires.
(Ord. 365, passed 5-20-1975) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.003 ERECTION OF NO PARKING SIGNS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, in order to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, shall erect no parking signs and other appropriate signs marking the
limits of the loading, shipping or receiving zones and setting forth the hours
during which the provisions shall be in effect.
   (B)   During the hours when the provisions applicable to the loading zone
are in effect, no vehicle shall be parked in any zone, except for the purpose
of taking on or discharging merchandise or freight, or for the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers, and in no case for longer than 30 minutes.
(Ord. 365, passed 5-20-1975) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.004 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE FEES.
   The installation and maintenance fees for loading, shipping or receiving
zones established under the terms of this chapter shall be as hereinafter
provided.
   (A)   Where the establishment of a zone does not necessitate the removal of
vehicle parking meters, an installation fee of $1 per foot frontage shall be
paid to the city by the applicant to defray the cost of establishing a zone. In
addition, an annual maintenance fee of $5 shall be paid to the city by the
permit holder on or before May 1 of each year to defray the cost of maintenance
for the following 12-month period, or fraction thereof. In the event of failure
to pay the maintenance fee by May 1, the permit issued hereunder shall
automatically expire.
   (B)   Where the establishment of a loading, shipping or receiving zone
necessitates the removal of one or more vehicle parking meters, an installation
fee of $75 shall be paid to the city by the applicant to defray the cost of
removing the vehicle parking meters and installing signs in each loading,
shipping or receiving zone established on the street. In addition, the annual
maintenance fee of $5 shall be paid to the city by the permit holder on or
before May 1 of each year for the zones established where the vehicle parking
meters were removed, where it was necessary to remove not more than two meter
stalls, and an additional fee of $25 shall be paid to the city by the permit
holder for each meter stall in excess of two which shall have been removed to
provide the zone on or before May 1 of each year, the fee to defray maintenance
and loss of revenues to the city for the 12-month period, or fraction thereof
following. In the event of failure to pay the above maintenance fee by May 1,
the permit issued hereunder shall automatically expire.
(Ord. 365, passed 5-20-1975) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.005 ESTABLISHMENT OF INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE FEES.
   The installation and maintenance fees for building entrance zones
established under the terms of this chapter shall be as hereinafter provided:
   (A)   Where the establishment of building entrance zones do not necessitate
the removal of vehicle parking meters, an installation fee of $25 shall be paid
to the city by the applicant to defray the cost thereof. In addition, an annual
maintenance fee of $5 shall be paid to the city by the permit holder on or
before May 1 of each year, the fee to defray maintenance for the 12-month
period, or fraction thereof follow the maintenance fee by May 1, any permit
issued hereunder shall automatically expire.
   (B)   Where the establishment of a building entrance zone necessitates the
removal of one or more vehicle parking meters, an installation fee of $75 shall
be paid to the city by the applicant to defray the cost of removing the vehicle
parking meters and installing signs in each building entrance established on
the street. In addition, an annual maintenance fee of $5 shall be paid to the
city by the permit holder on or before May 1 of each year for each building
entrance zone established in an area where the vehicle parking meters existed,
where it was necessary to remove not more than two meter stalls, and an
additional fee of $25 shall be paid to the city by the permit holder for each
meter stall in excess of two which shall have been removed to provide the
building entrance zone on or before May 1 of each year, the fee to defray
maintenance and loss of revenues to the city for the 12-month period, or
fraction thereof following. Failure to pay the fees shall subject the permit
holder to the penalties established for violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 365, passed 5-20-1975) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.006 EXEMPTIONS.
   The installation and maintenance fees to be paid under the provisions of
this chapter shall not be required of governmental institutions, public or
parochial schools, churches, hospitals, asylums, public libraries, public
museums or charitable institutions.
(Ord. 365, passed 5-20-1975)
§ 73.999 PENALTY.
   Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed $500, or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both a fine and
imprisonment.
(Ord. 365, passed 5-20-1975)
CHAPTER 74: BICYCLES
Section
   
74.001   Short title
   
74.002   Definitions
   
74.003   Authority
   
74.004   Reserved
   
74.005   Registration and record keeping
   
74.006   Record keeping; payment of fees; rules and regulations promulgated by
City Clerk
§ 74.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter may be referred to as the Bicycle Chapter.
(Ord. 494, passed 10-21-2003; Am. Res. 2022-49, passed 4-26-2022)
§ 74.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BICYCLE. As defined by the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 et seq. At the time of the adoption of this chapter,
BICYCLE means a device propelled by human power upon which a person may ride,
having either two or three wheels in a tandem or tricycle arrangement, all of
which are over 14 inches in diameter.
(Ord. 494, passed 10-21-2003; Am. Res. 2022-49, passed 4-26-2022)
§ 74.003 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted under the authority granted to the city under the
Michigan Vehicle Code, being Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. § 257.606.
(Ord. 494, passed 10-21-2003; Am. Res. 2022-49, passed 4-26-2022)
§ 74.004 RESERVED.
§ 74.005 REGISTRATION AND RECORD KEEPING.
   (A)   Every owner desiring to register their bicycle with the City Clerk may
do so. The registration shall state the owner’s name, date of birth, residence
address, make of bicycle, serial number, and any other information as the City
Clerk shall require. A registration fee may also be required, which may be
established by Council resolution annually.
   (B)   Upon registration of the bicycle with the City Clerk, he or she shall
cause to attach proof of registration to the bicycle. The City Clerk shall be
authorized to determine the color, type and form of the proof of registration
to be attached to the bicycle, provided that the proof of registration is
numbered and contains the words “City of Hamtramck, MI.” A new proof of a lost,
mutilated or destroyed proof of registration may be secured from the City Clerk
upon filing of an affidavit with him or her, demonstrating the facts, and upon
payment of the appropriate fee.
   (C)   All proof of registration shall remain the property of the city and
shall not be covered, obscured, bent, altered, or defaced in any manner likely
to impair its legibility. No person shall remove, destroy, mutilate, alter, or
counterfeit any proof of registration, or issue any forged or counterfeit proof
of registration.
(Ord. 494, passed 10-21-2003; Am. Res. 2022-49, passed 4-26-2022) Penalty, see
§
74.999
§ 74.006 RECORD KEEPING; PAYMENT OF FEES; RULES AND REGULATIONS PROMULGATED BY
CITY CLERK.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall keep a complete and accurate record of all
bicycle registrations.
   (B)   All fees required by this chapter shall be established by resolution
annually by the City Council during adoption of the annual budget.
(Ord. 494, passed 10-21-2003; Am. Res. 2022-49, passed 4-26-2022)
CHAPTER 75: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Truck routes
SCHEDULE I. TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any truck whether loaded or unloaded,
weighing more than 8,000 pounds as determined by its certificate of
registration, to be operated on any street in the city except those streets
hereinafter designated as “truck routes,” provided, however, the provisions of
this section shall not apply to trucks in excess of the weight limit herein
specified when the operation of the truck is necessary for the purposes of
making one or more deliveries or pickups of materials, manufactured products,
goods, wares and merchandise on streets other than those designated “truck
routes” in the city; provided further, that the operation shall be permitted
only for the shortest possible distance when necessary to effect the delivery
or pickup; provided further that trucks operated by the city in connection with
the rendering of necessary service to the residents of the city may be operated
on any or all streets in the city.
   (B)   The streets designated in this chapter as “truck routes” shall be
posted in a conspicuous place upon or at the entrance to the street or highway
or part thereof affected, with a suitable sign indicating the words “truck
route.”
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to park any truck, weighing in excess of 8,000
pounds as determined by its certificate of registration, on any street in the
city. The Chief of Police, for good cause shown, may grant special parking
permits allowing parking of those vehicles, provided the permit is granted for
a definite and specific period of time.
   (D)   All the provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the City
Police Department.
   (E)   A violation of this chapter shall constitute a civil infraction
subjecting the violator to civil fines and court costs as permitted by law.
   (F)   The streets hereinabove referred to as “truck routes” are hereby
designated as follows.
Alpena Avenue from Caniff Avenue to Edwin Avenue
Buffalo Avenue from Caniff Avenue to Holbrook Avenue
Caniff Avenue from Grand Haven Avenue to Buffalo Avenue
Carpenter Avenue from Conant Avenue to Dequindre Avenue
Commor Avenue from Dequindre Avenue to Grand Trunk RR
Conant Avenue from Hamtramck Drive to Carpenter Avenue
Denton Avenue from Conant Avenue to St. Aubin Avenue
Dequindre Avenue from Carpenter Avenue to Poland Avenue
Hamtramck Drive from Conant Avenue to West City Limit
Holbrook Avenue from St. Aubin Avenue to Buffalo Avenue
Joseph Campau Avenue from Denton Avenue to Hamtramck Drive
Lumpkin Avenue from Denton Avenue to Poland Avenue
Miller Avenue from Conant Avenue to McDougall Avenue
Nagel Avenue from Caniff Avenue to Carpenter Avenue
Poland Avenue from Lumpkin Avenue to Dequindre Avenue
Vincent Avenue from Conant Avenue to Marcus Avenue
 
(Ord. 416, passed 5-7-1985; Am. Ord. 471, passed 5-13-1999)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FIREWORKS
      
92.   DANGEROUS OR ABANDONED BUILDINGS
      
93.   NUISANCES
      
94.   ALARM SYSTEMS
      
95.   LEAD HAZARDS
      
96.   FORECLOSED, VACANT OR ABANDONED PROPERTY
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.001   Short title
   
90.002   Purpose
   
90.003   Definitions
   
90.004   Prohibition of certain animals
   
90.005   Cruelty to animals; cropping dog ears; docking dog tails; cruelty to
birds or poultry
   
90.006   Animals in motor vehicle
   
90.007   Abandonment, transport, vehicle accident
   
90.008   Sale, barter or give away of animals as pets or novelties
   
90.009   Animal shelter
   
90.010   Animal rescue organizations, permit required, regulation
   
90.011   Responsibility for damages
   
90.012   Violation notices
Domestic Animals
   
90.013   General
   
90.014   License applications; dogs
   
90.015   Tags
   
90.016   Service dog; no fees
   
90.017   Dog at large
   
90.018   Harboring a barking dog or howling cat
   
90.019   Harboring a vicious animal
   
90.020   Stray animals
   
90.021   Kennels, fees, and regulations
   
90.022   Outdoor tethering, unattended
Community Cats
   
90.023   Management of community cats
Sanitation and Disease
   
90.024   Sanitation requirements
   
90.025   Vermin
   
90.026   Vermin affected areas
   
90.027   Vermin infestation
   
90.028   Vermin proofing
   
90.029   Exposure to rabies
Religious Sacrifice
   90.030   Religious animal sacrifice
 
   
90.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and cited as Animal chapter of the city.
(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984; Am. Ord., passed 11-22-2022)
§ 90.002 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, comfort
and general welfare of the community through the proper control and care of
animals by their owners and others.
(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984; Am. Ord., passed 11-22-2022)
§ 90.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMALS. Shall include all animals both permitted and prohibited, but not be
limited to pigs, cats, dogs, sheep, goats, chickens, ducks, rabbits, ponies,
horses, and any other animals.
   ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION. Shall mean where more than two dogs and/or four
cats over four months of age are regularly harbored for longer than two weeks,
primarily for the purpose of fostering animals until adoption.
   AT LARGE. Any animal shall be deemed at large when it is off the property of
its owner and not under the control of a competent person.
   BIRDS. Includes domestic birds, including pigeons.
   COMMUNITY CAT. Shall mean any free-roaming, feral, or barn cat that may be
cared for by one or more residents of the immediate area and which has no
discernable form of ownership identification.
   COMMUNITY CAT CAREGIVER. Shall mean a person who may provide care, including
food, water, shelter, or medical care to a community cat while not being
considered the legal owner, harborer, controller, or keeper of a community cat.
   COMMUNITY CAT COLONY. Shall mean a group of cats that congregates together
as a unit.
   EAR TIPPING. Shall mean the removal of the ¼ inch tip of community cat’s
left ear, performed while the cat is under anesthesia by a licensed
veterinarian and designed to be an indication that the community cat has been
sterilized and vaccinated for rabies.
   EXPOSURE TO RABIES. An animal has been exposed to rabies within the meaning
of this chapter if it has been bitten by, or been in contact with any animal
known to have been in contact with any animal known to have been exposed to
rabies.
   FERAL CAT. Shall mean a cat that: (i) is born in the wild or is the
offspring of an owned or feral cat and is not socialized; or (ii) is a formerly
owned cat that has been abandoned and is no longer socialized.
   FOOD and FOOD STUFFS. Is intended to include human food, grain and other
feed for animals or fowl.
   KENNEL. Any establishment wherein four or more dogs or other warm-blooded
animals are confined or kept for adoption, boarding, breeding, or training
purposes, for remuneration.
   OWNER. Any person, group of persons, association, partner, or corporation
owning, keeping or harboring a dog or other animal.
   PERSON. Any individual, employee, corporation, co-partnership or
association.
   POLICE OFFICER. A police officer of the City of Hamtramck.
   POULTRY. Includes all domestic fowl.
   RESTRAINT. An animal is under restraint within the meaning of this chapter
if it is controlled by a leash, on or within a vehicle being driven or parked
on the street, or confined within the property limits of its owner or keeper.
   TRAP, NEUTER, VACCINATE, AND RETURN PROGRAM (TNVR). A program in which
community cats are humanely trapped, evaluated, vaccinated, sterilized, and ear
tipped by a veterinarian and returned to the trap location with the intent of
controlling or reducing feline population and reproduction.
   VERMIN. Noxious, objectionable, or disgusting animals collectively
especially those of small size that appear commonly and are difficult to
control, as flies, lice, bedbugs, cockroaches, mice, raccoons, and rats.
   VERMIN-PROOF or VERMIN-PROOFING. Applies to a form of construction which
will prevent the ingress or egress of vermin to or from a given space or
building or gaining access to food, water, or harborage. It consists of the
closing and keeping closed by the use of material impervious to vermin gnawing
of every opening in foundations, basements, cellars, exterior and interior
walls, ground or first floors, sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings and other
places that may be reached by vermin climbing, burrowing, or other methods.
   VERMIN CONTROL. Shall mean the distribution of vermin poison and/or the
setting of vermin traps and/or fumigation and/or such other methods of vermin
eradication.
   VERMIN-HARBORAGE. Shall mean any condition under which vermin may find
shelter or protection.   
(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984; Am. Ord., passed 11-22-2022)
§ 90.004 PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.
   (A)   The owning, keeping, or harboring of pigs, horses, cows, sheep, goats,
llamas, domestic fowl, outdoor rabbits is prohibited. This section does not
apply for temporary religious sacrificial purposes as permitted by law.
   (B)   Except for common household pets such as dogs and cats, it shall be
unlawful for any person to keep any animal or fowl within 15 feet of any
dwelling other than dwelling of owner.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any wild
animal.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022; Am. Ord. 2023-01-10, passed 1-10-2023)
§ 90.005 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CROPPING DOG EARS; DOCKING DOG TAILS; CRUELTY TO
BIRDS OR POULTRY.
   (A)   No person shall overdrive, overload, drive when overloaded, overwork,
torture, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance including food, water and
veterinary treatment, cruelly beat, mutilate or cruelly kill, or cause or
procure to be so overdriven, overloaded, driven when overloaded, overworked,
tortured, tormented, deprived of necessary sustenance including food, water and
veterinary treatment, cruelly beaten, mutilated or cruelly killed any animal
and whoever having the charge or custody of any animal, either as owner or
otherwise, inflicts unnecessary cruelty upon the same, or willfully fails to
provide the same with proper food, drink, veterinary care, shelter or
protection from the weather, or not provide grooming necessary to prevent
adverse health conditions.
   (B)   The cropping of the ears of and the docking of the tail of a dog shall
be considered to be a mutilation or cruelty to an animal within the meaning of
this section, unless the cropping or docking is performed by a licensed
registered veterinary surgeon, while the dog is under an anesthetic.
   (C)   No person owning or harboring any animal, or any other person, shall
treat an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner, or willfully or negligently cause
or permit any animal to suffer unnecessary torture or pain.
   (D)   No persons shall molest, injure, kill, or capture any domestic or wild
bird or poultry, or disturb the nest of any wild birds, unless otherwise
permitted by law.
   (E)   No person shall slaughter any animal in the city except for properly
licensed commercial facilities in the business of food preparation or police in
the course of their duties or as permitted by law.
(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984; Am. Ord., passed 11-22-2022; Am. Ord. 2021-01-10,
passed 1-10-2023)
§ 90.006 ANIMALS IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall leave an unattended animal in a standing or parked
motor vehicle in a manner that endangers the animal's health or safety.
   (B)   An officer, firefighter, Michigan Humane Society officer, animal
control officer, or other official emergency responder who holds a reasonable
belief that an animal's safety is in immediate danger from heat, cold, lack of
adequate ventilation, lack of food or water, or other circumstances that could
reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability, or death to the animal
is authorized to take all steps that are reasonably necessary for the removal
of an animal from a motor vehicle.
   (C)   The rescuing responder must leave written notice bearing their name
and office, and the address of the location where the animal can be claimed.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022)
§ 90.007 ABANDONMENT, TRANSPORT, VEHICLE ACCIDENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to abandon an animal or cause an animal to be
abandoned in any place. An animal that is lost by an owner or custodian shall
not be regarded as abandoned under this section when the owner or custodian has
made a reasonable effort to locate the animal.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to transport, carry, or cause to be carried any
live animal upon the hood, fender, running board, or other external part of any
moving motor vehicle or within the open bed of any moving motor vehicle.
   (C)   Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a
domesticated animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be
possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's
owner; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator
shall at once report the accident to the police department.
   (D)   For purposes of this section, returning a community cat to the
location where that cat was found as part of a trap-neuter-return effort is not
considered abandonment.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022)
§ 90.008 SALE, BARTER OR GIVE AWAY OF ANIMALS AS PETS OR NOVELTIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to sell, or offer
for sale, barter or give away baby chicks, rabbits, ducklings or other fowls,
live animals, fish, or reptile as novelties or as a prize in a game, contest,
or other competition, whether or not dyed, colored or otherwise artificially
treated. This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the display or sale of
natural chicks, eggs, or ducklings in proper brooder facilities by hatcheries,
stores, or private residences.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022)
§ 90.009 ANIMAL SHELTER.
   An animal shelter shall be utilized by the city at a place and location as
shall be selected and designated by the City Manager and approved by the City
Council.
   (A)   The owner of an animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter
may claim the animal by properly identifying as the owner of the animal and
upon meeting the following conditions:
      (1)   Payment of an impounding fee and any required micro-chipping fees;
      (2)   Payment of a boarding fee for each 24 hours or fraction thereof
that the animal is held, after the first 24 hours, any and all fees required;
      (3)   The showing of a dog license for the dog, or if the dog has no
license, then the securing of a license and the showing of proof of vaccination
of the dog for rabies, as long as the dog is over six months of age.
   (B)   All fees shall be paid by the owner or responsible agent of the animal
impounded regardless if the animal is surrendered or claimed and failure to do
so is a violation of this chapter. The shelter may waive costs at their
discretion.
(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984; Am. Ord., passed 11-22-2022)
§ 90.010 ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATIONS, PERMIT REQUIRED, REGULATION.
   (A)   No person shall operate an animal rescue organization in the city
without first completing an application for request to operate within the city,
subject to approval of the Chief of Police at their discretion.
   (B)   No person or individual shall operate as a foster for an animal rescue
organization in the city without first completing an application for request to
foster within the city, subject to approval of the Chief of Police at their
discretion.
   (C)   A person or individual harboring a foster dog for 30 days or more
within the city will be required to license the foster dog with the city.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022)
§ 90.011 RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES.
   Every owner of an animal shall be liable for damages for any and all
injuries to person or property caused by the animal, to be determined and
collected in appropriate civil proceedings, and nothing in the chapter
contained shall be construed to impose any liability upon the city, its agents
or employees, for damages caused by the animal.
(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984; Am. Ord., passed 11-22-2022)
§ 90.012 VIOLATION NOTICES.
    Anyone authorized by the City Manager for the enforcement of this chapter,
is hereby authorized upon the witnessing of violations where it is not
practical, possible, or desirable in their judgement to impound the animal may
issue to the owner of the animal a violation.
(Ord. 412, passed 5-8-1984; Am. Ord., passed 11-22-2022)
DOMESTIC ANIMALS
§ 90.013 GENERAL.
   No dog shall be permitted upon the public streets or off the premises of the
owner unless the animal has been immunized against rabies as mandated by the
State of Michigan, and unless the animal is leashed and under the reasonable
control of the owner or unless the animal is confined in the process of being
transported to and from the premises of the owner. For the purpose of this
chapter, an animal shall be deemed under the reasonable control when the animal
is with the owner or some member of the owner's family or some other person
with permission of the owner.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022)
§ 90.014 LICENSE APPLICATIONS; DOGS.
   (A)   Anyone who owns a dog six months or older shall obtain a license from
the City Clerk.
   (B)   The application for license shall be accompanied by current and valid
proof of vaccination of the dog for rabies by a veterinarian licensed to
practice veterinary medicine.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, household, or family unit to
harbor, maintain or keep more than four warm-blooded animals of the same
species when the animals are over six months of age unless the owner obtains a
kennel license under § 90.021.
   (D)   For purposes of this chapter, any person who shall allow or permit any
animal to remain on or about their premises for the space of 14 days or more
shall, for purposes of this chapter only, be deemed the owner thereof.
   (E)   The Police Department or any other person designated by the City
Manager may make inquiry as to the dogs owned, harbored, or kept, or kennels
operated in the city, and whether the dogs and kennels are licensed.
   (F)   The owner of any dog over six months old which is found to be
unlicensed shall be instructed to license the dog. If after 30 days the dog is
not licensed, the owner may be ticketed for a violation of this chapter.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.015 TAGS.
   Upon issuance of a license the tag shall be affixed to the collar of a dog.
The owner shall keep licensing information up to date for the prompt
identification of the owner. In case of the loss of a tag the owner may obtain
a replacement tag from the City Clerk.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.016 SERVICE DOG; NO FEES.
   Licensing fees shall be waived for officially certified service dogs.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022)
§ 90.017 DOG AT LARGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or keeping a dog to permit
the dog to run at large in any street, alley, or public place, or upon the
premises of another without the express permission of the owner or occupant of
the property. All dogs shall be leashed when in public places unless otherwise
permitted.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, a dog shall be deemed not to be
under reasonable control and at large when the dog commits damage to the person
or property of any other than the owner, except in the defense of the owner,
owner's family, or owner's property, while off the premises of the owner.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.018 HARBORING A BARKING DOG OR HOWLING CAT.
   No person shall harbor or keep any dog or cat which by loud and frequent or
habitual and constant barking, yelping, howling, or screeching causes an
annoyance to the neighborhood.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.019 HARBORING A VICIOUS ANIMAL.
   (A)   Any animal that displays vicious or aggressive tendencies shall be
muzzled and restrained when in public places.
   (B)   No person shall harbor or keep a fierce or vicious animal. Vicious is
considered when an animal has bitten a human, unprovoked, and caused serious
physical injury. Whenever any animal is brought to the pound for having bitten
a person, unprovoked, and caused serious physical harm, the Chief of Police or
their designee may, if deemed necessary and after holding the animal for a
sufficient length of time to meet constitutional standards for due process and
the requirements of the Health Department, cause the animal to be destroyed as
a vicious animal.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.020 STRAY ANIMALS.
   (A)   The Police Department or any other person designated by the Chief of
Police may seize and impound any dog straying unlawfully or kept in violation
of this section, and further it shall be the duty of the Police Department or
designated person to humanely handle and if necessary, dispose or destroy the
animal in a humane manner. However, if the owner of the animal is known, they
shall be notified and if the owner or designee appears within 120 hours of the
sending of the notice and produces proof to the satisfaction of the Police
Department or any other person designated by the Chief of Police that the
release of the dog will not result in a future violation of this section, the
dog shall be turned over to the owner thereof after payment of all fees to the
designated city's animal shelter. Absent exigent circumstances, such as to
prevent an immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public,
any seizure of animals on private property shall occur only in conformity with
the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution including but not
limited to obtaining a warrant from a judge or magistrate prior to the seizure
of the animal. The Police Chief shall ensure that the Department has access to
the appropriate materials for any and all warrant applications in order to
expedite any such warrant requests.
   (B)   The operator of the animal shelter will maintain a record on each
identifiable dog acquired, indicating a basic description of the animal, the
date it was acquired and under what circumstances. The record shall also
indicate the date of notice sent to the owner of an animal and subsequent
disposition.
   (C)   Any dog impounded as a stray and subsequently transported to the
city's designated animal shelter shall be micro-chipped prior to return to
their owner, if not already done so prior. All fees shall be charged to the
owner upon recovery of the dog. This does not apply to dogs returned to the
owner prior to their arrival at the animal shelter.
   (D)   This section does not apply to feral or community cats.
   (E)   This section does not apply to animals which are sick or injured to
the extent that the holding period would cause undue suffering, or to animals
whose owners request immediate disposal. Dogs or cats acquired, having been
exposed to rabies, or any dog or cat that has bitten a person or other animal,
shall be kept until the time and under conditions as may be required by the
Police Department.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.021 KENNELS, FEES, AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General. For the purposes of this section, a kennel shall be construed
as an establishment either residential or commercial wherein or whereon four or
more warm blooded animals of the same species, six months or older, are
confined and kept. Wherein or whereon any dog or warm-blooded animal is for
adoption, the premises is used for boarding, grooming, breeding, rescue, or
training purposes, or for remuneration. Any person requiring a kennel license
shall make application to the City Clerk and must also maintain a valid
Hamtramck business license. The license shall be issued only after
investigation of the Building Department, Police Department and Fire Department
regarding compliance with all codes and ordinances of the city, and a report
regarding same shall be submitted in writing to the Clerk's office. The
buildings, including walls and floors, shall be of a construction as will
adequately and comfortably house the animals kept therein and the facilities
used to confine the animals shall be kept clean and free from accumulation of
filth, mud, waste matter, vermin and debris. All warm-blooded animals kept or
maintained in connection within the kennels shall be furnished with a clean,
fresh potable water supply at all times, and adequate and proper food to
maintain the animals in normal condition of health.
   (B)   Fees. The fee for the license shall be set by a resolution of City
Council annually.
   (C)   Vaccination and license. All dogs retained in any kennel shall be
vaccinated and licensed subject to the provisions of this section and state
law.
   (D)   Certificate to be provided.
      (1)   Any person or persons, commercial establishment or organization
offering animals for adoption or sale shall provide the buyer with a
certificate guaranteeing that the animal is free from all disease and has had
all appropriate shots (including name of licensed veterinarian and date).
      (2)   No animal offered for adoption or sale shall be placed in a kennel
or cage where a previously diseased animal was housed until the kennel or cage
is cleaned, disinfected, and found to be free from disease in a manner approved
by the County Health Department and/or any representative of the Michigan
Humane Society.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.022 OUTDOOR TETHERING, UNATTENDED.
   Dogs shall not be left unattended outside of the home without a caretaker
present on the premises and no longer than 30 minutes between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m.
   (A)   Time restrictions and humane standards. It shall be unlawful for any
person to allow an animal to be confined by use of a tether, chain, or similar
restraint:
      (1)   By a tether of less than ten feet in length, or less than four
times the length of the animal's body from tip of nose to base of tail,
whichever is greater;
      (2)   By a tether the length of which allows the animal to cross the
property line of the property on which it is tethered;
      (3)   Using logging chain, tow chain, or other tether that causes injury
or pain to the animal because of the material of which it is made or because of
the size or weight of the tether;
      (4)   By attaching the tether to the animal by a collar that is not
properly fitted or by means of a choke chain collar, pinch collar, or prong
collar;
      (5)   In an area likely to cause injury or pain to the animal because of
entanglement or because of surrounding structures or near a fence it could jump
causing a choking hazard;
      (6)   Tethered without access to shade when the sunlight is likely to
cause overheating;
      (7)   Tethering an animal in an area where bare earth is present, and no
steps have been taken to prevent the surface from becoming wet or muddy in the
event of precipitation;
      (8)   Tethering an animal in an open area where it can be teased by
persons or an open area that does not provide the animal protection from attack
by other animals;
      (9)   Tethering an animal without securing its water supply so that it
cannot be tipped over by the tether.
   (B)   Extreme weather. No animal shall be left outside and unattended,
regardless of access to an outdoor shelter, during any period in which a severe
weather advisory or warning has been issued for the area by the National
Weather Service, or if the temperature is below 43-degrees Fahrenheit or above
90-degrees Fahrenheit. This includes but is not limited to an animal in a
securely fenced in yard, an animal in a kennel, or an animal tethered. This
section does not apply to feral or community cats.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
90.999
COMMUNITY CATS
§ 90.023 MANAGEMENT OF COMMUNITY CATS.
   (A)   The City of Hamtramck: recognizes that a process of trapping,
sterilizing, vaccinating for rabies, ear tipping, and returning cats to their
original location is an effective and humane way to manage the population of
community cats within the city; has determined that this process, known as
TNVR, is the preferred approach for managing the cat population; and will
encourage community organizations in TNVR efforts.
   (B)   The city establishes the following community cat requirements:
      (1)   Community cats may be cared for and fed on the private property of
the caregiver, upon the property of another with the permission of the owner or
property manager, or in public alleys/public parking lots in the presence of
the caregiver.
      (2)   Caregivers of community cats must abide by §
90.024.
   (C)   The Police Chief or their designee shall have the right to remove or
authorize the removal of any free-roaming cat or community cat because of
immediate public health or safety concerns. The Police Chief or their designee
shall comply with Fourth Amendment warrant requirement for any removal
occurring on private property unless constitutionally cognizable exigent
circumstances exist that would require immediate action in furtherance of the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.
   (D)   Healthy community cats that have been trapped by a designated
caretaker in accordance with this section, shall not be considered nor be
impounded. Healthy community cats shall be immediately returned to the location
at which they were found, released to a caregiver, or adopted. Prior to being
returned to the location at which they were found or released to a caregiver,
community cats shall be sterilized, ear tipped while under anesthesia by a
licensed veterinarian, and vaccinated. Under the care of a veterinarian, when a
cat is visibly injured or diseased and appears to be suffering and it
reasonably appears that such cat cannot be expeditiously cured and returned to
the field, it may be humanely euthanized.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
90.999
SANITATION AND DISEASE
§ 90.024 SANITATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every person lawfully keeping any animal shall maintain the premises
in which it is kept in a sanitary condition and free of insects, vermin, or
obnoxious odors.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any animal owned or
harbored to deposit fecal matter in any place other than the premises where the
animal is harbored or kept unless cleaned up contemporaneously.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to feed any domesticated or feral animal
unwholesome or unsuitable food or unclean water to drink or to place same in
unclean or unsuitable containers which are likely to cause or produce disease
in the animal. Feeding is permitted in public alleys and parking lots, as well
as on private property. No street feeding or feeding in public parks is
allowed. Feeding areas must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
Food must be offered to animals in a container and shall not be dumped on the
ground. Any food remaining must be removed within two hours.
   (D)   No person shall feed wild animals or birds on public or private
property. "Bird feeders," designed for this specific purpose and marketed as
such must be elevated at least 48 inches above the ground level.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.025 VERMIN.
   The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare by controlling the spread of vermin-borne diseases and
infections associated with the unsanitary conditions present wherever vermin
are found by requiring that certain structures shall be vermin-proofed, freed
of vermin, and maintained in a vermin-proof and vermin- free condition; by
providing for the proper storage of food and feed; by eliminating certain
conditions favoring the harborage of vermin, and by providing penalties for
violation thereof. This section does not apply to domesticated pet vermin kept
indoors as companion animals.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.026 VERMIN AFFECTED AREAS.
   (A)   Every building erected after the effective date of this chapter and
every alteration, addition, extension, enlargement, or repairs thereto, shall
be vermin proofed and maintained in such condition.
   (B)   Every building, existing at the effective date of this chapter, and
every alteration, addition, extension, enlargement, or repairs thereto, shall
be vermin proofed and maintained in such condition, and all vacant or
unimproved property shall be kept free of vermin harborage at all times. The
owner or owners of such buildings, vacant or unimproved property shall be
responsible for complying with the provisions of this section.
   (C)   All building material, lumber, boxes, cartons, barrels, bottles, cans,
containers, machinery, raw material, junk, fabricated goods, food, food stuff
and similar things which may afford harborage or food for vermin, shall be
kept, stored, or handled in a manner as to deter the harborage of vermin.
   (D)   No building or part thereof shall be used as a place where food and/or
foodstuffs is stored, processed, prepared, or manufactured, sold, or offered
for sale unless such building or part thereof is free from vermin and rodents.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.027 VERMIN INFESTATION.
   Whenever there is a vermin infestation in any building, open area or other
premises the owner, owner's agent, occupants thereof, shall immediately
institute vermin control and shall continuously maintain such measures until
any such building, open area or other premises are free of vermin infestation.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.028 VERMIN PROOFING.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, contractor, public utility, or
any other person in making alterations, additions, extensions, enlargements, or
repairs, or in making installation of wires, conduits, pipes, or other
installations, or for any other purpose, to remove and fail to restore in like
condition the vermin proofing from any building or to make new openings therein
that are not vermin proofed.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.029 EXPOSURE TO RABIES.
   (A)   Whoever owns or harbors any animal which is bitten by another animal
showing symptoms of rabies shall report the incident to the Police Department.
   (B)   Any person in possession of an animal which has contracted rabies, or
which has been bitten by an animal suspected of being afflicted with rabies, or
which has bitten any person shall, upon demand of the Police Department or any
other person designated by the Chief of Police produce and surrender up the
animal to the Police Department or its designee to be held for observation for
a period of ten days. Provided, that with the approval of the Chief of Police
or their designee, any animal may be surrendered to a registered veterinarian
or to any approved, non-profit corporation organized for the purpose of
sheltering dogs, or may be confined for a period of ten days at the owner's
home. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or allow the removal of an
animal so confined for observation from the premises without permission of the
Chief of Police or their designee. Every owner, or other person, upon
ascertaining that a dog is rabid, shall immediately notify the Police
Department who shall, with the consent of the owner, remove the dog to the
pound or summarily destroy it. If the owner refuses to consent to removal or
destruction, the Police Department shall apply for and obtain a warrant from a
court of competent jurisdiction. All costs incurred in this section, including
those necessary for obtaining any order of removal/destruction, shall be at the
expense of the owners.
(Ord., passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
90.999
RELIGIOUS SACRIFICE
§ 90.030 RELIGIOUS ANIMAL SACRIFICE.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit, abridge or in
any way hinder the religious freedom of any person or group. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this chapter, ritual handling or other preparation of
livestock for ritual slaughter are exempted from the terms of this chapter. For
the purposes of this section, the term “ritual slaughter” means slaughter in
accordance with the below definition. To conform with the provisions and intent
of this chapter, animals not previously rendered insensible, and to be
slaughtered in accordance with a humane method as defined in the definition
below, shall be slaughtered immediately following total suspension from the
floor as otherwise proscribed by city and state law.
      (1)   HUMANE METHOD. Means either:
         (a)   A method whereby the animal is rendered insensible to pain by
mechanical, electrical, chemical or other means that is rapid and effective,
before being shackled, hoisted, thrown, cast or cut; or
         (b)   A method in accordance with ritual requirements of any religious
faith whereby the animal suffers loss of consciousness by anemia of the brain
caused by the simultaneous and instantaneous severance of the carotid arteries
with a sharp instrument.
      (2)   Residents conducting ritual religious sacrifice shall dispose of
all waste in accordance with local, state, and federal law.
(Ord. 2021-01-10, passed 1-10-2023) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Animals.
      (1)   Any person violating §§
90.001 through
90.029 shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine of not more than $300
and 24 hours community service in the discretion of the court.
      (2)   Each day that a violation is continued or permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense punishable upon conviction as herein provided.
      (3)   Upon a second violation of
Chapter 90 shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine of not more than
$1,000 or to imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days or to both a
fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 282, passed 3-12-1963; Am. Ord. 308, passed 4-11-1967; Am. Ord. 412,
passed 5-8-1984; Am. Ord., passed 11-22-2022; Am. Ord. 2023-01-10, passed 1-10-
2023)
CHAPTER 91: FIREWORKS
Section
   
91.001   Definitions
   
91.002   Prohibition on use of consumer fireworks
   
91.003   Possession of consumer fireworks by minor
   
91.004   Sale, give, furnish to minor
   
91.005   Ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks
   
91.006   Restrictions on use when under the influence
   
91.007   Enforcement; seizure
 
   
91.999   Penalty
§ 91.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APA. The American Pyrotechnics Association.
   APA STANDARD 87-1. The APA Standard 87-1, Standard for Construction and
Approval for Transportation of Fireworks, Novelties, and Theatrical
Pyrotechnics, 2001 edition, published by the American Pyrotechnics Association
of Bethesda, Maryland.
   CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible
efforts by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction,
chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States
Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that
are listed in APA Standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3 or 3.5. CONSUMER FIREWORKS do not
include low impact fireworks.
   DEPARTMENT. The State of Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory
Affairs.
   DISPLAY FIREWORKS. Large fireworks devices that are explosive materials
intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or
audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27
CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172 and APA Standard 87-1, 4.1.
   FIREWORK or FIREWORKS. Any composition or device, except for a starting
pistol, flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible
or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation. FIREWORKS consist
of consumer fireworks, low impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display
fireworks and special effects.
   LOW IMPACT FIREWORKS. Ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase
is defined under APA Standards 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8 and 3.5.
   MINOR. An individual who is less than 18 years old.
   NOVELTIES. That term as defined under APA Standard 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2,
3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following:
      (1)   Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls,
or individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of explosive content
per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cap.
      (2)   Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy
guns in which toy caps as described in division (1) are used, that are
constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place
for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so
as to form a missile by the explosion.
      (3)   Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding one-eighth inch in
diameter.
      (4)   Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes
with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer's
name and the quantity contained in each box are printed on the box, and toy
smoke devices.
   PERSON. An individual, agent, association, charitable organization, company,
LLC, corporation, labor organization, or any other legal or commercial entity.
(Ord. 486, passed 11-6-2002; Am. Ord. 2014-41, passed 6-10-2014; Am. Ord.,
passed 6-23-2020)
§ 91.002 PROHIBITION ON USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS.
   (A)   No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks within the
City of Hamtramck, except this prohibition shall not preclude any person from
the ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks on the following days
after 11:00 a.m.:
      (1)   December 31 until 1:00 a.m. on January 1.
      (2)   The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day until
11:45 p.m. on each of those days.
      (3)   June 29 to July 4 until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days.
      (4)   July 5, if that date is a Friday or Saturday, until 11:45 p.m.
      (5)   The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day until 11:45
p.m. on each of those days.
      (6)   Eid al-Adha until 11:45 p.m.
      (7)   Eid-al-Fitr (End of Ramadan) until 11:45 p.m.
      (8)   Hijra (Islamic New Year) until 11:45 p.m.
   (B)   This provision does not apply to City of Hamtramck sponsored events.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall upon
conviction be imposed a civil fine of $1,000 for each violation of the
ordinance and no other fine or sanction. Remittance of $500 of the fine
collected under the ordinance shall be provided to the local law enforcement
agency responsible for enforcing the ordinance.
(Ord. 2014-41, passed 6-10-2014; Am. Ord., passed 6-23-2020) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.003 POSSESSION OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS BY MINOR.
   A minor shall not possess consumer fireworks.
(Ord. 2014-41, passed 6-10-2014; Am. Ord., passed 6-23-2020) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.004 SALE, GIVE, FURNISH TO MINOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, sell, furnish, give
or cause to be sold, furnished or given any consumer fireworks to a person
under the age of 18 years A person that violates this section shall be ordered
to pay a civil fine of not more than $1,000, or, for a second or subsequent
violation of this section, a civil fine of not more than $2,500. For all
violations issued under this section the "Department" shall be notified. The
age of an individual purchasing consumer fireworks shall be verified by any of
the following:
   (A)   An operator's or chauffeur's license issued under the Michigan Vehicle
Code, 1949 PA 300, being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 to 257.923.
   (B)   An official state personal identification card issued under 1972 PA
222, being M.C.L.A. §§ 28.291 to 28.300.
   (C)   An enhanced driver license or enhanced official state personal
identification card issued under the enhanced driver license and enhanced
official state personal identification card act, 2008 PA 23, being M.C.L.A. §§
28.301 to 28.308.
   (D)   A military identification card.
   (E)   A passport.
   (F)   Any other bona fide photograph identification that establishes the
identity and age of the individual.
(Ord. 486, passed 11-6-2002; Am. Ord. 2014-41, passed 6-10-2014; Am. Ord.,
passed 6-23-2020) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.005 IGNITION, DISCHARGE AND USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS.
   No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on public
property, school property, religious institution property or the property of
another without that person or organization's express permission to use those
fireworks on those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a
person that violates this subsection is responsible for a state civil
infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $500.
(Ord. 2014-41, passed 6-10-2014; Am. Ord., passed 6-23-2020) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.006 RESTRICTIONS ON USE WHEN UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   A person shall not discharge, ignite or use consumer fireworks or low impact
fireworks while under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance
or combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance (as defined by
M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1d and 257.8b). A person that violates this section is
responsible for a state civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine
of not more than $1,000.
(Ord. 2014-41, passed 6-10-2014; Am. Ord., passed 6-23-2020) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.007 ENFORCEMENT; SEIZURE.
   (A)   The City Fire Marshal, Fire Chief, or their respective designee(s), or
sworn law enforcement officers of the city are authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   If the City Fire Marshal, Fire Chief, or their respective designee, or
a sworn law enforcement officer of the city, determines that a violation of
this chapter has occurred, the Fire Marshal, Fire Chief, or designee, or sworn
officer may seize the consumer fireworks as evidence of the violation.
   (C)   Following a final disposition of an appeal of a conviction under this
act, the seizing agency may dispose of or destroy any fireworks retained as
evidence in that prosecution.
      (1)   A person from whom fireworks are seized under this act shall pay
the actual costs of storage and disposal of the seized fireworks if found
guilty, responsible, or liable for a violation under this act.
   (D)   The seizing agency may use fireworks described in this section for
training purposes.
(Ord. 2014-41, passed 6-10-2014; Am. Ord., passed 6-23-2020) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided in above, if a person violates this chapter,
the person is guilty of a crime as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days or a fine of not more than
$1,000, or both.
      (2)   If the violation causes damage to the property of another person, a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of
not more than $5,000, or both.
      (3)   If the violation causes serious impairment of a body function of
another person, a felony punishable by imprisonment for not more than five
years or a fine of not more than $5,000, or both.
      (4)   If the violation causes the death of another person, a felony
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 15 years or a fine of not more
than $10,000, or both.
   (B)   In addition to any other penalty imposed for the violation of this
act, a person that is found guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be
required to reimburse the appropriate governmental agency for the costs of
storing seized fireworks that the governmental agency confiscated for a
violation of this chapter. This reimbursement shall be in a form and at a time
as required by the City of Hamtramck and as otherwise required by law.
(Ord. 486, passed 11-6-2002; Am. Ord. 2014-41, passed 6-10-2014; Am. Ord.,
passed 6-23-2020)
CHAPTER 92: DANGEROUS OR ABANDONED BUILDINGS
Section
   
92.001   Dangerous buildings defined
   
92.002   Notice of dangerous building; contents; Board of Appeals; service
   
92.003   earing; testimony determination to close proceedings or order building
or structure demolished, made safe, or properly maintained; failure to appear
or noncompliance with order; hearing; enforcement; reimbursement and notice of
cost; lien; remedies
   
92.004   Duties of Housing Code Inspector
   
92.005   Enforcement of judgement; lien for judgement amount; priority
   
92.006   Duties of City Attorney
   
92.007   Emergency cases
   
92.008   When owner absent from the city
   
92.009   Administrative liability
   
92.010   Duties of Fire Department
   
92.011   Duties of Police Department
   
92.012   Appeals
 
   
92.999   Penalty
§ 92.001 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS DEFINED.
   All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects
shall be deemed DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:
   (A)   Those whose exterior or interior walls or other vertical structural
members list, lean or buckle to an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base;
   (B)   Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more, of damage
or deterioration of the supporting member or members or 50% of damage or
deterioration of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls or covering;
   (C)   Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs
or in which the same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be
reasonably safe for the purpose used;
   (D)   Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to
have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare
of the occupants or the people of the city;
   (E)   Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to
decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or are likely to cause
sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or
general welfare of those living therein;
   (F)   Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate
to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who
live or may live therein;
   (G)   Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic
or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means
of communication;
   (H)   Those which have parts thereof which are so attached they may fall and
injure members of the public or property;
   (I)   Any building or structure which becomes hazardous to the safety,
health or welfare of the public by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment;
   (J)   Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the Building
Code of this city or any provision of the Fire Prevention Code or other
ordinances of this city;
   (K)   Any building which shall become vacant and open at door or window,
leaving the interior exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by
trespassers or animals;
   (L)   Any building which has been damaged, vandalized or has deteriorated to
an extent as to be unfit or unsuitable for occupancy and which has not been
made habitable or safe to the standards of this chapter within 30 days after
notice by the building official upon the last known owner or person having the
right to possession thereof; and/or
   (M)   Any sign, fence, shed, lean-to, cellar or other structure which has
become so rotted, broken, infirm or dilapidated as to be likely to fall over or
otherwise injure persons coming upon the premises.
   (N)   A part of the building or structure is likely to fall, become detached
or dislodged, or collapse and injure persons or damage property.
   (O)   The building or structure, or part of the building or structure,
because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or the
removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or
for other reasons, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some
portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is
likely to fall or give way.
   (P)   A building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, including the adjoining grounds, because of dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit
for human habitation, or is in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or
disease, or is likely to injure the health, safety, or general welfare of
people living in the dwelling.
   (Q)   Whenever any building becomes vacant, dilapidated, and open at doors
or windows, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or
accessible to entrance by trespassers.
   (R)   A building or structure which is partially completed unless such
building or structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a
valid and subsisting building permit issued by the city and unless such
construction is completed within one year. The City Council may, upon a showing
of good cause, extend the time for completion of such building or structure.
(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980; Am. Ord. passed 8-22-2023)
§ 92.002 NOTICE OF DANGEROUS BUILDING; CONTENTS; BOARD OF APPEALS; SERVICE.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this act, if a building or
structure is found to be a dangerous building, the city shall issue a notice
that the building or structure is a dangerous building.
   (B)   The notice shall be served on the owner, agent, or lessee that is
registered with the city under the provisions of this section, as is
hereinafter stated. If an owner, agent, or lessee is not registered pursuant to
the provisions of this section, the notice shall be served on each owner of or
party in interest in the building or structure in whose name the property
appears on the last local tax assessment records. Posting of notice upon the
structure in conjunction with service upon each owner or party in interest in
the building, shall also constitute proper service.
   (C)   A registry of owners and premises shall be maintained by the city.
   (D)   The notice shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person to
whom the notice is directed either personally or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, addressed to the owner or party in interest at the address
shown on the tax records. If a notice is served on a person by certified mail a
copy of the notice shall also be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building
or structure. The notice shall be served upon the owner or party in interest at
least ten days before the date of the hearing included in the notice. If the
premises are managed or operated by an agent, the agent's name and place of
business shall be placed with the name of the owner in the registry.
   (E)   The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing on whether
the building or structure is a dangerous building. The person to whom the
notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause at the hearing why
the Construction Board of Appeals, as established pursuant to and in compliance
with the State Building Code, MCL 125.1501 et seq., as amended, should not
order the building or structure to be demolished, otherwise made safe, or
properly maintained.
   (F)   (1)   The Construction Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the City
Council and shall serve at its pleasure. The Construction Board of Appeals
shall consist of the following members:
         (a)   Four licensed builders, two of whom may be licensed Maintenance
or Alterations Contractors;
         (b)   Two members of the general public; and
         (c)   An individual registered as a building official, plan reviewer,
or inspector under the Building Officials and Inspectors Registration Act, Act
No. 54 of the Public Acts of 1986, being MCL 338.2301 to 338.2313.
      (2)   Construction Board of Appeals members shall be appointed for three
years, except that of the members first appointed, two members shall serve for
one year, two members shall serve for two years, and one member shall serve for
three years. A vacancy created other than by expiration of a term shall be
filled for the balance of the unexpired term in the same manner as the original
appointment. A member may be reappointed for additional terms.
      (3)   The Construction Board of Appeals annually shall elect a
chairperson, vice chairperson, recording secretary and other officers that the
Board considers necessary.
      (4)   A majority of the Construction Board of Appeals members appointed
and serving constitutes a quorum. Final action of the Board of Appeals shall be
only by affirmative vote of a majority of the Board members appointed and
serving.
      (5)   The City Council may fix the amount of any per diem compensation
provided to the members of the Construction Board of Appeals. Expenses of the
Construction Board of Appeals incurred in the performance of official duties
may be reimbursed as provided by law for employees of the City of Hamtramck.
      (6)   A meeting of the Construction Board of Appeals shall be held
pursuant to the Open Meetings Act, Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976,
being MCL 15.261 to 15.275. Public notice of the time, date, and place of the
meeting shall be given in the manner required by Act No. 267 of the Public Acts
of 1976.
      (7)   A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained
by the Construction Board of Appeals in the performance of an official function
shall be made available to the public pursuant to the Freedom of Information
Act, Act No. 442 of the Public Acts of 1976, being MCL 15.231 to 15.246.
(Ord. passed 8-22-2023) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.003 HEARING; TESTIMONY; DETERMINATION TO CLOSE PROCEEDINGS OR ORDER
BUILDING OR STRUCTURE DEMOLISHED, MADE SAFE, OR PROPERLY MAINTAINED; FAILURE TO
APPEAR OR NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ORDER; HEARING; ENFORCEMENT; REIMBURSEMENT AND
NOTICE OF COST; LIEN; REMEDIES.
   (A)   All hearings prescribed by § 92.002 shall comply with the Stille-
Derossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act 230 of 1972, MCL 125.1501 et
seq., as amended, and the Construction Board of Appeals shall take testimony of
the city, the owner of the property, and any interested party. Upon completion
of the hearing, the Construction Board of Appeals shall render a decision
either closing the proceedings or ordering the building or structure
demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained.
   (B)   (1)   If the Construction Board of Appeals determines that the
building or structure should be demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly
maintained, the Construction Board of Appeals shall so order, fixing a time in
the order for the owner, agent, or lessee to comply with the order. If the
building is a dangerous building under §
92.001, the order may require the owner or agent to maintain the exterior of
the building and adjoining grounds owned by the owner of the building
including, but not limited to, maintenance of lawns, trees, and shrubs.
      (2)   In the event the Board agrees to an owner's intent to rehabilitate
a structure, the owner must secure a base building permit from the Building
Department within 90 days of ruling.
   (C)   The cost of demolition includes, but is not limited to, fees paid to
hearing officers, costs of title searches or commitments used to determine the
parties in interest, recording fees for notices and liens filed with the county
register of deeds, demolition and dumping charges, court reporter attendance
fees, and costs of the collection of the charges authorized under this act. The
cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the
exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or
structure incurred by the city to bring the property into conformance with this
act shall be reimbursed to the city, village, or township by the owner or party
in interest in whose name the property appears.
   (D)   The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon
the last local tax assessment records shall be notified by the assessor of the
amount of the cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of
maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the
building or structure by first class mail at the address shown on the records.
If the owner or party in interest fails to pay the cost within 30 days after
mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount of the cost, the city,
village, or township shall have a lien for the cost incurred by the city,
village, or township to bring the property into conformance with this act. The
lien shall not take effect until notice of the lien has been filed or recorded
as provided by law. A lien provided for in this division does not have priority
over previously filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. The lien for the cost
shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax
liens under the General Property Tax Act, 1893 PA 206, MCL 211.1 to 211.157.
   (E)   In addition to other remedies under this section, the City of
Hamtramck may bring an action against the owner of the building or structure
for the full cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of
maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the
building or structure. The city shall have a lien on the property for the
amount of a judgment obtained under this division. The lien provided for in
this division shall not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or
recorded as provided by law. The lien does not have priority over prior filed
or recorded liens and encumbrances. A performance bond may be required and set
by the Board in either case of required demolition or rehabilitation.
(Ord. passed 8-22-2023) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.004 DUTIES OF HOUSING CODE INSPECTOR.
   The Housing Code Inspector shall:
   (A)   Inspect or cause to be inspected semiannually, all public buildings,
schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels, tenements, commercial,
manufacturing or loft buildings for the purpose of determining whether any
conditions exist which render those places a “dangerous building” within the
terms of §
92.001 of this chapter;
   (B)   Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are
filed by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may
be existing in violation of this chapter;
   (C)   Inspect any building, wall or structure reported (as hereinafter
provided for) by the Fire or Police Departments of this city as probably
existing in violation of the terms of this chapter;
   (D)   Inspect annually buildings in the following sections of this city, to
determine whether they are “dangerous buildings” within the terms of §
92.001 of this chapter;
   (E)   Follow the steps proscribed in §
92.003 to provide notice and instructions to the owner, occupant, lessee,
mortgagee, agent and all other persons having interest in the building;
   (F)   Report to the Construction Board of Appeals and the Building Inspector
any noncompliance with the notice provided for in division (E) and hereof and §
92.003;
   (G)   Appear at all hearings conducted by the Housing Board of Appeals and
testify as to the condition of “dangerous buildings;” and
   (H)   Place a notice on all “dangerous buildings” reading as follows:
      This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the Housing
Code Inspector. This notice is to remain on this building until it is repaired,
vacated or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been given the
owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or agent of this building, and all other
persons having an interest in the building as shown by the land records of the
Recorder of Deeds of the County of Wayne. It is unlawful to remove this notice
until the notice is complied with.
(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980; Am. Ord. passed 8-22-2023) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.005 ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGEMENT; LIEN FOR JUDGEMENT AMOUNT; PRIORITY.
   (A)   A judgment in an action brought pursuant to §
92.003 may be enforced against assets of the owner other than the building or
structure.
   (B)   The city shall have a lien for the amount of a judgment obtained
pursuant to §
92.003(E) against the owner's interest in all real property located in this
state that is owned in whole or in part by the owner of the building or
structure against whom the judgment is obtained. A lien provided for in this
section does not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as
provided by law, and the lien does not have priority over prior filed or
recorded liens and encumbrances.
(Ord. passed 8-22-2023)
§ 92.006 DUTIES OF CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney shall:
   (A)   Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the notices
provided for throughout this chapter;
   (B)   Appear at all hearings before the Construction Board of Appeals in
regard to dangerous buildings;
   (C)   Bring suit for collect all municipal liens, assessments or costs,
incurred by the Housing Code Inspector in repairing or causing to be vacated or
demolished dangerous buildings; and
   (D)   Take any other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980; Am. Ord. passed 8-22-2023)
§ 92.007 EMERGENCY CASES.
   In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the
life or safety of any person unless a dangerous building as defined herein is
immediately repaired, vacated or demolished, the Building Inspector shall
report the facts to the Housing Code Inspector and the Construction Board of
Appeals shall cause the immediate repair, vacation or demolition of the
dangerous building. The costs of an emergency repair, vacation or demolition of
the dangerous building shall be collected in the same manner as provided in §
92.005 hereof.
(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980; Am. Ord. passed 8-22-2023)
§ 92.008 WHEN OWNER ABSENT FROM THE CITY.
   In cases, except emergency cases, where the owner, occupant, lessee or
mortgagee is absent from the city, all notices or orders provided for herein
shall be sent by registered mail to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee and
all other persons having an interest in the building as shown by the land
records of the Recorder of Deeds of the county to the last known address of
each, and a copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
“dangerous building”to which it relates. The mailing and posting shall be
deemed adequate service.
(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980; Am. Ord. passed 8-22-2023)
§ 92.009 ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY.
   No officer, agent or employee of the city shall render himself or herself
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his or her duties
under this chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of
the city as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
or her duties under this chapter shall be defended by the City Attorney until
the final determination of the proceedings therein.
(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980; Am. Ord. passed 8-22-2023)
§ 92.010 DUTIES OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The employees of the Fire Department shall make a report in writing to the
Housing Code Inspector of all buildings or structures which are, may be, or are
suspected to be “dangerous buildings” within the terms of this chapter. The
reports must be delivered to the Housing Code Inspector within 24 hours of the
discovery of the buildings by any employee of the Fire Department.
(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980; Am. Ord. passed 8-22-2023)
§ 92.011 DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   All employees of the Police Department shall make a report in writing to the
Housing Code Inspector of any buildings or structures which are, may be or are
suspected to be “dangerous buildings” within the terms of this chapter. The
reports must be delivered to the Housing Code Inspector within 24 hours of the
discovery of the buildings by any employee of the Police Department.
(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980; Am. Ord. passed 8-22-2023)
§ 92.012 APPEALS.
   An owner aggrieved by a final decision or order of the Construction Board of
Appeals may appeal the decision or order to the circuit court by filing a
petition for an order of superintending control within 20 days from the date of
the decision.
(Ord. passed 8-22-2023)
§ 92.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   The owner of any “dangerous building” who shall fail to comply with
any notice or order, to repair, vacate or demolish the building given by any
person authorized by this chapter to give the notice or order shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not exceeding $500
for each offense and a further sum of $10 for each and every day the failure to
comply continues beyond the date fixed for compliance or 90 days imprisonment
or in the discretion of the court both a fine and imprisonment.
   (B)   The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any
notice to vacate and who fails to repair the building in accordance with any
notice given as provided for in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not exceeding $500 for each offense
and a further sum of $10 for each and every day the failure to comply continues
beyond the date fixed for compliance or 90 days imprisonment, or in the
discretion of the court both a fine and imprisonment.
   (C)   Any person removing the notice provided for in §
92.004(H) hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
fined not exceeding $500 for each offense.
(Ord. 394, passed 5-6-1980; Am. Ord. passed 8-22-2023)
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES
Section
Junk, Trash, Abandoned Vehicles and the Like
   
93.001   Definitions
   
93.002   Determination
   
93.003   Trash and abandoned vehicles—misdemeanor
   
93.004   Junk automobiles—misdemeanor
   
93.005   Abandoned dwellings—misdemeanor
   
93.006   Storage of building materials—misdemeanor
   
93.007   Action by Chief of Police
Noxious Weeds and Vegetation
   
93.035   Purpose
   
93.036   Definitions
   
93.037   Growth of grass and weeds
   
93.038   Duty of occupant or owner
   
93.039   Cutting and destruction
   
93.040   Owners and occupants responsible for premises
   
93.041   Notice to abate
   
93.042   Abatement procedure
Trash; Abandoned and Junk Vehicles; Abandoned Dwellings; Storage of Building
Materials—Civil Infractions
   
93.045   Trash and abandoned vehicles—civil infraction
   
93.046   Junk automobiles—civil infraction
   
93.047   Abandoned dwellings—civil infraction
   
93.048   Storage of building materials—civil infraction
 
   
93.999   Penalty
JUNK, TRASH, ABANDONED VEHICLES AND THE LIKE
§ 93.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle which has remained on private property for a
period of 48 continuous hours or more, without the consent of the owner or
occupant of the property or for a period of 48 continuous hours or more after
the consent of the owner or occupant has been revoked.
   BLIGHTED STRUCTURE. Any dwelling, garage or outbuilding or any factory,
shop, store, warehouse or any other structure or part of a structure which,
because of fire, wind or other natural disaster or physical deterioration, is
no longer habitable as a dwelling, nor useful for the purpose for which it may
have been intended.
   BUILDING MATERIALS. Lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing
materials, electric wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles,
mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws or any other materials used in
constructing any structure.
   JUNK. Parts of machinery or motor vehicles, unused furniture, stoves,
refrigerators or other appliances, remnants of wood, metal or any other castoff
material of any kind, whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable
use.
   JUNK AUTOMOBILES. Any motor vehicle which is not licensed for use upon the
highways of the state for a period in excess of 60 days and shall also include,
whether licensed or not, any motor vehicle which is inoperative for any reason
for a period in excess of 60 days, provided that there is excepted form this
definition unlicensed, but operative, vehicles which are kept as the stock in
trade of a regularly licensed and established new or used automobile dealer.
   PERSON. All natural persons, firms, co-partnerships, corporations and all
associations of natural persons, incorporated or unincorporated, whether acting
by themselves or by a servant, agent or employee. All PERSONS who violate any
of the provisions of this subchapter, whether as owner, occupant, lessee,
agent, servant or employee shall, except as herein otherwise provided, be
equally liable as principals.
   TRASH and RUBBISH. Any and all forms of debris not herein otherwise
classified.
(Ord. 293, passed 10-27-1964)
§ 93.002 DETERMINATION.
   It is hereby determined that the storage or accumulation of trash, rubbish,
junk, junk automobiles, abandoned vehicles, building materials and the
maintenance of blighted structures upon any private property within the city
tends to result in blighted and deteriorated neighborhoods, the increase in
criminal activity, the spread of vermin and disease and is contrary to the
public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the community.
(Ord. 293, passed 10-27-1964)
§ 93.003 TRASH AND ABANDONED VEHICLES—MISDEMEANOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to store, or permit the storage or
accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk, junk automobiles or abandoned vehicles on
any private property in the city except within a completely enclosed building
or upon the premises of a duly licensed junk dealer, junk buyer, dealer in used
auto parts, dealer in secondhand goods or junk gatherer.
(Ord. 293, passed 10-27-1964) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.004 JUNK AUTOMOBILES—MISDEMEANOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove parts from, or otherwise
disassemble any automobile, whether or not the same be a junk automobile,
abandoned vehicle, or otherwise, or any appliance or machinery, except in a
completely enclosed building or upon the premises of a duly licensed junk
dealer, junk buyer, dealer in used auto parts, dealer in secondhand goods or
junk gatherer.
(Ord. 293, passed 10-27-1964) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.005 ABANDONED DWELLINGS—MISDEMEANOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any blighted or
vacant structure, dwelling, garage, outbuilding, factory, shop, store or
warehouse unless the same is kept securely locked, the windows kept glazed or
neatly boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by
unauthorized persons or unless the structure is in the course of construction
in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the city and unless the
construction is completed within a reasonable time.
(Ord. 293, passed 10-27-1964) Penalty, see §
93.999
Cross-reference:
   Dangerous or abandoned buildings, see
Ch. 92
§ 93.006 STORAGE OF BUILDING MATERIALS—MISDEMEANOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to store or permit the storage or
accumulation of building materials on any private property, except in a
completely enclosed building or except where the building materials are part of
the stock in trade of a business located in the property, or except when the
materials are being used in the construction of a structure on the property in
accordance with a valid building permit issued by the city and unless the
construction is completed within a reasonable time.
(Ord. 293, passed 10-27-1964) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.007 ACTION BY CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police may remove or cause to be removed any junk automobile or
abandoned vehicle, or parts of either, from any unenclosed private property
after having notified in writing the owner or occupant of the property of his
or her intention to do so at least 48 hours prior to the removal. The notice
shall be served personally upon the owner or occupant of the property, if
occupied, or may be posted in a conspicuous place upon vacant or unoccupied
property. Junk automobiles or abandoned vehicles, or parts of either, shall be
removed to the automobile pound and disposed of in accordance with law. The
removal by the Chief of Police shall not excuse or relieve any person of the
obligation imposed by this subchapter to keep his or her property free from
storage or accumulation of junk automobiles or abandoned vehicles, or parts of
either, nor from the penalties for violation thereof.
(Ord. 293, passed 10-27-1964)
NOXIOUS WEEDS AND VEGETATION
§ 93.035 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to preserve and promote health, safety and
general welfare of residents, motorists and pedestrians alike through
regulation of growth of noxious weeds, rank vegetation and grasses which are
deemed to detract from the appearance and character of a neighborhood,
negatively affect the value and marketability of surrounding property,
constitute a traffic or fire hazard and cause additional health problems for
persons with respiratory ailments. Failure to comply with provisions of this
subchapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008)
§ 93.036 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A person(s) authorized and empowered to issue and serve
municipal civil infraction citations for alleged violations to this subchapter.
   ERADICATE. To get rid of, wipe out, destroy, by the natural process or human
interaction.
   GRASS. Any plant of the family Gramineae (or Poaceae) characterized by
jointed stems, sheathing leaves, flower spikelets and fruit consisting of a
seed-like grain or caryopsis.
   NOXIOUS WEEDS. Canada thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any species of
Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of
Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus
arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa
incana), ragweed (ambrosia elatior 1.) and poison ivy (rhus toxicodendron),
poison sumac (toxicodendron vernix) or other plants which are recognized as
deleterious to health, safety or public welfare and recognized as a common
nuisance.
   PROPERTY. Any real property that is or has been put to residential,
commercial, institutional, or industrial use; including, for the purpose of
this article, abutting street right-of-way lying between the curb and sidewalk
or a drainage course paralleling the street where there is no curb abutting the
property. In addition, any lot in any subdivision where buildings have been
erected on 50% or more of the lots of the subdivision shall be defined as
improved property.
   RANK VEGETATION. Profuse or unmanageable communities of plants in a region.
(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008)
§ 93.037 GROWTH OF GRASS AND WEEDS.
   (A)   Declared nuisance. The presence of noxious weeds, rank vegetation or
tall grass upon properties, as prohibited below, is hereby deemed detrimental
to public health, safety and welfare and shall constitute a public nuisance.
   (B)   Growth on property. The owner, occupant or responsible agent of any
property, or the owner or responsible agent of any unoccupied or undeveloped
property, shall not permit or maintain on the property growth of noxious weeds,
tall grass or rank vegetation to a height greater than seven inches or
accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush. An owner or occupant shall not
cause, or permit noxious weeds, other poisonous plants, or plants detrimental
to health, to grow on any improved property.
   (C)   Fences and alleyways. Fences, sidewalks, walkways, and alleyways
adjacent to the property shall be kept free of weeds, trees, and other nuisance
vegetation.
   (D)   Exempted. Exempted from the five-inch height limitation are reasonably
maintained flower gardens, plots of shrubbery and vegetable gardens.
(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008; Am. Ord. 2014-42, passed 6-10-2014; Am. Ord.,
passed 11-22-2022)
§ 93.038 DUTY OF OCCUPANT OR OWNER.
   Every occupant or owner of property, whether improved or unimproved, shall
cut and remove or destroy by lawful means, all noxious weeds, tall grass or
rank vegetation as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 8-29-2017)
§ 93.039 CUTTING AND DESTRUCTION.
   A published notice of the provisions of this subchapter shall be provided by
advertising the following notice or substantially similar notice annually prior
to commencement of enforcement in a newspaper with circulation in the city and
designated by the City Council as the official, legal advertising media for the
city.
NOTICE
To all property owners, agents and occupants, notice is hereby given to all
persons owning or occupying property within the City of Hamtramck, that
pursuant to the City Code, it shall be the duty of the owners or occupants to
keep all grass, weeds and vegetation cut below a height of five inches on
properties and free from noxious weeds. All properties shall include the
abutting street right-of-way lying between the curb and sidewalk or the
drainage course paralleling the street where there is no curb abutting the
properties and any abutting alley. If the provisions of this ordinance are not
complied with within three days of notice of the violation, the city shall
cause the grass and weeds to be cut or destroyed, and the actual cost of
cutting or destruction plus an administrative fee as established by resolution
of City Council, shall be charged to the property owner and, if necessary,
collected as a tax lien against the property.
(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 8-29-2017)
§ 93.040 OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS RESPONSIBLE FOR PREMISES.
   A person who owns, manages, leases, rents or occupies a premise shall not
create, maintain, operate or permit to be created, maintained or operated any
nuisance as defined in this subchapter. All persons who own, manage, lease,
rent or occupy any premises shall be equally responsible for keeping the
premises in a clean and habitable condition and take necessary precautions to
prevent any nuisance, as defined in this subchapter, from existing on the
premises. Each day a violation continues is deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008)
§ 93.041 NOTICE TO ABATE.
   Upon observation of a violation of the provisions of this subchapter, a code
enforcement, police officer, or other designee of the City Manager may issue
notice to abate either personally, by mail, or email notification if so
subscribed and previously consented to, to the owners and occupants responsible
as designated in § 93.040. Posting a notice of the violation upon the property
shall be deemed adequate notice. Failure to receive the notice is no defense to
any action by the city to abate the violation, collect abatement costs, collect
administrative costs or impose penalties authorized by this code. The notice to
abate shall inform the owner and occupant of the following:
   (A)   The nature of the violation;
   (B)   The time frame within which the owner and/or occupant shall abate the
violation, being not more than ten days from the date of the notice. The
enforcement officer may grant additional time where bona fide efforts to abate
the violation are in progress;
   (C)   If the owner or occupant fails to abate the violation, the enforcement
officer may issue a municipal civil infraction citation;
   (D)   The city may act to abate the violation if it is not abated by the
owner or occupant; and
   (E)   The cost of abatement by the city, plus administrative fee set by
Council annually, shall be a personal debt of the owner which may be assessed
as a tax lien against the property or assessed by the 31st District Court until
paid.
(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008; Am. Ord. 2014-42, passed 6-10-2014)
§ 93.042 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   City to cut or destroy; expenses to be paid by owner; liens. If the
provisions of this subchapter are not complied with after the legal notices
have been published, then an officer, inspector or other agent authorized by
the City Council between April 1 and October 31 may enter upon a property as
many times as necessary to cut or destroy tall grass, noxious weeds and rank
vegetation, and the owner or occupant of the property shall pay all expenses
incurred by the city. The city shall have a lien upon the property for the
expenses, and a lien may be enforced in the manner prescribed by the general
laws of the state providing for the enforcement of tax liens.
   (B)   Means of abatement. The officer, inspector or other agent authorized
by the city may use hand or mechanical means to abate the violation, and shall
take reasonable care to avoid unnecessary damages to the property.
   (C)   Owner liability. Owner liability shall be as follows:
      (1)   Lien upon property. From the time of commencement of the cutting or
destruction of prohibited grasses, rank vegetation and noxious weeds, the city
shall have a lien upon the property.
      (2)   Costs. The owners of property shall be liable for all costs
incurred by the city in connection with cutting or destruction. The City
Council will by resolution set the minimum cost for the cutting or destruction
of the prohibited grasses, rank vegetation and noxious weeds. In addition, an
administrative fee in the amount of 25% of the actual cost of the cutting or
destruction will be included in the total cost.
      (3)   Municipal civil infraction citation. The enforcement officer may
issue a civil infraction citation to a property owner or occupant for failure
to adhere to the provisions of this subchapter, which may result in a citation
for each offense as described in this section with the penalties set forth in §
93.999.
   (D)   Collection of costs. Collection of costs shall be accomplished as
follows:
      (1)   Billing. For purposes of determining ownership of the property, it
shall be presumed in evidence that the person to whom the property is assessed
on the city’s most recent tax roll is the owner of the property. Billing of
costs will be mailed to owners of the property by regular mail to the address
shown on the city’s tax rolls. If the charges are not paid by the owner within
30 days from the date of billing, payment shall be deemed delinquent.
      (2)   Delinquent charges; tax lien. In the event of delinquent charges,
the city shall have a lien upon the property for the charges and the lien shall
be enforceable as a tax lien and collected as in the case of general property
tax.
(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008)
TRASH; ABANDONED AND JUNK VEHICLES; ABANDONED DWELLINGS; STORAGE OF BUILDING
MATERIALS—CIVIL INFRACTIONS
§ 93.045 TRASH AND ABANDONED VEHICLES—CIVIL INFRACTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to store, or permit the storage or
accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk, junk automobiles or abandoned vehicles on
any private property in the city except within a completely enclosed building
or upon the premises of a duly licensed junk dealer, junk buyer, dealer in used
auto parts, dealer in secondhand goods or junk gatherer.
(Ord. , passed - -2013) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.046 JUNK AUTOMOBILES—CIVIL INFRACTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove parts from, or otherwise
disassemble any automobile, whether or not the same be a junk automobile,
abandoned vehicle, or otherwise, or any appliance or machinery, except in a
completely enclosed building or upon the premises of a duly licensed junk
dealer, junk buyer, dealer in used auto parts, dealer in secondhand goods or
junk gatherer.
(Ord. , passed - -2013) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.047 ABANDON DWELLINGS—CIVIL INFRACTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any blighted or
vacant structure, dwelling, garage, outbuilding, factory, shop, store or
warehouse unless the same is kept securely locked, the windows kept glazed or
neatly boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by
unauthorized persons or unless the structure is in the course of construction
in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the city and unless the
construction is completed within a reasonable time.
(Ord. , passed - -2013) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.048 STORAGE OF BUILDING MATERIALS—CIVIL INFRACTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to store or permit the storage or
accumulation of building materials on any private property, except in a
completely enclosed building or except where the building materials are part of
the stock in trade of a business located in the property, or except when the
materials are being used in the construction of a structure on the property in
accordance with a valid building permit issued by the city and unless the
construction is completed within a reasonable time.
(Ord. , passed - -2013) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Junk, trash, abandoned vehicles and the like. Any violation of, or
failure to comply with the provisions of §§
93.001 through
93.007 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500, and costs, or
prosecution, or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both a fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court. When the fine and costs are
imposed, the court may provide that, in default of payment thereof, the
offender shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days unless the fine
and costs shall sooner be paid. Each day that a violation of §§
93.001 through
93.007 is continued or permitted to exist without compliance shall constitute a
separate offense punishable upon conviction in the manner prescribed in this
section, provided no person shall be imprisoned for a single but continuing
violation of §§
93.001 through
93.007 for a period longer than 90 days.
(Ord. 293, passed 10-27-1964)
   (B)   Noxious weeds and vegetation, trash and abandoned vehicles. A person
who violates provisions of §§
93.035 through
93.048, as amended, may be fined for a municipal civil infraction, subject to
the following penalties:
      (1)   Civil fines shall apply in the event of determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction. Fines shall be in an amount
set forth for the offense in the schedule of fines adopted by the Thirty-First
District Court, costs and other sanctions, for each offense.
      (2)   The defendant determined to be responsible for a municipal civil
infraction may be required to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses.
The judge or magistrate may issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to
enforce or enjoin the violation.
      (3)   Each violation act, as well as each subsequent day, will constitute
a separate offense.
      (4)   In addition to any remedies provided for by §§
93.035 through
93.048, any equitable or other remedies available and/or permitted by law may
be sought.
      (5)   The judge or magistrate may impose costs, damages and expenses as
provided by law.
      (6)   A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense
of a criminal offense or of the City Code or other city ordinance violation
which is not a civil infraction.
(Ord. 2008-5, passed 4-8-2008; Am. Ord. , passed 3-26-2013)
CHAPTER 94: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
94.001   Title
   
94.002   Definitions
   
94.003   Automatic dialing prohibited
   
94.004   Registration required by owner
   
94.005   Automatic shutoff required
   
94.006   Existing alarm systems registration required
   
94.007   Licensing and regulations of alarm installers
 
   
94.999   Penalty
§ 94.001 TITLE.
   This chapter may be known and cited as the Burglar Alarm Chapter.
(Ord. 487, passed 11-6-2002)
§ 94.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM SYSTEM. An assembly of equipment and devices, or a single device,
except for an alarm system on a motor vehicle, arranged to signal the presence
of a hazard requiring urgent attention to which Police and/or Fire Departments
are expected to respond.
   FALSE ALARM. The activation of an alarm system causing a sound or visual
signal through mechanical failure, faulty equipment, malfunction, improper
installations or the negligence or improper or mistaken use by the owner or
lessee of an alarm system or of his or her employees or agents which shall be
established when there is no evidence of criminal activity, or illegal entry or
an attempt thereof, fire or need for medical attention upon the activation of
the alarm system with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Severe storm conditions;
      (2)   Alarm system malfunction, if corrective measures have been taken or
installed within five days thereafter, and a copy of a repair order by a
licensed alarm system contractor is provided within 30 days of the false alarm
except as follows: no penalty shall be imposed for three alarm system
malfunctions in a calendar year. However, more than three shall be considered
false alarms, and the following penalties of §
94.999 shall apply as follows: the fourth malfunction shall trigger a higher
penalty; the fifth malfunction shall trigger a higher penalty, and the sixth
malfunction shall trigger a higher penalty;
      (3)   False alarms that can be substantiated as being activated by
disruption or disturbance of the telephone company facilities;
      (4)   Utility pole accidents;
      (5)   A testing of the alarm system when prior notification has been
received by the Police Department and/or Fire Department; and
      (6)   Where the Fire Chief or his or her designee has waived the fee the
because there has been a request for waiver due to documented extenuating
circumstances.
   SUBSCRIBER. Includes, but is not limited to, any public service, utility,
Fire Department or police agency.
   TELEPHONE NUMBER. Includes any additional numbers assigned by a public
utility company, engaged in the business of providing communication services
and facilities to be used by means of a rotary or other systems to connect when
the primary telephone number is in use.
(Ord. 487, passed 11-6-2002)
§ 94.003 AUTOMATIC DIALING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell, install,
use, operate, adjust, arrange for, or contract to provide a device, or
combination of devices that will, upon activation, either mechanically,
electronically, or by other means initiate the automatic calling, dialing or
connection directly to any City Police Department or Fire Department telephone
number.
(Ord. 487, passed 11-6-2002) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.004 REGISTRATION REQUIRED BY OWNER.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who owns, leases or occupies a
premises in which an alarm system is installed, used or maintained shall
register the alarm system with the City Police Department on forms provided by
the city. The City Clerk shall inform the City Police Department of any person,
firm or corporation.
   (B)   A person, firm or corporation who registers a system with the City
Police Department shall provide the Chief of Police or his or her designee with
its name, the telephone number and address of the premises where the alarm
system is located, and also the name and telephone number of at least one other
person, firm or corporation who can be reached at any time, day or night, and
who, within a 30-minute response time, can open the promises in which the alarm
system is installed and deactivate the audible and/or visible signal.
(Ord. 487, passed 11-6-2002) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.005 AUTOMATIC SHUTOFF REQUIRED.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation
to maintain and operate an alarm system equipped with audible signal(s) (e.g.
bells, horns, sirens and the like) that is not equipped with a shutoff device
that automatically silences the audible signal(s) within ten minutes of the
signal activation. This section shall not apply to fire alarm systems.
(Ord. 487, passed 11-6-2002) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.006 EXISTING ALARM SYSTEMS REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Persons, firms or corporations using, owning, leasing or occupying a
promises in which an alarm system exists on the effective date of this chapter,
shall comply with the requirements of §§
94.003 through
94.005 within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter; and shall be
jointly and severally liable for violations of this section. Failure to comply
with this section would result in a $50 fine. Each day shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ord. 487, passed 11-6-2002) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.007 LICENSING AND REGULATIONS OF ALARM INSTALLERS.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person, firm or
corporation to engage in the business of installing an alarm system unless the
person has been licensed by the state in accordance with Public Act 330 of
1968, being M.C.L.A. § 338.1083, or is the owner or is installed by the owner
or occupant of a residence in his or her residence.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person, firm or
corporation who is an alarm contractor, or its agent, to knowingly misrepresent
any services rendered to an alarm user.
(Ord. 487, passed 11-6-2002) Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.999 PENALTY.
   Except as specified in §
94.002, the occurrence of a false alarm or other prohibition of this chapter
shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction by imposition of civil
fines as annually adopted by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 487, passed 11-6-2002)
CHAPTER 95: LEAD HAZARDS
Section
   
95.001   Policy and intent
   
95.002   Definitions
   
95.003   Presumptions and obligations
   
95.004   Violations
   
95.005   Inspection for violations
   
95.006   Remedy for violations
   
95.007   Standards for clearance examination and report
   
95.008   Lead-safe hazard reduction and control
   
95.009   Notice to tenants
   
95.010   Occupant protection and worksite preparation
   
95.011   Safe work practices
   
95.012   Emergency actions; weather conditions
   
95.013   Exemptions
   
95.014   Prohibition of retaliatory action
   
95.015   Database for properties
   
95.016   Enforcement
 
   
95.999   Penalty
§ 95.001 POLICY AND INTENT.
   It is the policy of the city to assist in poison prevention of its residents
by requiring that the presence of deteriorated lead-based paint on the interior
and exterior of pre-1978 residential structures and on the exterior of pre-1978
nonresidential structures be identified and be addressed by reducing and
controlling lead based paint hazards which may be present in order to prevent
exposure to these hazards.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)
§ 95.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABATEMENT.
      (1)   Any set of measures designed to permanently eliminate lead-based
paint or lead-based paint hazards (see definition of PERMANENT).
      (2)   ABATEMENT includes:
         (a)   The removal of lead-based paint and dust-lead hazards, the
permanent enclosure or encapsulation of lead-based paint, the replacement of
components or fixtures painted with lead-based paint and the removal or
permanent covering of soil-lead hazards; and
         (b)   All preparation, cleanup, disposal and post abatement clearance
testing activities associated with the measures.
   CERTIFIED. Licensed or certified to perform activities as risk assessment,
lead-based paint inspection, or abatement supervision by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 745,
Subpart L.
   CERTIFIED LEAD-BASED PAINT INSPECTOR. An individual who has been trained by
an accredited training program, as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 745.223, and
certified by EPA pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 745.226 to conduct lead-based paint
inspections. A certified lead-based paint inspector also samples for the
presence of lead in dust and soil for the purpose of clearance testing.
   CERTIFIED RISK ASSESSOR. An individual who has been trained by an accredited
training program, as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 745.223, and certified by EPA
pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 745.226 to conduct risk assessments. A CERTIFIED RISK
ASSESSOR also samples for the presence of lead in dust and soil for the
purposes of clearance testing.
   CHEWABLE SURFACE. An interior or exterior surface painted with lead-based
paint that a young child can chew. A CHEWABLE SURFACE is the same as an
accessible surface as defined in 42 U.S.C. § 4851b(2). Hard metal substrates
and other materials that cannot be dented by the bite of a young child are not
considered chewable.
   CLEARANCE EXAMINATION. An activity conducted following lead-based paint
hazard reduction activities to determine that the hazard reduction activities
are complete and that no soil-lead hazards or settled dust-lead hazards, as
defined in this section, exist in the dwelling unit or worksite.
   COMMON AREA. A portion of a residential property that is available for use
by occupants of more than one dwelling unit. Such an area may include, but is
not limited to, hallways, stairways, laundry and recreational rooms,
playgrounds, community centers, on-site day care facilities, porches,
basements, attics, garages and boundary fences.
   COMPONENT. An architectural element of a dwelling unit or common area
identified by type and location, such as a bedroom wall, an exterior window
sill, a baseboard in a living room, a kitchen floor, an interior window sill in
a bathroom, a porch floor, stair treads in a common stairwell or an exterior
wall.
   CONTAINMENT. The physical measure taken to ensure that dust and debris
created or released during lead-based paint hazard reduction are not spread,
blown or tracked from inside to outside the worksite.
   DETERIORATED PAINT. Any interior or exterior paint or other coating that,
through a visual assessment, is found to peel, chip, flake, chalk or crack, or
any paint or coat located on an interior or exterior surface or fixture that is
otherwise damaged or separated from the substrate, or a chewable surface that
contains visual signs of chewing.
   DRIPLINE. The area within three feet surrounding the perimeter of a
building.
   DRY SANDING. Sanding without moisture and includes both hand and machine
sanding.
   DUST-LEAD HAZARD. Surface dust that contains a dust-lead loading (area
concentration of lead) at or exceeding levels promulgated by the EPA pursuant
to § 403 of the Toxic Substances Control Act.
   DWELLING UNIT.
      (1)   Single-family dwelling, including attached structures such as
porches and stoops; or
      (2)   Housing unit in a structure that contains more than one separate
housing unit, and in which each unit is used or occupied, or intended to be
used or occupied, in whole or in part, as the home or separate living quarters
of one or more persons.
   ENCAPSULATION. The application of a cover or coat that serves as a barrier
between the lead-based paint and environment and is dependent that relies for
its durability on adhesion between the encapsulant and the painted surface, and
on the integrity of the existing bonds between paint layers and between the
paint and the substrate. ENCAPSULATION may be used as a method of abatement if
it is designed and performed so as to be permanent.
   ENCLOSURE. The use of rigid, durable construction materials that are
mechanically fastened to the substrate in order to act as a barrier between
lead-based paint and the environment. ENCLOSURE may be used as a method of
abatement if it is designed to be permanent.
   EVALUATION. Risk assessment, a lead hazard screen, a lead-based paint
inspection, paint testing or a combination of these to determine the presence
of lead-based paint hazards or lead-based paint.
   FRICTION SURFACE. An interior or exterior surface subject to abrasion or
friction, including, but not limited to, certain window, floor and stair
surfaces.
   g. Gram.
   HAZARD REDUCTION. A measure designed to reduce or eliminate human exposure
to lead-based paint hazards through methods including interim controls or
abatement or a combination of the two.
   HEPA VACUUM. A vacuum cleaner with a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA)
filter through which contaminated air flows. A HEPA filter is one that captures
at least 99.97% of airborne particles of at least 0.3 micrometers in diameter.
   IMPACT SURFACE. An interior or exterior surface subject to damage by
repeated sudden force, such as certain parts of door frames.
   INTERIM CONTROLS. A set of measures designed to reduce human exposure or
likely exposure to lead-based paint hazards. INTERIM CONTROLS include, but are
not limited to, repairs, painting, temporary containment, specialized cleaning,
clearance, ongoing lead-based paint maintenance activities and the
establishment and operation of management and resident education programs.
   LEAD-BASED PAINT. Paint or other surface coatings that contain lead equal to
or exceeding 1.0 milligram per square centimeter or 0.5% by weight or 5,000
parts per million (ppm) by weight.
   LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARD. Any condition that causes exposure to lead from
dust-lead hazards, soil-lead hazards or lead-based paint that is deteriorated
or present in chewable surfaces, friction surfaces or impact surfaces, and that
would result in adverse human health effects.
   LEAD-BASED PAINT INSPECTION. A surface-by-surface investigation to determine
the presence of lead-based paint and the provision of a report explaining the
results of the investigation.
   LEAD HAZARD INFORMATION PAMPHLET. The most recent publication of the
developed by the EPA, the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development and the Consumer Product Safety Commission pursuant to § 403 of the
Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. § 2686), entitled Protect Your Family
From Lead in Your Home.
   mg. Milligram; thousandth of a gram.
   OCCUPANT. A person who inhabits a dwelling unit.
   OWNER. A person, firm, corporation, nonprofit organization, partnership,
government, guardian, conservator, receiver, trustee, executor or other
judicial officer, or other entity which, alone or with others, owns, holds or
controls the freehold or leasehold title or part of the title to property, with
or without actually possessing it. The definition includes a vendee who
possesses title, but does not include a mortgagee or an owner of an opposing
interest under a ground rent lease.
   PAINT REMOVAL. A method of abatement that permanently eliminates lead-based
paint from surfaces.
   PAINT STABILIZATION. Repair any physical defect in the substrate of a
physical defect painted surface that is causing paint deterioration, removing
loose paint and other material from the surface to be treated, and applying a
new protective coating or paint.
   PAINTED SURFACE TO BE DISTURBED. A paint surface that is to be scraped,
sanded, cut, penetrated or otherwise affected by rehabilitation work in a
manner that could potentially creates a lead-based paint hazard by generating
dust, fumes or paint chips.
   PAINT TESTING. The process of determining, by a certified lead- based paint
inspector or risk assessor, the presence or absence of lead-based paint on
deteriorated paint surfaces or painted surfaces to be disturbed or replaced.
   PERMANENT. An expected design life of at least 20 years.
   PORCH, OPEN. An open structure projecting from the exterior wall of a
building and having at least 70% of the total area of the vertical planes
forming its perimeter unobstructed in any manner except by screen between floor
and ceiling.
   REDUCTION. Measures designed to reduce or eliminate human exposure to lead-
based paint hazards through methods including interim controls and abatement.
   REHABILITATION. The improvement of an existing structure through
alterations, additions or enhancements. REHABILITATION includes repairs
necessary to correct the results of deferred maintenance, replacement of
fixtures and components, improvements to increase the efficient use of energy
and installation of security devices.
   REPLACEMENT. A strategy of abatement that entails removal of building
components that have surfaces coated with lead-based paint and installation of
new components free of lead-based paint.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. A dwelling unit, common area, building exterior
surface and any surrounding land, including outbuildings, fences and play
equipment affixed to the land, belonging to an owner and available for use by
residents, but not including land used for agricultural, commercial, industrial
or other nonresidential purposes and not including paint on the pavement of
parking lots, garages or roadways.
   RISK ASSESSMENT.
      (1)   An on-site investigation to determine the existence, nature,
severity and location of lead-based paint hazards; and
      (2)   Provision of a report by an individual or firm conducting risk
assessment which explain results of the investigation and options for reducing
lead-based paint hazards.
   SOIL-LEAD HAZARD. Bare soil on residential property that contains lead equal
to or exceeding levels promulgated by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency pursuant to § 403 of the Toxic Substances Control Act.
   TENANT. The individual named as the lessee in a lease, rental agreement or
occupancy agreement for a dwelling unit.
   ug. Microgram; millionth of a gram.
   VISUAL ASSESSMENT. An examination for, as applicable:
      (1)   Deteriorated paint;
      (2)    Visible surface dust, debris and residue found as part of an
inspection pursuant to §
95.005, a risk assessment or clearance examination;
      (3)   The completion or failure of a lead-based paint hazard reduction
measure as part of a clearance examination.
   WET SANDING or WET SCRAPING. A process to remove loose paint in which the
painted surface to be sanded or scraped is kept wet to minimize dispersal of
paint chips and airborne dust.
   WINDOW TROUGH. An area between the interior window sill (stool) and the
storm window frame. If there is no storm window, the window trough is the area
that receives both the upper and lower window sashes when they are both
lowered.
   WIPE SAMPLE. A sample collected by wiping a representative surface of known
area, as determined by ASTM E1728, Standard Practice for Field Collection of
Settled Dust Samples Using Wipe Sampling Methods for Lead Determination by
Atomic Spectrometry Techniques, or equivalent method, with an acceptable wipe
material as defined in ASTM E 1792, Standard Specification for Wipe Sampling
Materials for Lead in Surface Dust.
   WORKSITE. An interior/exterior area where lead-based paint hazard reduction
activity takes place. There may be more than one worksite in a dwelling unit or
at a residential property.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)
§ 95.003 PRESUMPTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   For purposes of this chapter, all paint on the interior or exterior of
any residential building for which a certificate of occupancy is required on
which the original construction was completed prior to January 1, 1978.
   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, all paint on the interior or exterior of
any nonresidential structure on which the original construction was completed
prior to January 1, 1978 shall be presumed to be lead-based.
   (C)   Any person seeking to rebut these presumptions shall establish through
the means set forth in §
95.004 that the paint on the building or structure in question is not lead-
based paint.
   (D)   Residential buildings subject to the certificate of occupancy
requirements are maintained free of lead-based paint hazards.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)
§ 95.004 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Deteriorated paint violation. The interior and exterior of any
residential building for which a certificate of occupancy is required, on which
the original construction was completed prior to January 1, 1978, and the
exterior of any non-residential structure on which the original construction
was completed prior to January 1, 1978, shall be maintained in a condition so
that the paint thereon does not become deteriorated paint, unless the
deteriorated paint surfaces total no more than:
      (1)   Twenty square feet on exterior surfaces;
      (2)   Two square feet in any one interior room or space; and
      (3)   Ten percent of the total surface area on an interior/exterior type
of component with a small surface area. Examples include windowsills,
baseboards and trim.
   (B)   Bare soil violation. Bare soil shall not be present within the drip
line of any residential building for which a certificate of occupancy is
required pursuant to §
95.016 on which the original construction was completed prior to January 1,
1978.
   (C)   Dust-lead hazard violation. A dust-lead hazard shall be identified and
cited in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
95.005.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.005 INSPECTION FOR VIOLATIONS.
   All inspections, including, but not limited to, inspections performed as
part of an application for a certificate of occupancy, or renewal of a
certificate of occupancy, or based upon the filing of a complaint, shall
include a visual assessment for deteriorated paint and bare soil violations.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.006 REMEDY FOR VIOLATIONS.
   Following a visual assessment which results in the citation of a
deteriorated paint violation, the violation may be removed only by one of the
following methods.
   (A)   Certification by a lead-based paint inspector or risk assessor that
the property has been determined through a lead-based paint inspection
conducted in accordance with the federal regulations at 40 C.F.R. § 745.227(b)
not to contain lead-based paint.
   (B)   Certification by a lead-based paint inspector or risk assessor that
all lead-based paint in the property has been identified and cited. Violations,
have been abated, or identified and interim controls implemented and clearance
has been achieved in accordance with standards found at 40 C.F.R. § 745.227(e),
regardless of whether abatement has been achieved or interim controls
implemented and provided however that the property has been inspected pursuant
to those standards since the deteriorated paint or dust-lead hazard violation
was last detected cited.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.007 STANDARDS FOR CLEARANCE EXAMINATION AND REPORT.
   The remedy available shall require that a clearance examination be completed
for a property upon which a deteriorated paint violation has been cited in
accordance with the following requirements.
   (A)   Qualified personnel. Certification of clearance shall be issued by:
      (1)   A certified risk assessor; or
      (2)   A certified lead-based paint inspector.
   (B)   Required activities.
      (1)   A clearance examination shall include a visual assessment, dust
sampling, submission of samples for analysis for lead, interpretation of
sampling results and preparation of a report. Examinations shall be performed
in dwelling units, common areas and exterior areas in accordance with this
section and the steps set forth at 40 C.F.R. § 745.227(e)(8) and (9).
      (2)   A visual assessment shall be performed to determine if deteriorated
paint surfaces and/or visible amounts of dust, debris, paint chips or other
residue are present. Both exterior and interior painted surfaces shall be
examined for the presence of deteriorated paint. If deteriorated paint and
visible dust, debris or residue are present in areas subject to dust sampling,
they must be eliminated prior to the continuation of the clearance examination.
If exterior painted surfaces have been disturbed by the hazard reduction,
maintenance or rehabilitation activity, the visual assessment shall include an
inspection of the ground and any outdoor living areas close to the affected
exterior painted surfaces. Visible dust or debris in outdoor living areas shall
be cleaned up and visible paint chips on the ground shall be removed.
      (3)   Dust samples shall be wipe samples and shall be taken on floors,
including/excluding open porches and, where practicable, interior windowsills
and window troughs. Dust samples shall be collected and analyzed in accordance
with 40 C.F.R. § 745.227(f) and (g).
   (C)   Report. The clearance examiner shall ensure that an examination report
is prepared that provides documentation of the examination.
      (1)   The report shall include the following information:
         (a)   The address of the residential property and, if only part of a
multi-family property is affected, the specific dwelling units and common areas
affected;
         (b)   The date(s) of the examination;
         (c)   The name, address and signature of each person performing the
examination, including their EPA certification number;
         (d)   The results of the visual assessment for the presence of
deteriorated paint and visible dust, debris, residue or paint chips;
         (e)   The results of the analysis of dust samples, in ug/square foot,
by location of sample; and
         (f)   The name and address of each laboratory that conducted the
analysis of dust samples, including the identification number for each
laboratory recognized by EPA under § 405(b) of the Toxic Substances Control Act
(15 U.S.C. § 2685(b)).
      (2)   When abatement is performed, the report shall be an abatement
report in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 745.227(e)(10).
   (D)   Clearance standards. Where a deteriorated paint or dust-lead hazard
violation has been cited, the dust-lead standards in 40 C.F.R. § 745.65(b)
shall be met before a certificate of occupancy may be issued or a violation
removed. With respect to porches, the standard required for clearance shall be
400 ug/square foot, provided however, that if a porch is found to contain more
than 40 ug/square foot, the inspector or assessor shall advise the occupants of
the premises that the porch constitutes a potential lead-based paint hazard
that requires continued caution and that the occupants should read and follow
closely the information in the lead hazard information pamphlet regarding lead
safe maintenance practices such as frequent washing and that pamphlet shall be
provided to the occupants.
   (E)   Requirement to avoid conflict of interest regarding clearance
inspection. All examinations shall be performed by persons or entities
independent of those performing hazard reduction or maintenance activities.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.008 LEAD-SAFE HAZARD REDUCTION AND CONTROL.
   (A)   No person shall disturb or remove lead-based paint, or in any other
way generate excessive dust or debris during work on the interior or exterior
of any existing building or structure except in accordance with the
requirements of this section and other sections of this chapter.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to activities that disturb or remove
paint where the activities are being performed on buildings on which
construction was completed on or after January 1, 1978.
   (C)   Sign required when exterior lead-based paint is disturbed.
      (1)   Not later than the commencement date of any lead-based paint hazard
reduction work, the owner, or the contractor when the owner has entered into a
contract with a contractor to perform work on the exterior of a building or
structure, shall post signs in a location or locations clearly visible to the
adjacent properties stating the following:
   LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARD REDUCTION WORK IN PROGRESS
   PUBLIC ACCESS TO WORK AREA PROHIBITED POSTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE CITY OF
HAMTRAMCK CODE FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PHONE --------------
      (2)   The sign required by this division shall be not less than 24 inches
square and shall be in large boldface capital letters no less than one-half
inch in size, and shall contain the notification in English. The sign required
by this division shall remain in place until the lead based paint hazard
reduction work has been completed.
      (3)   Where it is not possible to post signs in a conspicuous location or
locations clearly visible to the adjacent properties, the owner or where the
owner has entered into a contract with a contractor to perform lead-based paint
hazard reduction work, the contractor shall provide the notice in written form,
such as a letter or memorandum, to the occupants of adjacent properties.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.009 NOTICE TO TENANTS.
   Where lead-based paint hazard reduction work is to be performed on the
interior or exterior of buildings occupied by one or more tenants, not less
than three business days before any lead-based paint hazard reduction work is
to commence, the owner shall provide the following information.
   (A)   Content of notice. Provide written notice to tenants of the building
on which the work is being performed that lead-based paint hazard reduction
work is being performed. This notice shall be in compliance with the EPA pre-
renovation notification rules set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 745, Subpart E, shall
be in the form of a sign, letter or memorandum, and shall prominently state the
following:
      Work is scheduled to be performed beginning __________ (date) on this
property that may disturb or remove lead-based paint. The persons performing
this work are required to follow federal and local laws regulating work with
lead-based paint. You may obtain information regarding these laws, or report
any suspected violations of these laws, by calling the City of Hamtramck at
________ (a number to be designated by the city). The owner of this property is
also required to provide tenants with a copy of the lead hazard information
pamphlet. Retaliatory action against tenants is prohibited by the Municipal
Code.
   (B)   Lead hazard information pamphlet. The owner shall provide all tenants
in the building with a copy of the lead hazard information pamphlet.
   (C)   Notice by contractor. Where lead-based paint hazard reduction work is
being performed by a contractor on residential property, the contractor shall
at least three business days prior to the commencement of the work, notify the
property owner of potential lead hazards during the project by delivering to
the owner a copy of the lead hazard information pamphlet.
   (D)   Early commencement of work by owner. A property owner may commence, or
may authorize a contractor to commence, lead-based paint hazard reduction work
less than three business days after providing notices required above when the
work must be commenced immediately to correct an emergency condition, such as
work necessitated by non-routine failures of equipment, that were not planned
but result from a sudden, unexpected event that, if not immediately attended
to, presents a safety or public health hazard, or threatens equipment and/or
property with significant damage.
   (E)   Early commencement of work requested by tenant. Upon written request
of a tenant, an owner may commence or authorize a contractor to commence, lead-
based paint hazard reduction work on that tenant’s unit less than three
business days after providing notices required in division (A) above.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.010 OCCUPANT PROTECTION AND WORKSITE PREPARATION.
   (A)   Occupant protection.
      (1)   Occupants shall not be permitted to enter the worksite during
hazard reduction activities (unless they are employed in the conduct of these
activities at the worksite) until after hazard reduction work has been
completed and clearance has been achieved.
      (2)   Occupants shall be temporarily relocated during hazard reduction
activities and until a clearance examination has been successfully completed on
the occupant’s unit, and occupants who relocate to a unit not owned by their
landlord shall not be liable for rent accruing during that time, except
relocation shall not be necessary if:
         (a)   Treatment will not disturb lead-based paint, dust-lead hazards
or soil lead hazards;
         (b)   Only the exterior of the dwelling unit is treated, and windows,
doors, ventilation intakes and other openings in or near the worksite are
sealed during hazard control work and cleaned afterward, and entry free of
dust-lead hazards, soil-lead hazards and debris is provided;
         (c)   Treatment of the interior will be completed within one period of
eight daytime hours, the worksite is contained so as to prevent release of
leaded dust and debris into other areas and treatment does not create other
safety, health or environmental hazards (e.g., exposed live electrical wiring,
release of toxic fumes or on-site disposal of hazardous waste); or
         (d)   Treatment of the interior will be completed within 15 calendar
days, the worksite is contained so as to prevent the release of leaded dust and
debris into other areas, treatment does not create other safety, health or
environmental hazards; and, at the end of work on each day, the worksite and
the area within at least ten feet of the containment area is cleaned to remove
any visible dust or debris, and occupants have safe daily access to sleeping
areas, and bathroom and kitchen facilities.
      (3)   The dwelling unit and the worksite shall be secured against
unauthorized entry, and occupants’ belongings protected from contamination by
dust lead hazards and debris during hazard reduction activities. Occupants’
belongings in the containment area shall be relocated to a safe and secure area
outside the containment area, or covered with an impermeable covering with all
seams and edges taped or otherwise sealed.
      (4)   In addition to protections afforded elsewhere by law, if interior
hazard reduction activities will not be or are not completed within 60 calendar
days, occupants shall have the right to terminate their lease and shall have no
further obligation to pay rent under that rental agreement, provided, however,
that this division shall not relieve the occupant of the obligation to pay any
previously accrued rent for which he or she is otherwise liable.
   (B)   Worksite preparation.
      (1)   The worksite shall be prepared, including the placement of
containment barriers, to prevent the release of leaded dust, and contain lead-
based paint chips and other debris from hazard reduction activities within the
worksite until they can be safely removed. Practices that minimize the spread
of leaded dust, paint chips, soil and debris shall be used during worksite
preparation.
      (2)   A warning sign shall be posted at each entry to a room where hazard
reduction activities are conducted when occupants are present; or at each main
and secondary entryway to a building from which occupants have been relocated.
Each warning sign shall be as described in 29 C.F.R. § 1926.62(m), except that
it shall be posted irrespective of employees’ lead exposure and, to the extent
practicable, provided in the occupants’ primary language.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.011 SAFE WORK PRACTICES.
   (A)   Prohibition. Lead-based paint shall not be applied to any exterior or
interior surface.
   (B)   Prohibited methods. The following methods of paint removal shall not
be used:
      (1)   Open flame burning or torching;
      (2)   Machine sanding or grinding without a high-efficiency particulate
air (HEPA) local exhaust control;
      (3)   Abrasive blasting or sandblasting without HEPA local exhaust
control;
      (4)   Heat guns operating above 1,100°F or charring the paint;
      (5)   Dry sanding or dry scraping, except dry scraping in conjunction
with heat guns or within 1.0 foot of electrical outlets, or when treating
defective paint spots totaling no more than two square feet in any one interior
room or space, or totaling no more than 20 square feet on exterior surfaces.
      (6)   Paint stripping in a poorly ventilated space using a volatile
stripper that is a hazardous substance in accordance with regulations of the
Consumer Product Safety Commission at 16C C.F.R. § 1500.3, and/or a hazardous
chemical in accordance with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
regulations at 29 C.F.R. §§ 1910.1200 or 1926.59, as applicable to the work.
   (C)   Worksite preparation. The worksite shall be prepared in accordance
with §§
95.010(B) through
95.011(B).
   (D)   Specialized cleaning. After hazard reduction activities have been
completed, the worksite shall be cleaned using cleaning methods, products and
devices that are successful in cleaning up dust-lead hazards, such as a HEPA
vacuum or other method of equivalent efficacy, and lead-specific detergents or
equivalent.
   (E)   De minimis levels. Safe work practices are not required when
maintenance or hazard reduction activities do not disturb painted surfaces that
total more than:
      (1)   Twenty square feet on exterior surfaces;
      (2)   Two square feet in any one interior room or space; or
      (3)   Ten percent of the total surface area on an interior or exterior
type of component with a small surface area. Examples include windowsills,
baseboards and trim.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.012 EMERGENCY ACTIONS; WEATHER CONDITIONS.
   (A)   For emergency actions necessary to safeguard against imminent or
immediate danger to human life, health or safety, or to protect property from
further structural damage, including demolitions ordered, occupants shall be
protected from exposure to lead in dust and debris generated by emergency
actions to the extent practicable. This exemption does not apply to any work
undertaken subsequent to, or above and beyond emergency actions, other than the
demolitions noted above.
   (B)   Performance of lead-based paint hazard reduction or lead-based paint
abatement on an exterior painted surface as required under this chapter may be
delayed for a reasonable time during a period when weather conditions render
impossible the completion of conventional construction activities, provided
however, that this limitation shall continue only for the period in which work
cannot be performed in the work safe manner as provided for herein.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.013 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to properties taken by a governmental
entity in a foreclosure proceeding which are vacant and secured and:
      (1)   Scheduled for demolition; or
      (2)   Scheduled for sale within 12 months.
   (B)   The requirements of this chapter which are applicable to residential
buildings for which a certificate of occupancy is required shall not include
owner-occupied dwellings for which a certificate of occupancy may be required.
   (C)   The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any person(s) who
owns fewer than three residential buildings in the county for which a
certificate of occupancy is required.
   (D)   All dwellings for which a certificate of occupancy is required shall
be inspected regardless of their exemption but shall receive only documentation
of the problem(s) noted during the inspection.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.014 PROHIBITION OF RETALIATORY ACTION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for an owner, or any person acting on his or her
behalf, to take any retaliatory action toward a tenant who reports a suspected
lead-based paint hazard to the owner or to the city. Retaliatory actions
include but are not limited to any actions that materially alter the terms of
the tenancy (including rent increases and non-renewals) or interfere with the
occupants’ use of the property.
   (B)   There shall be a rebuttal presumption that any attempt by the owner to
raise rents, curtail services, refuse to renew or attempt to evict a tenant
within six months after any report to the city or the owner or any enforcement
action in connection with a suspected lead hazard is a retaliatory action in
violation of this section, except that in instances of nonpayment of rent or
commission of waste upon the premises by the tenant no presumption shall apply.
After six months from the date of the reporting of a suspected lead hazard, or
the most recent activity related to any enforcement action, the defense of
retaliatory eviction shall remain available to the tenant, but without the
benefit of the presumption created by this section.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not be given effect in any case
in which it is established that the condition from which the complaint or
action arose was caused by the tenant, a member of the tenant’s household or a
guest of the tenant. Nor shall it apply in a case where a tenancy was
terminated pursuant to the terms of a lease as a result of a bona fide transfer
of ownership.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.015 DATABASE FOR PROPERTIES.
   (A)   The city shall maintain a database, accessible to the public, of all
residential properties where lead hazards have been identified, reduced and
controlled with funds received by the city from the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development which require that a database be maintained. The
city shall further maintain a database of all residential properties granted a
certificate of occupancy after the effective date of this chapter.
   (B)   The databases created pursuant to this section shall be kept available
for “walk in” inspection by the public. No person requesting access shall be
required to complete a freedom of information request in order to view this
database.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)
§ 95.016 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate any
rules and regulations deemed necessary to implement the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   The city may commence an action to obtain injunctive relief to prevent
actions prohibited by this chapter, to enforce corrective orders and
conciliation agreements authorized by this chapter.
   (C)   In cases involving alleged violations of this chapter, the city may
enter into agreements whereby persons agree to methods of conforming to this
chapter in case of hardship as determined by the City Manager. Violations of
the agreements shall be violations of this chapter and may be punishable
through the appropriate judicial processes. The agreements shall be a part of
public record, and the city shall maintain the right to make any and all parts
of the agreement public.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.999 PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Each violation of
this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500, imprisonment of
not more than 90 days, or both.
(Ord. 2008-3, passed 3-11-2008)
CHAPTER 96: FORECLOSED, VACANT OR ABANDONED PROPERTY
Section
Foreclosed, Vacant or Abandoned Property Registration
   
96.001   Purpose
   
96.002   Definitions
   
96.003   Evidence of vacant or abandoned property
   
96.004   Registration required
   
96.005   Amendment of registration information
   
96.006   Designation of responsible local agent required
   
96.007   Transfer of ownership
   
96.008   Duty to maintain and secure
   
96.009   Monitoring of property; fee; inspection
   
96.010   Abatement
   
96.011   Fire damaged property
   
96.012   Fees and charges
   
96.013   Nuisance per se
   
96.014   Disclaimer of liability
   
96.015   Redevelopment ready fee
Re-Occupancy of Vacant, Abandoned, Foreclosed Property
   
96.025   Purpose
   
96.026   Definitions
   
96.027   Application required
   
96.028   Certificate of occupancy required
   
96.029   Inspection required
   
96.030   Dangerous conditions
   
96.031   Severability
   
96.032   Disclaimer of liability
 
   
96.999   Penalty
FORECLOSED, VACANT OR ABANDONED PROPERTY REGISTRATION
§ 96.001 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to prevent blight, protect property values
and neighborhood integrity, avoid the creation and maintenance of nuisances,
ensure the safe maintenance of buildings and to protect public health, safety
and welfare by creating a vacant property registry and establishing inspection
and maintenance standards.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 96.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows, terms not herein defined shall have the meanings
customarily assigned to them:
   ABANDONED. A property that is vacant as a result of the relinquishment of
possession or control by a mortgager or the mortgager's assigns whether or not
the mortgager or mortgager's assigns have relinquished equity and title.
   ASSESSED VALUE. The assessed value of a property is determined by the City
Assessor’s Office according to established assessment practices and guidelines.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this subchapter, or any duly authorized agent.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING. Any dwelling or structure that is in violation of any
condition referenced in §
92.001 of this code.
   FORECLOSURE. The process by which a lien, mortgage or security interest is
enforced against a parcel of real property. A parcel of real property for which
there is any of the following shall constitute a FORECLOSED PROPERTY:
      (1)   A notice of foreclosure;
      (2)   A notice of trustee's sale;
      (3)   A foreclosure sale of the real property where the title to the real
property was retained by the beneficiary of the mortgage;
      (4)   A pending tax sale; and
      (5)   Any transfer of title under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or deed
in lieu of sale.
   LANDSCAPING. Shall include, without limitation, items such as trees, shrubs,
plants, grass, ground cover including mulch and rocks, borders, ornamental
fences, items and structures.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A notice issued to the owner or responsible local agent
stating that there has been a violation of a provision of this subchapter or
any other applicable codes, ordinances, rules or regulations concerning the
premises.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable
interest in the premises.
   PROPERTY. Any unimproved or improved real property within the City of
Hamtramck and includes the building and structures located on the property
regardless of condition.
   RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT. The responsible local agent shall be an individual
person, and shall be either the property owner, representative of a
corporation, partnership, firm, joint venture, trust, association,
organization, or other entity having a legal or equitable interest in the
property, or designated by the owner as responsible for operating the premises
in compliance with all the provisions of the city codes and ordinances. All
official notices and violations may be issued to the responsible local agent,
and any notice so issued shall be deemed to have been issued upon the owner of
record.
   SECURE MANNER. Includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking of
windows, doors (including garage doors), gates and any other opening that may
allow access to the property and structure.
   VACANT PROPERTY. An improved or unimproved lot or parcel of real property
that is not currently legally used or occupied for a period of 30 days.
Exceptions:
      (1)   A building or structure which remains furnished, has active
utilities in use, and is consistently maintained by the owner while not
occupied.
      (2)   The vacancy of an individual dwelling unit in a multi-family
dwelling or apartment building.
      (3)   The vacancy of individual tenant units in a commercial building
that has multiple tenant spaces with one common access.
      (4)   A building under construction that meets all of the following
conditions:
         (a)   There is a current and valid building permit on file with the
city;
         (b)   There is significant and continuous progress being made toward
completion of the building and/or project;
         (c)   The contractor, owner or tenant secures the property and takes
all other necessary safety precautions;
         (d)   The contractor, owner or tenant takes all reasonable measures to
maintain the exterior of the property in compliance with all applicable codes;
and
         (e)   Otherwise complies with this chapter and all other applicable
laws, ordinances and regulations.
(Ord. , passed - - 2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016; Am. Res. 2023-158b,
passed 11-14-2023; Am. Res. 2024-45b, passed 5-28-2024)
§ 96.003 EVIDENCE OF VACANT OR ABANDONED PROPERTY.
   Property will be presumed abandoned when there is evidence of conditions,
taken separately or as a whole that would lead to the conclusion that the
property is vacant. Scope of evidence includes, but is not limited to evidence
of overgrown or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers
or mail; past due utility notices and/or disconnect utilities; accumulation of
junk, litter, trash or debris; abandoned vehicles; open entryways, broken or
boarded windows; statements of neighbors, passersby, delivery or utility
agents, city workers and code officials, Police and Fire Department employees.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 96.004 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner of any foreclosed, vacant or abandoned property shall
register the property with the City of Hamtramck within 30 days of the earlier
of:
      (1)   The property becoming subject to foreclosure.
      (2)   The property becoming a vacant or abandoned property.
      (3)   Notice sent to the owner by the city that the property has been
declared a foreclosed, vacant or abandoned property.
   (B)   No registration is valid unless completed accurately and correctly,
signed by the owner or responsible local agent, and the proper fees have been
paid. Once issued, certificates are not transferable as to person or place and
fees may not be refunded.
   (C)   Registration shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The address of the foreclosed, vacant or abandoned property.
      (2)   The date of which the property became foreclosed, vacant or
abandoned.
      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of the
dwelling or structure including the name, address and phone number of the
majority shareholder of any owner that is a business or corporation.
      (4)   The name, address, telephone number, driver's license number or
other legal identification and date of birth of the responsible local agent for
the property.
      (5)   A mailing address where mail is to be sent that will be
acknowledged as received by owner or agent. If mail sent to the address is
returned for whatever reason, then such occurrence shall be prima facie proof
that the owner has failed to comply with registration requirements.
      (6)   Affirmation of utility connects or disconnects.
      (7)   The acknowledgment and signature of a designated responsible local
agent.
      (8)   The acknowledgment of inspection, if required, and scheduled date
of inspection.
   (D)   Payment in full of all fines, fees and other debts on the property
that are owed to the city, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Outstanding water and sewer bills.
      (2)   All charges for cleanup, mowing, boarding or other maintenance
debts.
      (3)   Any fines or penalties arising from violations.
   (E)   Foreclosed, vacant, abandoned property registration is valid for one
year from the date of issuance and shall be renewed annually thereafter until
the property has become legally occupied. Renewal registration must be applied
for 60 days prior to the expiration date of the current certificate. Failure to
register after notice or to timely renew a property registration is a violation
of this subchapter and shall subject the property owner to late fees.
   (F)   Registration fees, renewal fees, late fees as well as any other
charges in connection with foreclosed, vacant or abandoned registration and
compliance shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.005 AMENDMENT OF REGISTRATION INFORMATION.
   If any information that is submitted on a foreclosed, vacant or abandoned
registration changes, including the name or responsible party of any limited
liability company or corporation, the owner or registered agent must notify the
city with an amended application within ten days of the change. There shall be
no fee for an amended application if done within ten days; however failure to
update necessary information within ten days shall subject the property owner
to late fees.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.006 DESIGNATION OF RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT REQUIRED.
   The owner of any vacant dwelling or structure shall designate an individual
person as the responsible local agent who shall be responsible for maintaining
the dwelling or structure and who shall provide access for inspection by the
code official for compliance with the applicable ordinance requirements. The
owner may act as the responsible local agent. The responsible local agent shall
reside within a 50 mile radius of the city.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.007 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   The seller of a foreclosed, vacant or abandoned property must notify
the city within 15 days of the date of the sale or transfer and provide the
name and address of the purchaser or transferee. The purchaser or transferee
must apply for a property registration within 15 days of the sale or transfer,
unless it is intended to be occupied as a single-family owner occupied
structure and a principal residence exemption is on file with the city. No
refunds or credits of fees will be given when there is a transfer of ownership.
   (B)   Any foreclosed, vacant or abandoned property which meets one of the
following conditions will be required to obtain a new certificate of occupancy
pursuant to the provisions of §§
96.025 through
96.032:
      (1)   Any vacant or abandoned residential property that has been
unoccupied for a period of 180 days or more that will be occupied after sale or
transfer of ownership.
      (2)   Any vacant or abandoned commercial or industrial property that has
been unoccupied for a period of 90 days or more that will be occupied after
sale or transfer of ownership.
      (3)   Any property that has been foreclosed, regardless of the period of
vacancy, which will be occupied after sale or transfer of ownership.
(Ord. , passed - - 2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.008 DUTY TO MAINTAIN AND SECURE.
   It is declared a public nuisance for any owner or agent to cause, permit, or
maintain any property condition contrary to the provisions of this section. The
owner or agent responsible for the care and control of the property shall
perform regular inspections of the property to assure compliance with the
requirements of this section and all other codes and ordinances.
   (A)   Property shall be kept free of the following:
      (1)   Grass taller than five inches.
      (2)   Weeds on property, along fence lines, in alleyways.
      (3)   Vegetation growth onto, or between sidewalk and driveway flags or
from cracks in the pavement.
      (4)   Dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building
materials, conditions for rodent harborage.
      (5)   Accumulated snow on sidewalks and driveways.
      (6)   Any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, and notices.
      (7)   Discarded items including, but not limited to: furniture, clothing,
large and small appliances, printed material, signage, containers, equipment,
construction materials.
      (8)   Any illegal outside storage of vehicles.
   (B)   Property shall be kept free of graffiti, tagging or similar markings
by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color
of the exterior structure.
   (C)   Property shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be
accessible to unauthorized persons. Broken windows must be repaired or replaced
within 30 days. Boarding up of open or broken windows is prohibited except as a
temporary measure for no longer than 30 days.
   (D)   Property shall comply with minimum security fencing, barrier and
maintenance requirements of the construction code and the International
Property Maintenance Code. Security fencing shall be kept in good repair.
   (E)   Landscaping shall be properly maintained.
   (F)   Pools, spas, or other water features located on the property shall be
drained and kept dry and free of debris, and must comply with the minimum
security fencing, barrier and maintenance requirements of the construction code
and the International Property Maintenance Code.
   (G)   Utilities at the property must be properly and safely connected or
fully disconnected by the utility company.
   (H)   Any building accessory or attachment must be securely attached so as
not to cause a blighted condition, including, but not limited to, gutters,
downspouts, shutters, railings, guards, steps, awnings, canopies, signs, light
fixtures, and fire escapes.
   (I)   Signs and lighting systems shall be structurally sound, and maintained
so as not to cause a blighted condition, or removed. Any sign that no longer
advertises or identifies a use conducted on the property shall be removed by
the property owner within 30 days of the date the use ended.
   (J)   Fencing and retaining walls shall be maintained structurally sound.
Any fence or wall with broken or hanging components shall be repaired,
straightened, or removed.
   (K)   Perishables shall be removed from the interior of all structures on
the property.
   (L)   Windows shall not be obscured with newspapers, paper or plastic sheets
or similar materials. Blinds and drapes designed for said purpose shall be
permitted.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.009 MONITORING OF PROPERTY; FEE; INSPECTION.
   (A)   The city shall inspect and monitor the condition of any property
required to be registered under this subchapter, including building, water,
fire, police, and any other inspections deemed necessary by the code official.
   (B)    Fees will be set by resolution of City Council to offset costs
incurred by the city, including but without limitation to, responding to phone
calls, complaints, inquires, site visits, owner notifications, and inspecting
and monitoring of the site. No refunds or credits of the monitoring fee will be
given.
   (C)   The code official shall have the authority to require the owner or
agent to implement additional maintenance, security, or other measures not
specified in §
96.008, as may be reasonably required to prevent further decline or blight.
   (D)   Upon application for a new vacant registration the subject property's
exterior premises shall be inspected for compliance with all applicable codes.
In the event the inspection reveals any violations the owner shall, within ten
days, apply for any necessary permits, and shall within 30 days, or such
additional period as authorized by the building official not to exceed six
months from the application date, complete all required repairs. The
application fee for a new registration shall include one initial inspection and
one re-inspection. Additional re-inspections shall be shall be assessed a re-
inspection fee.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.010 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   If the owner fails to secure or maintain the property as required
under this subchapter, such failure shall constitute a hazardous and nuisance
condition. After notice to abate has been provided, the code official may abate
the nuisance without further notice, by arranging for city employees or private
contractors to secure and board the structure, remove rubbish and debris,
landscape, or make repairs. The cost of abating the nuisance condition, plus
any applicable administrative costs or late fees, shall be charged to the owner
and against the property. Such billing shall be a personal debt against the
owner, which may be assessed as a lien against the property.
   (B)   The code official may abate the public nuisance without notice if the
public health and safety requires immediate abatement.
   (C)   The billing of costs and fees for abatement shall not exclude the
owner/agent from the issuance of citations for failing to meet any of the
requirements under this subchapter.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.011 FIRE DAMAGED PROPERTY.
   If any building or structure that is damaged by fire, the owner or agent
shall have 90 days from the date of the fire to apply for the appropriate
permits to begin construction or demolition. Failure to do so will result in
the property being deemed vacant or abandoned and subject to the requirements
of this subchapter.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016) Penalty, See §
96.999
§ 96.012 FEES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   All fees applicable to this subchapter shall be set by resolution of
the City Council and may include without limitation:
      (1)   Annual registration fees charged to the owner or agent at time of
registration of the foreclosed, vacant or abandoned residential property.
      (2)   Annual registration fee charged to the owner or agent at time of
registration of the foreclosed, vacant or abandoned commercial or industrial
property.
      (3)   Late fees charged to the owner or agent for failing to register the
foreclosed, vacant or abandoned property or renew a registration in a timely
manner.
      (4)   An inspection fee charged to the owner or agent for monthly
monitoring inspections or any inspection caused by the owner or agent's failure
to comply with the maintenance and security duties set forth in this
subchapter.
      (5)   Administrative charges charged to the owner or agent for excessive
notifications of violations, processing orders for boarding, landscaping,
removal of rubbish and debris, and preparation for prosecution.
   (B)   Fees set by City Council shall be fashioned progressively based on
square footage of the vacant property or lot size of vacant unimproved lots.
   (C)   If an owner or agent fails to pay fees or charges due under the terms
of this subchapter within 30 days of being invoiced, the cost reflected on the
invoice may be placed on the property’s utility bill which could later be
assessed against the property, additionally the city may institute action
against the owner or agent for collection of the costs in any court of
competent jurisdiction. The city’s attempt to collect such costs shall not
invalidate or waive any lien filed against the property.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016; Am. Res. 2023-158b,
passed 11-14-2023) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.013 NUISANCE PER SE.
   A foreclosed, vacant or abandoned structure or unit in violation of this
subchapter is considered to be a nuisance per se and is subject to abatement in
any manner prescribed by law.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 96.014 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The city shall not be liable to any person or entity by reason of this
chapter or the issuance of a foreclosed, vacant or abandoned property
registration. A property registration is not a warranty or guarantee that there
are no defects in or on any foreclosed, vacant or abandoned property.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-05, passed 9-6-2016)
§ 96.015 REDEVELOPMENT READY FEE.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to address the
issue of vacant properties within the city and to encourage property owners to
maintain and utilize their properties in a productive manner. This section
establishes a progressive vacant property redevelopment fee based on a
percentage of the property’s assessed value to incentivize property owners to
actively use or redevelop vacant properties.
   (B)   Fee rate schedule. A redevelopment ready fee shall be imposed annually
on vacant properties within the city limits. The fee rate shall be determined
as follows:
      (1)   For properties vacant for 12 to 24 consecutive months, the fee rate
shall be 3% of the property’s assessed value;
      (2)   For properties vacant for 25 to 36 consecutive months, the fee rate
shall be 5% of the property’s assessed value; and
      (3)   For properties vacant for 37 and/or more consecutive months, the
fee rate shall be 9% of the property’s assessed value.
   (C)   Administration.
      (1)   The redevelopment ready fee shall be assessed and collected by the
City Economic Development Department and under its purview or designee.
      (2)   Property owners shall be notified of the redevelopment ready fee
and the applicable rate annually.
      (3)   Property owners who fail to pay the redevelopment ready fee by the
designated due date shall be subject to penalty charges of $100 per day of
nonpayment.
 
Fee Schedule
Registration Residential $200 (every 180 days)
Registration Commercial  $500 (every 180 days)
Late Fees                $75
 
(Res. 2023-158b, passed 11-14-2023; Am. Res. 2024-45b, passed 5-28-24)
RE-OCCUPANCY OF VACANT, ABANDONED, FORECLOSED PROPERTY
§ 96.025 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a program for inspection and
certification of properties that have been deemed to be vacant, abandoned or
foreclosed. Such properties are found to be in declining conditions and often
inhabitable. To protect the health, safety and welfare of new occupants of
properties found to be vacant, abandoned or foreclosed within the provisions of
this chapter will be required to pass inspection and receive a certificate of
occupancy before being occupied.
(Ord. , passed - -2013)
§ 96.026 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDON. A property that is vacant as a result of the relinquishment of
possession or control by a mortgager or the mortgager’s assigns whether or not
the mortgager or mortgager’s assigns have relinquished equity and title.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this subchapter, or any duly authorized agent.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING. Any dwelling or structure that is in violation of any
condition referenced in §
92.001 of this code.
   FORECLOSURE. The process by which a lien, mortgage or security interest is
enforced against a parcel of real property. A parcel of real property for which
there is any of the following shall constitute a foreclosed property:
      (1)   A notice of foreclosure;
      (2)   A notice of trustee’s sale;
      (3)   A foreclosure sale of the real property where the title to the real
property was retained by the beneficiary of the mortgage;
      (4)   A pending tax sale;
      (5)   Any transfer of title under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or deed
in lieu of sale;
   NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any dwelling or structure intended to be occupied,
in whole or part, for any use other than a home, living space, residing place
or sleeping space, either permanently or transiently.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A notice issued to the owner or responsible local agent
stating that there has been a violation of a provision of the subchapter or any
other applicable codes, ordinances, rules or regulations concerning the
premises.
   OCCUPANCY. Any property occupied as either a residential property or non-
residential property.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable
interest in the premises.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. A dwelling or structure intended to be occupied, in
whole or part, for use as a home, living space, residing place or sleeping
space, either permanently or transiently.
   RESPONSIBLE AGENT. A representative of a corporation, partnership, firm,
joint venture, trust, association, organization, or other entity having a legal
or equitable interest in the property, or designated by the owner as
responsible for maintaining the premises in compliance with all the provisions
of the city codes and ordinances. All official notices and violations may be
issued to the RESPONSIBLE AGENT, and any notice so issued shall be deemed to
have been issued upon the owner of record. The owner of the premises may act as
the RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT.
   VACANT PROPERTY. Any improved property that is not legally occupied or any
unimproved property.
(Ord. , passed - -2013)
§ 96.027 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   The owner or responsible agent of any foreclosed, vacant or abandoned
property that will become occupied shall apply at the Department of Public
Services for a certificate of occupancy, before the property is occupied, and
shall also be responsible for providing access to the premises for making the
inspections necessary to ensure compliance with terms of all applicable codes
and ordinances adopted by the city.
(Ord. , passed - -2013) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.028 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any property that has been foreclosed, vacant or abandoned which meets
one or more of the following conditions, whether or not the property has been
registered with the City of Hamtramck Vacant Property Registry shall be
required to obtain a certificate of pccupancy before the property can be
occupied:
      (1)   Any vacant or abandoned residential property that has been
unoccupied for a period of 180 or longer.
      (2)   Any vacant or abandoned non-residential property that has been
unoccupied for a period of 90 days or longer.
      (3)   Any property that has been foreclosed by any bank, county,
financial entity, or any other person, firm or corporation holding interest in
the property, regardless of period of vacancy.
   (B)   No person shall rent, lease, or occupy any foreclosed, vacant or
abandoned property referenced in this section unless a certificate of occupancy
has been obtained.
   (C)   The certificate of occupancy issued to a residential property shall
remain valid and is transferrable until such time as the property becomes
foreclosed, vacant or abandoned. There is no annual renewal for a certificate
of occupancy issued to a residential property.
   (D)   The certificate of occupancy issued to a non-residential property
shall remain valid for the current use of the property. A non-residential
certificate of occupancy is not transferable, and is subject to reinspection
with every new use or business license issued.
   (E)   A certificate of occupancy is not to replace a non-owner occupied
certificate of compliance. Any non-owner occupied property shall be required to
comply with the provisions of §§
150.080 through
150.096 and
150.180 through
150.196 and obtain a certificate of compliance.
   (F)   A certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Department of Public
Services if the applicant meets the following requirements:
      (1)   Application form submitted.
      (2)   The required inspection(s) have been performed at the premises and
all violations disclosed have been corrected.
      (3)   All reinspections have been performed to confirm the correction of
violations.
      (4)   All the following fees and debts to the city have been paid in
full:
         (a)   All previously billed property taxes;
         (b)   All current or past due special assessments;
         (c)   Water or sewer bills outstanding;
         (d)   All charges against the property for mowing, cleanup, debris
removal or similar charges by the city;
         (e)   Any fees, fines, penalties, or debts of any sort arising from
provisions of property maintenance, including blight violations.
   (G)   Failure to make application, schedule the required inspection or
reinspection, or to obtain a certificate of occupancy as required by this
subchapter may subject the applicant to late fees.
(Ord. , passed - -2013) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.029 INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Access of code official/inspector. The code official/building
inspector(s) shall be granted access by the owner or responsible agent at the
date and time schedule for the inspection(s), for the purpose of conducting a
compliance inspection. If any owner or responsible agent refuses to provide
access to the premises for a compliance inspection, or fails to show up for the
inspection, a code official may issue a ticket for fail to obtain entry to the
premises. All properties inspected shall comply with the minimum standards set
forth in the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by reference in
§
150.010.
   (B)   Inspection required. All foreclosed, vacant or abandoned properties
which are required by this subchapter shall have an inspection to ensure
compliance with all the requirements of the International Property Maintenance
Code as adopted by reference in §
150.010. The following inspections are required: electrical, mechanical,
plumbing, building, and ordinance enforcement.
   (C)   Reinspection required. Reinspection shall be required when violations
are found to exist during a prior inspection. Before a certificate of occupancy
is issued, all violations must be corrected and approved. The violations shall
be corrected and a reinspection scheduled within 90 days after the initial
inspection, except in dangerous conditions which must be remedied immediately.
   (D)   Extension for Compliance. Upon request and submission of proof of
extenuating circumstances, the code official may grant an extension to make the
repairs necessary to bring the property into compliance.
   (E)   Inspection fees. Inspection fees, reinspection fees and late fees as
well as any other charges in connection with this subchapter shall be
established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. , passed - -2013) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.030 DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.
   Should the code official, upon inspection, determine that there are
conditions which constitute an imminent danger to health and safety, it may
order the conditions to be remedied and may limit or prohibit occupancy where
appropriate.
(Ord. , passed - -2013) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.031 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this subchapter is determined to be unenforceable by a
court, the remainder of this subchapter shall be deemed severable and is to
remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. , passed - -2013)
§ 96.032 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The city shall not be liable to any person or entity by reason of this
subchapter or the issuance of a foreclosed, vacant or abandoned property
certificate.
(Ord. , passed - -2013)
§ 96.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, agent, corporation or other entity who violates,
neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of §§
96.004 through
96.012 is responsible for a municipal civil infraction for the first and second
offense of the same provision within a period of 365 days. The City Council
shall establish a fine structure for a first and second offense municipal civil
infraction.
      (2)   Any person, agent, corporation or other entity who violates,
neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of §§
96.004 through
96.012 is responsible for a misdemeanor for the third and any subsequent
offense of the same provision within a period of 365 days. Upon conviction, the
person, agent, corporation, or other entity may be fined up to $500, sentenced
to 90 days in jail, community service for a time determined by the judge, or
any combination of the above.
      (3)   In addition to any other penalty or sanction provided in §§
96.004 through
96.012, the court may require the defendant to pay any unpaid fees and charges
arising from the provisions of §§
96.001 through
96.015 .
      (4)   Each day that a violation of §§
96.004 through
96.012 exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
(Ord. 2013-17, passed 3-26-2013)
   (B)   (1)   Any person, agent, corporation or other entity who violates,
neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of §§
96.027 through
96.030 is responsible for a municipal civil infraction for the first and second
offense of the same provision within a period of 365 days. The City Council
shall establish a fine structure for a first and second offense municipal civil
infraction.
      (2)   Any person, agent, corporation or other entity who violates,
neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of §§
96.027 through
96.030 is responsible for a misdemeanor for the third and any subsequent
offense of the same provision within a period of 365 days. Upon conviction, the
person, agent, corporation, or other entity may be fined up to $500, sentenced
to 90 days in jail, community service for a time determined by the judge, or
any combination of the above.
      (3)   In addition to any other penalty or sanction provided in §§
96.027 through
96.030, the court may require the defendant to pay any unpaid fees and charges
arising from the provisions of §§
96.025 through
96.032.
      (4)   Each day that a violation of §§
96.027 through
96.030 exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
(Ord. , passed - -2013)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
111.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS
      
112.   TRANSPORTATION
      
113.   ALCOHOL
      
114.   PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS AND JUNK DEALERS
      
115.   METAL AND GEM DEALERS
      
116.   HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
      
117.   PUBLIC SALES
      
118.   AMUSEMENTS
      
119.   RESTAURANTS AND FOOD-RELATED SERVICES AND PRODUCTS
      
120.   HANDBILL DISTRIBUTORS AND HOUSE-TO-HOUSE SOLICITORS
      
121.   MARIJUANA BUSINESSES
      
122.   SMOKING LOUNGES
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Business Licenses
   
110.001   Title and purpose
   
110.002   Scope
   
110.003   Definitions
   
110.004   Application of regulations
   
110.005   City Clerk
   
110.006   Qualifications of applicants
   
110.007   Procedure for issuance of license
   
110.008   Determination of license fee
   
110.009   Contents of license; information required
   
110.010   Duties of licensee
   
110.011   Transfer of license
   
110.012   Enforcement
 
   
110.999   Penalty
BUSINESS LICENSES
§ 110.001 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the General Licensing
Subchapter of the city. All businesses shall be registered annually within the
city:
   (A)   To assist the city with information to help provide:
      (1)   More adequate police and fire protection;
      (2)   More equal and equitable real and personal property taxation;
      (3)   Better efficiency and economy in furnishing public utility
services;
      (4)   More comprehensive and informed planning and zoning uses of land
and structures; and
      (5)   For purposes of taxation.
   (B)   To establish a registry of businesses operating within the city for
the general information of the public and for the promotion of the city.
(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981; Am. Ord., passed 9-8-2020)
§ 110.002 SCOPE.
   It is not intended by this subchapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any
way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances,
except those specifically repealed by this subchapter. Where this subchapter
imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises or personal property than
is imposed or required by an existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or
deed, the provisions of this subchapter shall control.
(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981; Am. Ord., passed 9-8-2020)
§ 110.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in
the singular number include the plural number. The word SHALL is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
   BUSINESS. Includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions,
enterprises, establishments, social clubs, and all other kinds of activities
and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances
used therein, any of which are conducted for private profit or benefit, either
directly or indirectly, on any premises in this city, or anywhere else within
its jurisdiction.
   CITY. The City of Hamtramck.
   CITY CLERK or DEPUTY CITY CLERK. The license officer of the city.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Hamtramck.
   INSIGNIA or INSIGNE. Any tag, plate, badge, emblem, sticker or any other
kind of device which may be required for any use in connection with any
license.
   LICENSE or LICENSEE. As used generally herein, shall include respectively
the words PERMIT or PERMITTEE or the holder for any use or period of time of
any similar privilege, wherever relevant to any provision of this subchapter or
other law or subchapter.
   PERSON. To include individual natural persons, partnerships, joint
adventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or corporations or
any officer's agents, employees, factors or any kind of personal
representatives of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself,
herself or for any other person, under either personal appointment or pursuant
to law.
   PREMISES. To include all lands, structures, places, and also the equipment
and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any
personal property which is either affixed to, or is otherwise used in
connection with any business conducted on the premises.
   SOCIAL CLUB. A club, commercial building, or commercial establishment, where
people go to meet each other. This may be for either leisure activities,
playing cards, meetings, or loitering inside with no intended purpose but where
it is clear the location is being used for people to gather.
(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981; Am. Ord., passed 9-8-2020)
§ 110.004 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance required. It shall be unlawful for any person, either
directly or indirectly, to conduct any business, non-profit enterprise, social
club, or to use in connection therewith any vehicle, premises, machine or
device, in whole or in part, for which a license or permit, is required by any
law or ordinance of this city or state, without a license or permit therefor
being first procured and kept in effect at all times as required by this
subchapter or other law or ordinance of this city.
   (B)   Special sales. This subchapter shall apply to all business in the
nature of special sales for which a license is required by any law or ordinance
of this city and it shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or
indirectly, to conduct any sale except in conformity with the provisions of
this subchapter.
      (1)   One act constitutes doing business. For the purpose of this
subchapter, any person shall be deemed to be in business or engaging in
nonprofit enterprise, and thus subject to the requirements of divisions (A) and
(B) of this section, when he or she does one act of:
         (a)   Selling or providing any goods or service;
         (b)   Soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale or
hire;
         (c)   Acquiring or using any vehicle or any premises in the city for
business purposes; or
         (d)   Occupying a commercial building for the use of a social club or
similar activity.
      (2)   Agents responsible for obtaining license. The agents or other
representatives of nonresidents who are doing business in this city shall be
personally responsible for the compliance of their principals and of the
businesses they represent with this subchapter.
      (3)   Separate license for branch establishments.
         (a)   Generally. A license shall be obtained in the manner prescribed
herein for each branch establishment or location of the business engaged in, as
if each branch establishment or location were a separate business; provided
that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental
to a business licensed under the provisions of this subchapter shall not be
deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments.
         (b)   Rental real property. Each rental real property shall be deemed
a branch establishment or separate place of business for the purposes of this
subchapter when there is a representative of the owner or the owner's agent on
the premises who is authorized to transact business for the owner or owner's
agent or there is a regular employee of the owner or of the owner's agent
working on the premises.
      (4)   No joint license. A person engaged in two or more businesses at the
same location shall obtain separate licenses to conduct each of the businesses.
      (5)   No license required for mere delivery. No license shall be required
of any person for any mere delivery in the city of any property purchases or
acquired in good faith from the person at his or her regular place of business
outside the city where no intent by the person is shown to exist to evade the
provisions of this subchapter.
      (6)   No special permits to nonprofit enterprise. The City Clerk shall
not issue special permits, without the payment of license fees, to any person
or organization for the conduct or operation of a non-profit enterprise, either
regularly or temporarily, when he or she finds that the applicant operates
without private profit for religious purpose.
         (a)   Application for special permit. An applicant for a special
permit shall submit an application therefor to the City Clerk, upon forms
prescribed by the City Clerk, and shall furnish additional information and make
affidavits as the City Clerk shall require.
         (b)   Special permittees must conform. A person or organization
operating under a special permit shall operate his or her nonprofit enterprise
in compliance with this subchapter and all other applicable rules and
regulations except as provided herein.
      (7)   Consumer and low-impact fireworks permit. Retail sales of consumer
grade/low-impact fireworks in the City of Hamtramck must be in compliance with
Michigan Fireworks Safety Act PA 256, amended December 31, 2018, and follow
these regulations:
         (a)   Retail sales of fireworks must obtain an additional special
permit in addition to the business license.
            1.   The fee of the special fireworks permit shall be set by
Council resolution annually.
         (b)   Professional grade display fire works remain illegal to buy and
sell.
         (c)   Anyone selling consumer fireworks must be certified by the State
of Michigan to do so and must prominently display the state certificate at the
retail location.
         (d)   Anyone selling low-impact fireworks must be registered on the
state's website before doing so.
         (e)   Anyone selling consumer or low-impact fireworks must file an
application for permit with the City Clerk.
         (f)   Retail sellers of consumer fireworks must maintain insurance
coverage of not less than $10,000,000 per occurrence.
         (g)   Any person or business selling, distributing or transporting
fireworks shall otherwise comply with the Act, and is required to obtain the
approvals that are necessary under the applicable provisions of the Ordinances
of the City of Hamtramck and the Act. Failure to secure applicable approvals is
subject to penalty as provided in the Act or the Ordinances of the City of
Hamtramck.
      (8)   Sidewalk sales. Separate temporary permits may be applied for
through the City Clerk's office. The fee shall be set annually by City Council.
A sidewalk sale is defined as merchandise on display for sale on public right-
of-way sidewalks. Properties with ingress entrances are not subject to sidewalk
sale. Sidewalk sales are permitted in commercially zoned districts on Joseph
Campau, Conant Ave, Holbrook Ave and Caniff only.
         (a)   The City Clerk shall develop a policy for the regulation of
sidewalk sales containing, but not limited to the following:
            1.   Sidewalk sales shall be limited of the amount available, per
business, per calendar year, and set for a duration of time for each permit
approved;
            2.   The City Clerk shall have the authority to suspend or revoke
this permit for any violation of any ordinance, law, violation of the policy.
            3.   The temporary use of the site must be consistent with the
zoning ordinance, and not cause any disturbance to the neighboring properties.
            4.   Sidewalk sale merchandise may only be located directly in-
front of the business holding the sale. The merchandise displayed shall not
impede pedestrian traffic and a 48-inch wide minimum path shall be maintained
at all times during the sales.
(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981; Am. Ord., passed 9-8-2020) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.005 CITY CLERK.
   (A)   Issue licenses. The City Treasurer shall collect all license fees and
the City Clerk shall issue licenses in the name of the city after all
applicable fees have been paid to all persons qualified under the provisions of
this subchapter and are as follows:
      (1)   Make rules. Promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and
regulations necessary to operation and enforcement of this subchapter;
      (2)   Adopt forms. Adopt all forms and prescribe the information to be
given therein as to character and other relevant matter for all necessary
papers;
      (3)   Require affidavits. Require applicants to submit all affidavits and
oaths necessary to the administration of this subchapter;
      (4)   Obtain endorsement. Submit all applications, in a proper case, to
interested city officials for their endorsements thereon as to compliance by
the applicant with all city regulations which they have the duty of enforcing;
      (5)   Investigate. Investigate and determine the eligibility of any
applicant for a license as prescribed herein;
      (6)   Examine records. Examine the books and records of any applicant or
licensee when reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of
this subchapter; and
      (7)   Give notice. Notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection of
his or her application and shall, upon his or her refusal of any license or
permit at the applicant's request, state in writing the reasons therefor and
deliver them to the applicant.
   (B)   Information confidential. The City Clerk shall keep all confidential
information furnished or secured under the authority of this subchapter, in
strict confidence. The information shall not be subject to public inspection
and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not become known except to
the persons charged with the administration of this subchapter.
(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981; Am. Ord., passed 9-8-2020)
§ 110.006 QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANTS.
   (A)   General standards to be applied. The general standards herein set out
relative to the qualifications of every applicant for a city license shall be
considered and applied by the City Clerk.
   (B)   Proof of qualifications. The applicant shall provide proof of
qualifications as follows:
      (1)   Citizenship. Be a citizen or legal resident of the United States or
a declarant therefor as authorized by law;
      (2)   Loyalty. Not, either individually or as a member of any party,
group or organization, at the time of any application for a license or special
permit, advocate or resort to any practices subversive of or designed for the
overthrow, destruction or sabotage of the government of the United States,
State of Michigan, or City of Hamtramck;
      (3)   The City Clerk shall consider the following:
         (a)   Penal history. All convictions, the reasons therefore, and the
demeanor of the applicant subsequent to his or her release;
         (b)   License history. The license history of the applicant; whether
the person, in previously operating in this or another state under a license,
has had a license revoked or suspended, the reasons therefor and the demeanor
of the applicant subsequent to the action; and
         (c)   General personal history. Other facts relevant to the general,
personal and business history of the applicant, as he or she shall find
necessary to a fair determination of the eligibility of the applicant.
      (4)   No obligations to city. Not be in default under the provisions of
this subchapter or indebted or obligated in any manner to the city except for
current taxes; and
         (a)   The City Clerk may issue a provisional license for businesses
that are indebted but otherwise on a payment plan with the City of Hamtramck.
This provisional license shall be revoked immediately if the business falls out
of compliance on any matter contained herein or fails to abide by any payment
plan obligations.
      (5)   Compliance with zoning regulations. Present a certificate of
occupancy furnished by the Superintendent of Building and Engineering the
effect that the proposed use of any premises in not a violation of city zoning
regulations.
   (C)   Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the City
Clerk shall have the right to appeal to the City Council by filing a written
appeal to the city clerk within ten days following the effective date of the
action or decision complained of.
      (1)   Contents of appeal. The appeal shall set out a copy of the order or
decision appealed from and shall include a statement of the facts relied upon
to avoid the order.
      (2)   Hearing. The City Council shall fix a time and place for hearing
the appeal and shall serve a written notice upon the appellant informing him or
her thereof.
(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981; Am. Ord., passed 9-8-2020) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.007 PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   License year. Except as otherwise herein provided as to certain
licenses, the license year shall begin May 1 of each year and shall terminate
at midnight on April 30 of the following year. Original licenses shall be
issued for the balance of the license year at the full license fee. License
applications for license renewals shall be accepted and licenses issued for a
period of 15 days prior to the annual expiration date. In all cases where the
provisions of this subchapter permit the issuance licenses for periods of less
than one year, the effective date of the licenses shall commence with the date
of issuance thereof.
   (B)   Formal application required. Every person required to procure a
license under the provisions of any ordinance or law of the city shall submit
an application for the license to the City Clerk. The application shall:
      (1)   Form of application. Be a written statement upon forms provided by
the City Clerk; the form shall include an affidavit, to be sworn, to by the
applicant before a notary public of this state;
      (2)   Contents of application. Require the disclosure of all information
necessary to compliance with §
110.006 and of any other information, which the City Clerk shall find to be
reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this subchapter;
      (3)   Payment of fees. Be accompanied by the full amount of the fees
chargeable for the license; and
      (4)   Issuance fee. Be accompanied by the payment of an issuance fee to
be set from time to time by proper resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   Issuance of receipts. Whenever a license cannot be issued at the time
the application for the same is made, the City Treasurer shall issue a receipt
to the applicant for the money paid in advance, subject to the following
conditions:
      (1)   The receipt shall not be construed as the approval of the City
Clerk for the issuance of a license; and
      (2)   Nor shall it entitle or authorize the applicant to open or maintain
any business contrary to the provisions of this subchapter.
   (D)   Renewal license procedure. The applicant for the renewal of a license
shall submit an application for the license to the City Clerk. The application
shall:
      (1)   Form of application. Be a written statement upon forms provided by
the City Clerk; the form shall include an affidavit, to be sworn to by the
applicant before a notary public of this state; and
      (2)   Contents. Require the disclosure of any information concerning the
applicant's demeanor and the conduct and operation of applicant's business
during the preceding licensing period as is reasonably necessary to, the
determination by the City Clerk of the applicant's eligibility for a renewal
license and to a possible adjustment of license fee.
   (E)   Duplicate license procedure. A duplicate license or special permit
shall be issued by the City Clerk to replace any license previously issued
which has been lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed, without any willful conduct
on the part of the licensee, upon the filing by the licensee of an affidavit
sworn to before a notary public of this state attesting to the fact and the
paying to the Treasurer of a fee to be set from time to time by proper
resolution of the City Council.
   (F)   Non-approval of license.
      (1)   Non-approval. All fees paid in advance by the applicant are non-
refundable.
      (2)   Compliance pending legal action. When the issuance of a license is
denied and any action instituted by the applicant to compel, its issuance, the
applicant shall not engage in the business for which the license was refused
unless a license be issued to him or her pursuant to a judgment ordering the
same.
   (G)   Late renewals. All fees for the renewal of any license which are not
paid at the time the fees shall be due, shall be paid as late fees with an
additional 50% of the license fee required for the license under the subchapter
for the first 15 days that the license fee remains unpaid and for each
additional day thereafter a fee of not less than $1 per day shall be assessed.
The daily fee shall be set by Council annually.
(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981; Am. Ord., passed 9-8-2020) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.008 DETERMINATION OF LICENSE FEE.
   License fees shall be set from time to time by the proper resolution of the
City Council.
(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981; Am. Ord., passed 9-8-2020)
§ 110.009 CONTENTS OF LICENSE; INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   Each license issued hereunder shall state upon its face the following:
   (A)   The name of the licensee and, any other name under which the business
is to be conducted;
   (B)   The kind and address of each business so licensed;
   (C)   The amount of license fee therefore;
   (D)   The dates of issuance and expiration; and
   (E)   Any other information as the City Clerk shall determine.
(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981; Am. Ord., passed 9-8-2020)
§ 110.010 DUTIES OF LICENSEE.
   (A)   General standards of conduct. Every licensee under this subchapter
shall:
      (1)   Permit inspection. Permit all reasonable inspections of his or her
business and examinations of his or her books by public authorities so
authorized by law;
      (2)   Comply with governing law. Ascertain and at all times comply with
all laws and regulations applicable to the licensed business and all the
Hamtramck Code of Ordinances including Hamtramck nuisances ordinances;
      (3)   Operate properly. Avoid all forbidden, improper or unnecessary
practices or conditions which do or may affect the public health, morals or
welfare;
      (4)   Cease business. Refrain from operating the licensed businesses on
premises after expiration of his or her license and during the period his or
her license is revoked or suspended; and
      (5)   Label/identify. All secondary locations, demisters, specialty trash
receptacles, or anything else associated with the business shall be marked as
such. Either the name of the business or address associated with the business
shall be affixed so that it may be readily identifiable to whom is the
responsible business.
   (B)   Display of license and insignia. Every licensee under this subchapter
shall do the following.
      (1)   Premises.
         (a)   Licenses. Post and maintain the license upon the licensed
premises in a place where it may be seen at all times.
      (2)   Vehicles.
         (a)   Effect of this subchapter. Any general or special license fees
required for any kind of vehicle, for the privilege of being operated upon the
public highways, by any statute or ordinance, shall not abrogate, limit or
affect any further requirements of this subchapter or of other ordinances or
laws, for additional and separate licenses, permits and insignia and fees for
vehicles, or other uses, for and relating to the privilege of using the same in
the business so licensed.
         (b)   Motor vehicles. Affix any insignia delivered for use in
connection with a licensed motor vehicle on the inside of the windshield of the
vehicle or as may be otherwise prescribed by the City Clerk or by law.
         (c)   Motor-less vehicles. Affix any metal or other durable type of
insignia delivered for use in connection with a wagon or other vehicle not
operated by motor power securely on the outside of the vehicle.
      (3)   Persons. Carry the license on his or her person when he or she has
no licensed business premises.
      (4)   Machines. Affix any insignia delivered for use in connection
therewith upon the outside. of any coin, vending or other business machine or
device, so that it may be seen at all times.
      (5)   Inoperative licenses, special permits and insignia. Not allow any
license, special permit or insignia to remain posted or displayed or used,
after the period for which it was issued has expired. or when it has been
suspended or revoked, or for any other reason become ineffective. The licensee
shall promptly return the inoperative license, special permit or insignia to
the City Clerk.
      (6)   Unlawful possession. Not loan, sell, give or assign, to any other
person, or allow any other person to use or display, or to destroy, damage or
remove, or to have in his or her possession, except as authorized by the City
Clerk or by law, any license or insignia which has been issued to the licensee.
   (C)   New location desired. A licensee shall have the right to change the
location of the licensed business provided he or she shall do the following.
      (1)   Approval of City Clerk. Obtain written permission from the City
Clerk for the change of location.
   (D)   Keep records.
      (1)   Keep all records and books necessary to the computation of his or
her license fee and to the enforcement of this subchapter.
   (E)   Security. The City Clerk may direct a business to ensure and secure
the safety of its operations, patrons, guests, and residents of Hamtramck. If
the business is an inherently dangerous business or attractive target, has
likelihood of continued unruly crowds, special fire concerns, special events
requiring crowd control, or any other safety concerns.
      (1)   The licensee may contract with the City of Hamtramck for extra
police or fire services at the expense of the licensee, private party, or other
organization requesting the services if staffing is available.
         (a)   Failure to reimburse the City of Hamtramck for any contracted
police or fire services shall be a violation of this subchapter and subject to
penalties under § 110.013.
(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981; Am. Ord., passed 9-8-2020) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.011 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee hereunder shall not transfer his or her license to another
person.
(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981; Am. Ord., passed 9-8-2020) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.012 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Inspections.
      (1)   Persons authorized. The following persons are authorized to conduct
inspections in the manner prescribed herein.
         (a)   City Clerk. The City Clerk shall make all investigations
reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this subchapter.
         (b)   Officials having duties. The City Clerk shall have the authority
to order the inspection of licensees, their businesses and premises by all city
officials having duties to perform with reference to the licensees or
businesses.
         (c)   Police officers. All police officers shall inspect and examine
businesses located within their respective jurisdictions or beats to enforce
compliance with this subchapter.
         (d)   Fire personnel. All fire personnel or contractors shall inspect
and examine businesses located within their respective jurisdictions or beats
to enforce compliance with this subchapter.
      (2)   Authority of inspectors.
         (a)   All persons authorized herein to inspect licensees and
businesses shall have the authority to enter at all reasonable times the
following premises:
            1.   Those for which a license is required;
            2.   Those for which a license was issued and which, at the time of
inspection, are operating under the license; or
            3.   Those for which the license has been revoked or suspended.
         (b)   A license can be suspended immediately by the City Clerk or
inspector if entry to the building where the license will be in effect is
refused during its normal business hours.
      (3)   Reports by inspectors. Persons inspecting licensees, their
businesses or premises as herein authorized shall, report all violations of
this subchapter or of other laws or ordinances to the City Clerk and shall
submit any other reports as the City Clerk shall order.
   (B)   Provisional order. When an inspector has reported the violation of
this subchapter or of any law or ordinance, the City Clerk shall issue to the
affected person a provisional order to comply.
      (1)   Nature of notice. The provisional order, and all other notices
issued in compliance with this subchapter, shall be in writing, shall be
personally served, mailed to the reported address of record, or emailed if
licensee has previously agreed to receive correspondences this way, and shall
apprise the person affected of his or her specific violations. In the absence
of the person affected or his or her agent or employee a copy of the notice
shall be affixed to some structure on the premises.
      (2)   Period for compliance. The provisional order shall require
compliance within 20 days of service on the affected person, or upon written
agreement authorized by the City Clerk. In case of mailing service this is 20
days from being postmarked.
      (3)   Hearing. Upon written application by the person affected before the
expiration of the 20-day period for compliance, the City Clerk shall order a
hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given the affected person in the manner
prescribed herein.
   (C)   Modifying authority of City Clerk. Upon written application, or on his
or her own motion, the City Clerk shall have the authority, in proper case, to
extend the time for compliance, to grant a new hearing date and to change,
modify or rescind any recommendation or order.
   (D)   Final order. Upon the failure or refusal of the violator to comply
with the provisional order or with any order made after hearing, the City Clerk
shall then declare and make the provisional order final.
      (1)   Authority of City Clerk. The City Clerk shall have the authority to
suspend or revoke licenses upon making and declaring a provisional order final.
      (2)   Effect of revocation or suspension. Upon revocation or suspension,
no refund of any portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee and
he or she shall immediately cease all business at all places under the license.
   (E)   Summary action.
      (1)   Generally. When the conduct of any licensee, agent or employee is
so inimical to the public health, safety and general welfare as to constitute a
nuisance and thus give rise to emergency, the City Clerk shall have the
authority to summarily order the cessation of business and the close of
premises or to suspend or revoke the license.
      (2)   Special hearing. Unless waived in writing, within 20 days after he
or she has acted summarily, the City Clerk shall conduct a special hearing for
the action in respect to the summary order as may be therein determined. Notice
of the hearing shall be given to the affected person in the manner prescribed
herein.
   (F)   Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the City
Clerk after hearing shall have the right to appeal to the City Council by
filing a written appeal to the City Clerk within ten days following the
effective date of the action or decision complained of.
      (1)   Contents of appeal. The appeal shall set out a copy of the order or
decision appealed from and shall include a statement of the facts relied upon
to avoid the order.
      (2)   Hearing. The City Council shall fix a time and place for hearing
the appeal and shall personally serve a written notice upon the appellant
informing him or her thereof.
   (G)   Security. The City Clerk as a provisional order may direct a business
to ensure and secure the safety of its operations, patrons, guests, and
residents of Hamtramck. If the business has; continued police runs, is an
inherently dangerous business or attractive target, has likelihood of continued
unruly crowds, special fire concerns, special events requiring crowd control,
or any other safety concerns.
      (1)   A licensee, private party, or other organization may contract with
the City of Hamtramck for extra police or fire services at the expense of the
licensee, private party, or other organization requesting the services if
staffing is available.
         (a)   Failure to reimburse the City of Hamtramck for any contracted
police or fire services shall be a violation of this subchapter and subject to
penalties under § 110.013.
(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981; Am. Ord., passed 9-8-2020)
§ 110.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
110.001 through
110.012 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not to exceed
$1,000 but not less than $500, or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or by both
a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court; plus, any costs,
damages, expenses, and other sanctions. This chapter is further subject to the
repeat offender provision of this code. This provision states that increased
civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a person of any
requirement or provision of this chapter. As used in this section, "repeat
offense" means a second (or any subsequent) violation of the same requirement
or provision (i) committed by a person; and (ii) for which the person admits
responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for a
repeat offense under this chapter shall be as follows:
      (1)   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be
no less than $750, plus costs.
      (2)   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $1,000, plus costs.
   (B)   A violation includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared
to be unlawful or an offense by this chapter or any ordinance; and any omission
or failure to act where the act is required by this chapter or any ordinance.
Further, each day on which any violation of this chapter continues constitutes
a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate
offense. In addition to any other remedies available at law, the city may bring
in the local district court an injunction or other process against a person or
company to restrain, prevent, or abate any violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 396, passed 1-29-1981; Ord. 457, passed 6-20-1996; Am. Ord., passed 9-8-
2020)
CHAPTER 111: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Section
   
111.001   Purpose
   
111.002   Conflict
   
111.003   Definitions
   
111.004   Permit required
   
111.005   Issuance of permit
   
111.006   Construction/engineering permit
   
111.007   Conduit or utility poles
   
111.008   Route maps
   
111.009   Repair of damage
   
111.010   Establishment and payment of maintenance fee
   
111.011   Modification of existing fees
   
111.012   Use of funds
   
111.013   Annual report
   
111.014   Cable television operators
   
111.015   Existing rights
   
111.016   Compliance
   
111.017   Reservation of police powers
   
111.018   Authorized city officials
 
   
111.999   Penalty
§ 111.001 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use of
public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101 through
484.3120) (“Act”) and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city
qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to
providers and complying with the Act.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.002 CONFLICT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in a manner as to conflict with
the Act or other applicable law.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.003 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACT. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101 through
484.3120), as amended from time to time.
      CITY. The City of Hamtramck.
      CITY CLERK. The Clerk of the city or his or her designee.
      CITY COUNCIL. The City Council or its designee. This section does not
authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be
made by the City Council.
      PERMIT. A non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this
chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the
city for its telecommunications facilities.
   (B)   All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as
defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following.
      AUTHORITY. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Authority created pursuant to Public Act 48 of 2002, § 3, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101 through 484.3120.
      MPSC. The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of
Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term
COMMISSION in the Act.
      PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity or any other legal entity.
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway,
highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY does not
include a federal, state, or private right-of-way.
      TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES. The equipment or personal
property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits,
pipes and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry,
amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. TELECOMMUNICATION
FACILITIES or FACILITIES do not include antennas, supporting structures for
antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and
miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile
service as defined in § 332(d) of Part I of Title III of the Communications Act
of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. § 332 and further defined as
commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. Part 20.3, and service provided by
any wireless, two-way communication device.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER and TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.
Those terms as defined in the State Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of
1991, § 102, being M.C.L.A. § 484.2102. TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDER does not
include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally
licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in § 332(d) of Part I of
the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. § 332 and
further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. Part 20.3, or
service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose
of the Act and this chapter only, a PROVIDER also includes all of the
following:
         (a)   A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications
service;
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns
telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way; and
         (c)   A person providing broadband internet transport access service.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.004 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the
city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on
an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with § 6(1) of the Act.
A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the
City Clerk and one copy with the City Attorney. Applications shall be complete
and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a
route map showing the location of the provider’s existing and proposed
facilities in accordance with § 6(5) of the Act.
   (C)   Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that
any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application
contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt
from the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§
15.231 through 15.246, pursuant to § 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications
provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map.
   (D)   Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the
application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee
in the amount of $500.
   (E)   Additional information. The Clerk may request an applicant to submit
any additional information which the Clerk deems reasonably necessary or
relevant. The applicant shall comply with all requests in compliance with
reasonable deadlines for additional information established by the Clerk. If
the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional
information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the
MPSC as provided in § 6(2) of the Act.
   (F)   Previously issued permits. Pursuant to § 5(1) of the Act,
authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under § 251 of the
State Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991, being M.C.L.A. § 484.2251
and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications
providers prior to the 1995 enactment of § 251 of the State Telecommunications
Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this chapter.
   (G)   Existing providers. Pursuant to § 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days
from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications
provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of
that date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under §
251 of the State Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991, being M.C.L.A.
§ 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to § 5(3) of the Act, a
telecommunications provider submitting an application under this division is
not required to pay the $500 application fee required under division (D) above.
A provider under this division shall be given up to an additional 180 days to
submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in § 5
(4) of the Act.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.005 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Approval or denial. Approval or denial of an application for a permit
will be by City Council. Pursuant to § 15(3) of the Act, approval or denial of
an application for a permit shall be within 45 days from the date a
telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under § 4(b) of
this chapter for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to §
6(6) of the Act, the Clerk shall notify the MPSC when the City Council has
granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which
the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied.
The City Council shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit.
   (B)   Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city
shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, in accordance with §§ 6(1), 6(2) and 15
of the Act.
   (C)   Conditions. Pursuant to § 15(4) of the Act, the Council may impose
conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to
the telecommunications provider’s access and usage of the public right-of-way.
   (D)   Bond requirement. Pursuant to § 15(3) of the Act, and without
limitation on division (C) above, the Clerk may require that a bond be posted
by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is
required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public
right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the
telecommunications provider’s access and use.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.006 CONSTRUCTION/ENGINEERING PERMIT.
   A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over,
across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a
construction or engineering permit as required under city regulations, as
amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be
charged for a construction or engineering permit.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.007 CONDUIT OR UTILITY POLES.
   Pursuant to § 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees
required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a telecommunications
provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.008 ROUTE MAPS.
   (A)   Pursuant to § 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall,
within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new
telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the
location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city.
   (B)   The route maps should be in (paper or electronic) format unless and
until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with § 6(8) of the Act.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.009 REPAIR OF DAMAGE.
   Pursuant to § 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an
excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a
public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the
city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the
street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public
right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its
preexisting condition.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.010 ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE FEE.
   In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set forth
in §
111.004(D) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications
facilities in the city’s public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance
fee to the authority pursuant to § 8 of the Act.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.011 MODIFICATION OF EXISTING FEES.
   In compliance with the requirements of § 13(1) of the Act, the city hereby
modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications
providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to
access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the
amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the
authority. In compliance with the requirements of § 13(4) of the Act, the city
also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with
telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city’s
boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under § 8 of
the Act. The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by
the fee with a copy of this chapter, in compliance with the requirement of § 13
(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers
in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise
inconsistent with the Act, the imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to
the city’s policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery
by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.012 USE OF FUNDS.
   Pursuant § 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from the
authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.013 ANNUAL REPORT.
   Pursuant to § 10(5) of the Act, the city shall file an annual report with
the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the
authority.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.014 CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS.
   Pursuant to § 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable television
operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an
obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this
Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from
charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through
broadband internet transport access services.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.015 EXISTING RIGHTS.
   Pursuant to § 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with
respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that a
telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the
city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider
related to the use of the public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.016 COMPLIANCE.
   The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this chapter
is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof
should be construed in a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall
comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not
limited to the following:
   (A)   Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act,
Public Act 442, of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 through 15.246, as provided
in §
111.004(C) of this chapter;
   (B)   Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit
requirements hereof, in accordance with §
111.004(F) of this chapter;
   (C)   Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an
application for a permit, and excusing the providers from the $500 application
fee, in accordance with §
111.004(G) of this chapter;
   (D)   Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from
the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for
access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance
with §
111.005(A) of this chapter;
   (E)   Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in
accordance with §
111.005(A) of this chapter;
   (F)   Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance
with §
111.005(A) of this chapter;
   (G)   Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in §
111.005(B) of this chapter;
   (H)   Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the
telecommunications provider’s access and usage of the public right-of-way, in
accordance with §
111.005(C) of this chapter;
   (I)   Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds
the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its
original condition during and after the telecommunication provider’s access and
use, in accordance with §
111.005(D) of this chapter;
   (J)   Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for
construction or engineering permits, in accordance with §
111.006 of this chapter;
   (K)   Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city’s
right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with §
111.011 of this chapter;
   (L)   Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with §
111.013 of this chapter; and
   (M)   Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to
pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with §
111.014 of this chapter.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.017 RESERVATION OF POLICE POWERS.
   Pursuant to § 15(2) of the Act, this chapter shall not limit the city’s
right to review and approve a telecommunication provider’s access to and
ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city’s authority to ensure
and protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.018 AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.
   The Clerk or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized city
official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged
violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices
(directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations
bureau) for violations under this chapter as provided by the city regulations.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 111.999 PENALTY.
   A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or
conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and
shall be subject to a fine in the amount of $500. Nothing in this section shall
be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event of a
violation by a person of this chapter or a permit.
(Ord. 490, passed 2-18-2003)
CHAPTER 112: TRANSPORTATION
Section
Motorcycles
   
112.001   Definition
   
112.002   License required for business of renting or selling
   
112.003   Restriction on location of business
   
112.004   License applicant requirements
   
112.005   Application forms
   
112.006   Licenses
   
112.007   License fee
 
   
112.999   Penalty
MOTORCYCLES
§ 112.001 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than three
wheels it contact with the ground and includes motor scooters and bicycles with
motor attached.
(Ord. 309, passed 9-5-1967)
§ 112.002 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR BUSINESS OF RENTING OR SELLING.
   It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of renting or selling of
motorcycles without first obtaining a license from the City Clerk and subject
to the approval of the City Council.
(Ord. 309, passed 9-5-1967) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.003 RESTRICTION ON LOCATION OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of renting or selling
of motorcycles within 1,000 feet of any residential building.
   (B)   This requirement may be waived if the applicant for a license secures
in writing the consent of 65% of the persons residing or doing, business on
property within 1,000 feet of the applicant’s proposed location.
(Ord. 309, passed 9-5-1967) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.004 LICENSE APPLICANT REQUIREMENTS.
   An applicant for a license shall be 21 years of age and shall possess a
license as provided for in Public Act 300 of 1949, § 25, being M.C.L.A. §
257.25.
(Ord. 309, passed 9-5-1967)
§ 112.005 APPLICATION FORMS.
   Application for a license shall be made on forms provided by the city and
shall contain the following:
   (A)   The name, age and address of the applicant; and
   (B)   The location where the business of renting or selling of motorcycles
will be conducted and the number of motorcycles that will be maintained on the
premises.
(Ord. 309, passed 9-5-1967)
§ 112.006 LICENSES.
   Licenses under this chapter shall:
   (A)   Maintain precise records of vehicle rental indicating the name of the
person to whom the rental was made, his or her address, driver’s license
number, what vehicle was rented, the date and hour of its rental and the time
returned to the possession of the licensee;
   (B)   Rent vehicles only to persons who have and can show a valid motor
vehicle operator’s license;
   (C)   No motorcycle, shall be rented to any person under 21 years of age
unless accompanied by his or her parents or guardian;
   (D)   Any person renting a motorcycle must sign application showing he or
she is 21 years of age, provided, however, if he or she is not 21 years of age
both he or she and the parent or guardian of the person shall sign the
application and acknowledging that he or she has read, knows and is familiar
with this chapter and the rules and regulations concerning the renting and
operation of a motorcycle;
   (E)   Rent motor vehicles only if the driver and his or her passengers are
wearing safety helmets;
   (F)   Maintain all motorcycles in a safe manner and provide each with all
equipment required by law;
   (G)   Operate the business between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00p.m.
There shall be no rental or the returning of sales of motorcycles between the
hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.;
   (H)   Purchase a policy of insurance for every motorcycle owned or rented on
the premises. The policy shall have a minimum coverage of $10,000 for only one
person injured and $20,000 for two or more persons injured as the result of any
one occurrence or accident, and coverage of $5,000 property damage insurance
for each property damage accident;
   (I)   Have only the number of motorcycles on the premises as provided for in
his or her application;
   (J)   The motorcycles shall not be operated on residential streets unless
taking the shortest and most direct route to the driver’s residence from the
nearest state trunkline;
   (K)   The speed limit on all residential streets for motorcycles shall be 15
mph;
   (L)   Comply with all ordinances and regulations of the city; and
   (M)   Furnish a $10,000 performance bond and the licensee will comply with
all ordinances and regulations of the city.
(Ord. 309, passed 9-5-1967) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.007 LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee shall be $300 annually for each location that sells
motorcycles, and 1,000 annually for each location that rents motorcycles and
that the license shall be revocable upon proper complaints and the court
determining it to be a nuisance to the neighborhood.
(Ord. 309, passed 9-5-1967) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.
   (B)   Motorcycles. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the
ordinances of this governmental unit, every person convicted of a violation of
any provision of §§
112.001 through
112.007 shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days or by both the fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 309, passed 9-5-1967; Am. Ord. 2017-01, passed 4-25-2017)
CHAPTER 113: ALCOHOL
Section
Possession and Consumption in Public Places
   
113.001   Purpose
   
113.002   Definition
   
113.003   Possession and consumption
   
113.004   Festivals, special events and city-approved sidewalk cafés
 
   
113.999   Penalty
POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES
§ 113.001 PURPOSE.
   To control the possession and consumption of alcoholic liquor in public
places within the city and to provide penalties for the violation.
(Ord. 467, passed 6-25-1998)
§ 113.002 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing
one-half of 1% of alcohol by weight, which is fit for beverage. The percentage
of alcohol by weight shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of
Public Act 58 of 1998, being M.C.L.A.§§ 436.1101 through 436.2303, as the same
may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 467, passed 6-25-1998)
§ 113.003 POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   Public property. No person shall consume alcoholic liquor, nor
transport nor possess any alcoholic liquor in a container that is open,
uncapped or on which the seal is broken, on any thoroughfare, street, sidewalk,
alley, parking lot, public way, public park, parkland, playground, baseball
field or land operated, leased or owned by the city.
   (B)   Public buildings. No person shall consume alcoholic liquor, nor
transport nor possess any alcoholic liquor in a container that is open,
uncapped or on which the seal is broken, in any public building operated,
leased or owned by the city.
   (C)   Motor vehicles. No person shall transport nor possess any alcoholic
liquor in a container that is open, uncapped or on which the seal is broken,
within the passenger compartment of a vehicle, whether the vehicle is publicly
owned or privately owned on the streets of the city. If the vehicle does not
have a trunk or compartment separate from the passenger compartment, a
container that is open, uncapped or on which the seal is broken shall be
encased or enclosed.
(Ord. 467, passed 6-25-1998) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.004 FESTIVALS, SPECIAL EVENTS AND CITY-APPROVED SIDEWALK CAFÉS.
   No person shall possess or consume alcoholic liquor in an area designated
for a festival, special event or city-approved sidewalk café unless the
beverages are purchased from, and dispensed by, an individual or entity
licensed to sell beverages, which has permission from the State Liquor Control
Commission for outdoor sales if applicable; and the entity is approved by the
City Council to sell the beverages for consumption in the area designated for
the festival, special event or city-approved sidewalk café subject to those
restrictions as to times, dates and locations as the Council may impose.
(Ord. 467, passed 6-25-1998) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.
   (B)   Possession and consumption. Any person or persons, firm or corporation
violating or failing to comply with the provisions of §
113.003 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $500, nor more than 90 days imprisonment in
the Wayne County Jail, or both fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the
court, for each violation.
(Ord. 467, passed 6-25-1998)
CHAPTER 114: PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS AND JUNK DEALERS
Section
   
114.001   Short title
   
114.002   Definitions
   
114.003   License required
   
114.004   License application
   
114.005   Investigations and inspections
   
114.006   License issuance; conditions for denial
   
114.007   Hearings on appeals
   
114.008   Inspections of business premises
   
114.009   License fees; expirations; transfers
   
114.010   Procedures and forms for fingerprinting, statements and recording of
transactions; inspection of records
   
114.011   Restrictions on sales
   
114.012   Sunday operation prohibited
   
114.013   Sales prohibited during certain hours
   
114.014   Prohibited sale or possession of items with serial numbers altered,
removed
   
114.015   Merchandise displays
   
114.016   Police order to hold property
   
114.017   Retention of articles for specified periods
   
114.018   Prohibited purchases
   
114.019   Premises, enclosures and restrictions
   
114.020   Premises condition
   
114.021   Storage of scrap tires
   
114.022   Bonds
   
114.023   Compliance with state laws
   
114.024   Compliance with zoning ordinances
   
114.025   Purchases from minors prohibited
 
   
114.999   Penalty
§ 114.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the Pawnbroker, Secondhand Dealer
and Junk Dealer Ordinance of the City of Hamtramck and will be referred to
herein as this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 114.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTO SALVAGE DEALER. Any junk dealer engaged substantially in the business
of purchasing or receiving, wrecking or dismantling, and the sale or exchange
of motor vehicles for the purpose of salvaging parts or materials therefrom.
   AUTO SALVAGE YARD OR SHOP. Any place where an auto salvage dealer purchases,
receives, wrecks, dismantles, sells, or exchanges used motor vehicles, or
parts, or materials salvaged therefrom.
   CERTAIN REGULATED BUSINESSES EXCLUSION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS. Any owner,
person, corporation, limited liability company, member of a co-partnership, or
firm which is regulated pursuant to state law and which is required to maintain
and report transactions pursuant to state law on the recommendation of the
Police Chief shall be permitted to be exempt from sections of this chapter
requiring recording and registration of transactions.
   COLLECTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle used for the collection, transportation, or
handling of junk, or secondhand property, except not including a towing vehicle
used to transport automobiles substantially used other than in transportation
of motor vehicles as part of an auto salvage dealer business.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person 18 years of age, or older, who renders any services in
connection with the operation of a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk
dealer business and who receives compensation from the business, or patrons
thereof.
   GOOD MORAL CHARACTER. The propensity on the part of the person to serve the
public in a licensed area in a fair, honest and open manner.
   GOODS. Any item not specifically covered by other definitions contained in
this section.
   JUNK. Any personal property which is, or may be salvaged for reuse, resale,
reduction, or similar disposition, or which is possessed, transported, owned,
collected, accumulated, dismantled, or assorted for any of the aforesaid
purposes. Without limiting the aforesaid definition of JUNK, terms shall
include used, or salvaged rope, bags, paper, rags, glass, rubber, wood pellets,
and similar articles of property and used motor vehicles, machinery, or parts
thereof which are used, owned, or possessed for the purpose of wrecking or
salvaging parts of materials therefrom. Metals available or used for as scrap,
shall be considered as JUNK.
   JUNK DEALER. Any person whose substantial business is buying, exchanging,
collecting, receiving, storing, accumulating, selling, or otherwise handling
junk.
   JUNK YARD or JUNK SHOP. Any place at which a junk dealer buys, exchanges,
collects, receives, stores, accumulates, sells, or otherwise handles junk.
   OWNER or OPERATOR. Any person who owns, or controls a pawnbroker, secondhand
dealer, or junk dealer business. This includes individuals, licensees,
managers, lessees, sponsors, partnerships, corporations, societies,
organizations, associations, limited liability companies, or any combination of
individuals, of whatever form or character.
   PATRON. Any person 18 years of age, or older, who does business in any form
with a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer business.
   PAWN SHOP. Any place where a pawnbroker regularly conducts the business of
being a pawnbroker.
   PAWNBROKER. Any person, corporation, member of a limited liability company,
member of a partnership, or firm who loans money on deposit, or pledge personal
property, or other valuable thing, other than securities, or printed evidence
of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property, or other
valuable things on condition of selling the same back again as stipulated
price.
   SCRAP IRON AND METAL PROCESSOR OR RECYCLER. Any junk dealer engaged
substantially in the business of purchasing or receiving scrap iron and metal
(except scrap motor vehicles not purchased from a licensed auto salvage dealer,
or junk dealer) and the storing, processing, recycling, and sale or exchange
thereof.
   SCRAP YARD. Any place where a scrap iron and metal processor, or recycler
engages in the business or receiving, storing, processing or recycling scrap
iron or metal.
   SECONDHAND DEALER. Any person, corporation, member of a co-partnership, or
firm, or limited liability company whose principal business is that of
purchasing, storing, selling, exchanging, and receiving secondhand personal
property of any kind, or description. Excluded from the procedures for
fingerprinting and recording transactions and inspection records shall be any
business, whose primary business is the purchase and resale of clothing.
PRIMARY BUSINESS means more than 90% of revenues derived.
   SECONDHAND STORE. Any place at which a second dealer buys, exchanges,
collects, receives, stores, or sells secondhand property. Excluded from the
procedures for fingerprinting and recording transactions and inspection records
shall be any business, whose primary business is the purchase and resale of
clothing. PRIMARY BUSINESS means more than 90% of revenues derived.
(Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 114.003 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No owner, or operator shall engage in or carry on the operation of a
pawnbroker without first obtaining and maintaining a valid business license
issued by the city pursuant to this chapter for each separate office, or place
of business conducted by such owner or operator. There will be six licenses
available for establishments within the primary business district, defined as
along Joseph Campau, and four licenses available for the other retail districts
within the city.
(Ord. 77, passed 7-26-1928; Am. Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009,
passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.004 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Any owner or operator desiring a pawnbroker business license shall file a
written application with the city on a form to be furnished by the city. The
applicant shall accompany the application with the correct license fee, which
fee shall not be refundable, and shall furnish the following information:
   (A)   Type of ownership of the business, i.e. whether individual,
partnership, corporation, or otherwise, including copies of the most recent
annual statement and most recent articles of incorporation, partnership
agreement, articles of organization, or other applicable document.
   (B)   The name, style and designation under which the business or practice
is to be conducted, including each address at which the business is to be
conducted.
   (C)   A complete list of the names, residential addresses, birth dates, and
driver license numbers, if applicable, of all owners and employees in the
business, identifying where applicable, any employees who will manage, or be in
charge of the operation of the business at any time.
   (D)   The following personal information concerning the applicant and
owners, if an individual; concerning each stockholder, officer, or director if
a corporation; concerning each member, if a limited liability company;
concerning the partners, including general and limited partners, if a
partnership and concerning the manager or other person principally in charge of
the operation of the business:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number, date of birth and driver
license number, if applicable;
      (2)   Two previous addresses prior to the present address of the
applicant;
      (3)   Written proof showing date of birth;
      (4)   Height, weight, color of hair, eyes and gender;
      (5)   Two front faced portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of application, at least two inches by two inches in size;
      (6)   A full accurate and complete business history detailing experience,
including, but not limited, whether or not such person has previously had any
ownership interest in, or worked at, in this or another city or state, the same
or similar business, including whether any license or permit issued, whether
any such license or permit was ever denied, revoked, or suspended, the reason
thereof and business activities, or occupations including the full name and
address of the business and the name and phone number of any contact persons;
      (7)   All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which such conviction occurred, the
offense for which conviction, or such conviction and the circumstances thereof;
      (8)   Complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by
the Chief of Police, or his or her authorized representative;
   (E)   Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation to the truth of the statements set
forth in the application and qualifications of the applicant.
   (F)   The names and addresses of three adult residents in the county who
will serve as character references, who must be persons other than relatives
and business associates.
   (G)   A written declaration by the applicant under penalty of perjury that
the information contained in this application is true and correct with such
declaration dated and signed in the city.
   (H)   Execution of any and all necessary documents and a statement
indicating that proper equipment will be installed for the direct electronic
entry into the City of Hamtramck’s computerized system, transaction
information, or recording by electronic transmission pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 114.005 INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or
junk dealer business license, the city shall refer the application to the Chief
of Police, or his or her designee who shall conduct an investigation into the
applicant’s moral character, personal and criminal history. A personal
interview may be required and such further information, identification and
physical examination of the person and proposed business premises and records
of the applicant as shall bear on the investigation.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall cause to be conducted
an investigation of the premises where the business is to be carried on for the
purpose of insuring that the premises comply with all requirements set forth in
this chapter and with ordinances of the city relating to public, health, safety
and welfare. Additionally, no applicant’s license shall be considered as issued
until all equipment is installed and demonstrated to be operating for the
electronic transmission of information relating to transactions as required
pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   An applicant shall submit to lawful inspections by the city and any of
its departments, as well as the county and any other governmental agencies as
necessary to ensure that the proposed business and applicant comply with
applicable laws, ordinances and regulations of the city. An application may be
refused for submission for approval to the City Council until a report form
applicable departments is received and information furnished such that the
applicant or proposed premises comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations.
   (D)   Before issuance of any license, the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee shall submit within 45 days of receipt of an application and report of
investigations, inspections and a recommendation for approval or denial.
(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 114.006 LICENSE ISSUANCE; CONDITIONS FOR DENIAL.
   (A)   The city upon receipt of an application for a license required by this
chapter, and reports and recommendations of the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, shall place the application upon the agenda for the next regularly
scheduled Council meeting, provided that such meeting date is not less than
seven days from the date of receipt of such application by the City Clerk. If
it is less than seven days from such receipt, such application shall be placed
upon the agenda for the following regular meeting of the City Council. The
Council shall determine whether or not such license shall issue, after
reviewing the reports of investigation and inspection and recommendation by the
Chief of Police, or his or her designee, and other employees of the Council
shall direct that a license be issued within 14 days provided in addition
electronic transmission is demonstrated to be capable unless it finds that:
      (1)   The correct fee has not been tendered or any fee in the form of
check or draft has been dishonored.
      (2)   The operation as proposed is not compliant with the applicable laws
including but not limited to the city’s building, fire, zoning and health
ordinances.
      (3)   The applicant or any person having an ownership interest in any
entity which is the applicant, or a manager, has been convicted of any crime
involving moral turpitude, including but not limited to prostitution and
pandering, gambling, extortion, fraud, criminal usury, controlled substances,
weapons, assault, theft unless such conviction occurred at least 15 years prior
to the date of application.
      (4)   The applicant has knowingly made any false misleading or fraudulent
statement of fact in the permit application, or in any document required by the
city.
      (5)   The applicant has had a similar business license, or other similar
permit, or license denied, revoked, or suspended for any of the causes set
forth here and above in this chapter, or any other state or local agency within
the prior 15 years to the date of application.
      (6)   The applicant or any owner is not 18 years of age or older.
   (B)   The Council, if it denies an application, shall specify the grounds
for denial, notifying the applicant by regular mail, addressed to the addressed
furnished in the application which notice shall specify the grounds for denial.
(Ord. 77, passed 7-26-1928; Am. Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009,
passed 1-22-2013)
§ 114.007 HEARINGS ON APPEALS.
   (A)   Within 20 days of the date of denial of an application, the applicant
may request in the form of a written application to the city, furnished to the
City Clerk, a hearing before the City Council for reconsideration of the
license application denial. Such hearings shall be conducted as follows:
      (1)   The applicant and his or her attorney, may present and submit
evidence on the applicant’s behalf to show that the grounds for the original
denial do not exist, or are inaccurate.
      (2)   After reviewing the evidence, the City Council shall determine
whether to uphold the denial, or grant the application.
      (3)   The applicant and his or her attorney, may present a statement and
adequate evidence, demonstrating that:
         (a)   Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances, or conditions apply
to the business referred to in the appeal submitted which circumstances or
conditions do not apply generally to any proposed business which warrant the
issuance of the application notwithstanding conformity with this chapter.
         (b)   That the granting of such license will not materially affect the
health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood,
patrons, or the public at large and that such issuance shall not be a material
detriment, or injurious to public welfare.
   (B)   In all cases where an appeal is granted, City Council shall find:
      (1)   That the grant of the appeal will be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter; and
      (2)   That the grant of the appeal will not be detrimental or injurious
to the neighborhood or the city at large.
      (3)   The City Council may impose reasonable conditions, if the license
is approved for issuance.
(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 114.008 INSPECTIONS OF BUSINESS PREMISES.
   (A)   Every licensee shall permit all reasonable inspections of the business
premise, including during regular business hours and otherwise after regular
business hours and shall at all times comply with all applicable laws,
including after expiration of any license and during any period the license may
be revoked or suspended.
   (B)   Any licensee shall display the license in an open and conspicuous
place on the premises visible to the patrons of the premises.
   (C)   During the pendency of any application, or during the term of any
license, if any information provided in the application changes, such change of
information shall be furnished in writing to the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee within 72 hours after such change.
(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.009 LICENSE FEES; EXPIRATIONS; TRANSFERS.
   (A)   Fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City
Council.
   (B)   License granted shall expire on June 30 of each year and shall require
payment of a renewal fee for the ensuing year.
   (C)   No license shall be deemed transferable, separable, or divisible.
(Ord. 77, passed 7-26-1928; Am. Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009,
passed 1-22-2013)
§ 114.010 PROCEDURES AND FORMS FOR FINGERPRINTING, STATEMENTS AND RECORDING OF
TRANSACTIONS; INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   (A)   The city shall furnish forms for the taking of fingerprints and
furnishing additional information as required by regulations of the City Police
Department. Every person licensed to conduct, maintain, or engage in a business
of pawnbrokers, secondhand dealer, or junk dealer, shall maintain in a form
provided by the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, records in the manner
and form as provided herein, which shall be subject to inspection by the City
Police Department upon request.
   (B)   Every licensee, owner and employee, shall keep a record of all persons
and/or entities with whom business has transacted and all property coming into
their possession. Reports must be electronically transmitted to the Chief of
Police or his or her designee. Within 48 hours a report must be transmitted by
means of electronic transmission through a modem, or similar device in a format
that the data is capable of direct electronic entry into the Hamtramck Police
Department’s computerized system, as approved by the Chief of Police, or his or
her designee for identifying property coming into the possession of a licensor,
including but not limited to all pawn property, all transactions in which used
goods have been received the preceding day by pawn, trade, purchase, or
consignment and items received by junk dealers. A transaction report by
electronic transmission under this division (B) shall not be reported on paper
forms, unless the Chief of Police, or his or her designee so requires. All
secondhand dealers, junk dealers, and pawnbrokers must have the equipment
installed in their place of business no later than November 1, 2012.
Information must be reported electronically beginning November 1, 2012.
   (C)   A fee as adopted and subject to change periodically by the City
Council shall be assessed per transaction. The vendor will assess the property
registration fee for each transaction, the licensee reports either through
batch file upload, or directly using the vendor’s business interface, or on the
vendor’s automated reported service that involves transactions subject to the
provision of this chapter.
   (D)   TRANSACTION is defined as a single buy, or may involve one or more
items and does not include contract extensions, or claims. The per transaction
registration fee is not a per item fee, included in the transaction. It is
within the sole discretion of the secondhand dealer whether to recover the fee
from their customers for registering a transaction.
   (E)   The licensee will be invoiced on a monthly basis. The city’s vendor
automated reporting service isolates and generates a list of the billable
transactions will be used for deriving invoiced amounts. The above fees are
assessed for the use of the standard vendor’s automated recording service. Any
custom programming completed for the secondhand dealer will be negotiated on a
contract basis and may result in additional licensing arrangements between the
vendor and the licensor. Sales tax will be added to the above amounts where
applicable. Failure to timely pay as invoiced is a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.011 RESTRICTIONS ON SALES.
   No entity or person who is not a licensed pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or
junk dealer shall sell, offer for sale, advertise for sale, or represent any
article, personal property, or other valuable thing for sale which is subject
to the provisions of this chapter unless the proper license is in effect. No
pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer, shall purchase, or receive in pawn,
any item, or other articles, or keep for sale any such articles, or items
unless a current effective license is in effect.
(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.012 SUNDAY OPERATION PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter
as a pawnbroker, pursuant to state law to transact business, or to open, or
keep open, the place or room where such business is conducted on any Sunday.
(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.013 SALES PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS.
   No licensee, employee, or agent of a licensee shall sell or purchase by
sale, barter, exchange, or otherwise any item under a license issued pursuant
to this chapter from or to any person, or entity between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. In addition, no person or entity shall or
purchase by sale, barter, exchange, or otherwise any junk between the hours of
6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day.
(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.014 PROHIBITED SALE OR POSSESSION OF ITEMS WITH SERIAL NUMBERS ALTERED,
REMOVED.
   (A)   No licensee, or agent, or employee shall conceal or misrepresent the
identity by removing, concealing, defacing, adding to, substituting, or
altering, the serial number or manufacturer’s number on any motor vehicle,
motor, appliance, mechanical device, watch, clock, camera, precision
instrument, outboard motor, radio, shotgun, or any other article or thing where
the manufacturer has placed numbers for the purpose of identification; by
altering or replacing any part of such article, or thing, baring the serial or
manufacturer’s number with a new or replaced part upon which the proper serial
number, or manufacturer’s number has not been stamped or placed.
   (B)   No person licensed under this chapter, or employee of such licensed
person, shall deal in, or possess, any item as described herein above from
which the serial numbers have been removed, concealed, defaced, added,
substituted, altered, or replaced.
   (C)   In all prosecutions under this section, possession by any dealer,
licensor, person, or entity of an item from which the serial numbers, or
manufacturer’s number, or identification number has been removed, concealed,
defaced, added, substituted, altered, or replaced shall be prima facie evidence
of violation of the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.015 MERCHANDISE DISPLAYS.
   No licensee under this chapter shall display merchandise or articles outside
of the building, or fail to change a window display at least twice monthly.
(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.016 POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY.
   Whenever a law enforcement official from any agency notifies an auto salvage
dealer, junk dealer, pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or owner or employee of any
of the foregoing, the item must not be sold, or removed from the premises. If
the hold was conveyed verbally, the hold shall be confirmed by the
investigating agency within 72 hours either in writing, or by electronic
transmission. The order to hold the item shall expire 60 days from the date is
placed, unless the holding agency seizes the item of evidence, or obtain other
court order to hold the item, or determines that the hold is still necessary
and notifies the business in writing, or by electronic transmission to continue
to hold the item for an additional 60 days. Each licensee and owner shall be
jointly and severally liable for holding such property.
(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.017 RETENTION OF ARTICLES FOR SPECIFIED PERIODS.
   (A)   Items, goods, articles and junk purchased or exchanged, shall be
retained for not less than 15 days before disposal in an accessible place in
the building where licensed activity occurs. A tag shall be attached to such
item in some visible and conspicuous place with a number corresponding to the
entry in the electronic record, or other record provided.
   (B)   Any person engaged in the business of buying, exchanging, collecting,
receiving, storing, or selling any used motor vehicles for the purpose of
wrecking or salvaging parts there from, shall report each such transaction to
the Chief of Police, or his or her designee within five business days,
excluding Saturday and Sunday, from the date of the transaction. The report
shall contain a description of each such motor vehicle inquired, including
vehicle identification number, hour and date when purchased, a description of
the person, including a copy of photo identification from whom it was acquired
and a photo of the vehicle. Such reports shall be on forms approved by the
Chief of Police, or his or her designee and made under oath. Such vehicles
shall not be disposed of, or altered in any manner for a period of five days
from the time the report is received by the city.
(Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.018 PROHIBITED PURCHASES.
   No licensee, owner, or employee shall receive any item, goods, or junk from
any person who at the time is intoxicated, or appears to be under the influence
of a controlled substance, or is known to be a thief, or receiver of stolen
property, or from any person who is suspected not to be the owner of the
property, or from any minor under the age of 18 years.
(Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.019 PREMISES, ENCLOSURES AND RESTRICTIONS.
   No licensee shall maintain a junk yard, junk shop, auto salvage yard, or
scrap metal yard, or any other business unless the business is carried on
entirely inside a building, or unless the premise is conducted within an
enclosed area, except for gates, or doors for ingress and egress by a suitable
enclosure such as a fence, or wall as approved by the Planning Commission for
the City of Hamtramck.
(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.020 PREMISES CONDITION.
   (A)   All fences and enclosures shall be maintained in a neat and
substantial manner, including but not limited to painting, removal, or
replacement of dilapidated areas and maintenance of a continuous uninterrupted
even perimeter of the same materials.
   (B)   No items, goods, or junk shall be permitted to lean on or touch any
such enclosure, or be in front of or suspended on any such enclosure. Items may
not be piled higher than two feet below the top of such enclosure and items
must be arranged so that safety aisles, driveways and uniformed passage ways
are provided, allowing reasonable access to all parts of the premises by law
enforcement and fire fighting operations.
   (C)   All premises shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and neat
condition and no fire shall be permitted unless a permit from the Fire Marshal
and any other regulatory agency has been obtained and is in full force.
(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.021 STORAGE OF SCRAP TIRES.
   Scrap tires may only be stored after special land use approval by the
Planning Commission under the standards for special land use approval and the
zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.022 BONDS.
   (A)   Prior to any pawnbroker license being issued, the applicant shall
furnish a corporate security bond, best A Rated, or better and the penal sum of
$10,000 with sufficient sureties to be approved by the city which bond shall be
conditioned that the owner, operator shall during the time of the license
comply with all the laws of the state of Michigan and the city pursuant to this
chapter and in regard to pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers, junk dealers,
Precious Metal and Gem Dealers Act of the state, as set forth, and the sale of
secondhand watches act of the state as set forth, including any amendments to
the foregoing state laws. Any person aggrieved by the action of the licensee
shall have a right of action on the bond for recovery of money damages. Such
bond shall remain in full force and effect for 90 days after the expiration or
cancellation of any license, or after the termination of any action upon such
bond.
   (B)   On the recommendation of the Building Inspector, City Manager, or
Hamtramck City Police Department, an additional bond may be required in order
to assure that the conditions at the site of the business are maintained from
which the costs of any enforcement action shall be repaid to the city in the
event of any enforcement action for compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 77, passed 7-28-1928; Am. Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009,
passed 1-22-2013)
§ 114.023 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAWS.
   Each licensee and employees must comply with the terms of state laws
including but not limited to M.C.L.A. §§ 445.471 through 445.476 and any
amendments thereto, the state act regulating pawnbrokers where applicable
M.C.L.A. §§ 446.201 through 446.219 and any amendments thereto. Full compliance
with the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act as set forth in M.C.L.A. §§ 445.481
through 445.492 and any amendments thereto is required. Compliance with the
Sale of Secondhand Watches Act M.C.L.A. §§ 445.551 through 445.555 and any
amendments thereto is required.
(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 114.024 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING ORDINANCES.
   Every licensee and employee shall comply with all requirements for business
location at which work, pursuant to any license issued under this chapter,
occurs as provided in any applicable zoning ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 114.025 PURCHASES FROM MINORS PROHIBITED.
   No licensee, dealer, employee, person or entity shall purchase or receive
any item or property on the premises or otherwise off premises associated with
the business conducted on the premises, from any person under the age of 18
years.
(Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
114.999
§ 114.999 PENALTY.
   Any licensee, dealer, employee, person, or entity who violates the terms and
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $500, or
both, plus costs. Any violation may also result in a suspension or revocation
of such license as prescribed by statute and as otherwise imposed by the
Hamtramck City Police Department after notice of such proposed action at least
seven days beforehand. The licensee shall be permitted a hearing before the
Chief of Police and a right of appeal as prescribed for denial of the issuance
of a license.
(Ord. 77, passed 7-28-1928; Am. Ord. 81, passed 2-28-1929; Am. Ord. 2013-009,
passed 1-22-2013)
CHAPTER 115: METAL AND GEM DEALERS
Section
   
115.001   Definitions
   
115.002   Registration and transaction fee
   
115.003   Records of transactions
   
115.004   Retention of transaction and transmittal to Police Department
   
115.005   Certificate of registration
   
115.006   Application; prerequisites
   
115.007   Police Department review
   
115.008   Review by Building Inspector
   
115.009   Certificate of registration: duration; renewal; changes
   
115.010   Display of certificate of registration
   
115.011   Precious item retention; alteration or defacing unlawful
   
115.012   Precious items: acceptance prohibited and unlawful
   
115.013   License revocation
 
   
115.999   Penalty
§ 115.001 DEFINITIONS.
   Definitions utilized under this chapter shall be the same definitions as
provided in the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act M.C.L.A. § 445.482 as
amended.
(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 115.002 REGISTRATION AND TRANSACTION FEE.
   A registration fee and renewal fee shall be assessed from each licensee in a
manner and amount as set from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
The license fee shall be waived in the event the proposed licensee has a valid
and updated pawn license. A transaction fee per transaction shall be payable in
an amount as set from time to time by the City Council.
(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 115.003 RECORDS OF TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   A dealer shall maintain a permanent record of each transaction, on
record of transaction forms provided for in Act 95 of 1981 and shall provide
the records online in accordance with the policies of the Hamtramck Police
Department.
   (B)   At the time a dealer receives or purchases a precious item, the dealer
or the agent or employee of the dealer shall ensure that the following
information is recorded accurately on a record of transaction form:
      (1)    The dealer certificate of registration number.
      (2)    A general description of the precious item or precious items
received or purchased, including the type of metal or precious gem. In the case
of watches, the description shall contain the name of the maker and the number
of both the works and the case. In the case of jewelry, all letters and marks
inscribed on the jewelry shall be included in the description.
      (3)    The date of the transaction.
      (4)    The name of the person conducting the transaction.
      (5)    The name, date of birth, driver’s license number or State of
Michigan personal identification card number, and street and house number of
the customer, together with a legible imprint of the right thumb and photograph
of the customer, or if that is not possible, of the left thumb or a finger of
the customer. However, the thumbprint or fingerprint shall only be required on
the record of transaction form retained by the dealer. The thumbprint or
fingerprint shall be made available to a police agency during the course of a
police investigation involving a precious item or items described on the record
of transaction. After a period of one year from the date of the record of
transaction, if a police investigation concerning a precious item or items
described on the record of transaction has not occurred, the dealer and any
police agency or sheriff’s department holding a copy of the record of
transaction shall destroy, and not keep a permanent record of, the record of
transaction. A dealer who goes out of business or changes his or her business
address to another local jurisdiction either within or out of this state shall
transmit the records of all transactions made by the dealer within one year
before his or her closing or moving, to the local police agency.
      (6)    The price paid by the dealer for the precious item or precious
items.
      (7)    The form of payment to the customer; check, money order, bank
draft, or cash. If the payment is by check, money order, or bank draft, the
dealer shall indicate the number of the check, money order, or bank draft.
      (8)    The customer’s signature.
   (C)   The record of each transaction shall be numbered consecutively,
commencing with the number 1 and the calendar year (example, 01-2012).
   (D)   The record of transaction forms of a dealer and each precious item
received shall be open to an inspection by the county prosecuting attorney, the
local police agency, the police agency or sheriff’s department of the local
governmental unit in which the customer resides, and the Michigan State Police,
at all times during the ordinary business hours of the dealer. As a condition
of doing business, a dealer is considered to have given consent to the
inspection prescribed by this division (D). The record of transaction forms of
a dealer shall not be open to inspection by the general public.
   (E)   The items shall be photographed and any serial number or other
markings provided, as well as any other information as required pursuant to the
electronic transaction reporting processes utilized by the city. Additionally,
the driver license, state identification, passport, or other photographic
identification of a customer shall be photographed.
(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.004 RETENTION OF TRANSACTION AND TRANSMITTAL TO POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by state law, each record of a
transaction shall be retained by the dealer for not less than one year after
the transaction to which the record pertains.
   (B)   Within 48 hours after receiving or purchasing a precious item, the
dealer shall send a copy of the record of transaction form to the Hamtramck
Police Department and, if the record of transaction form indicates that the
customer resides outside the jurisdiction of the city, the dealer shall send a
copy of the record of transaction form to the police agency of the city,
village, or township in which the customer resides as set forth on the record
of transaction, or, if that city, village, or township does not have a police
agency, to the sheriff’s department of the county in which the customer resides
as set forth on the record of transaction.
      (1)   Every licensee, owner and employee, shall keep a record of all
persons and/or entities with whom business has transacted and all property
coming into their possession. Reports must be electronically transmitted to the
Police Chief or his or her designee. Within 48 hours of receipt by purchase, or
otherwise of a precious item, a report must be transmitted by means of
electronic transmission through a modem, or similar device in a format that the
data is capable of direct electronic entry into the Hamtramck Police
Department’s computerized system, as approved by the Police Chief, or his or
her designee for identifying property coming into the possession of a licensor.
A transaction report by electronic transmission under this division (B) shall
not be reported on paper forms, unless the Police Chief, or his or her designee
so requires. All dealers must have the equipment installed in their place of
business no later than January 1, 2013. Information must be reported
electronically beginning February 1, 2012.
      (2)   A fee as adopted and subject to change periodically by the City
Council shall be assessed per transaction. The vendor will assess the property
registration fee for each transaction, the licensee reports either through
batch file upload, or directly using the vendor’s business interface or on the
vendor’s automated reported service that involves transactions subject to the
provision of this chapter.
      (3)   Transaction is defined as a single buy, or which may involve one or
more items and does not include contract extension, or claims. The per
transaction registration fee is not a per item fee, included in the
transaction. It is within the sole discretion of the secondhand dealer whether
to recover the fee from their customers for registering a transaction.
      (4)   The licensee will be invoiced on a monthly basis. The city’s vendor
automated reporting service isolates and generates a list of the billable
transactions will be used for deriving invoiced amounts. The above fees are
assessed for the use of the standard vendor’s automated recording service. Any
custom programming completed for the secondhand dealer will be negotiated on a
contract basis and may result in additional licensing arrangements between the
vendor and the licensor. Sales tax will be added to the above amounts where
applicable. Failure to timely pay as invoiced is a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   The record of transaction forms received by a police agency or
sheriff’s department shall not be open to inspection by the general public.
Each police agency or sheriff’s department holding record of transaction forms
shall be responsible for ensuring the confidentiality of the record of
transaction forms and ensuring that the record of transaction forms are used
only for the purpose for which they were received.
(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.005 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   No person shall carry on the business of a precious metal or gem dealer in
the city without first having a business license issued from the City Clerk
authorizing such person or entity to carry on such business subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.006 APPLICATION; PREREQUISITES.
   A dealer shall apply to the city for a certificate of registration, and pay
a fee prescribed by the City Council to cover the cost of processing and
issuing the certificate of registration, by disclosing the following
information:
   (A)   The name, address, photograph and thumbprint of the applicant(s).
   (B)   The name and address under which the applicant does business.
   (C)   The name, address, photograph and thumbprint of all agents or
employees of the dealer. Within 24 hours after hiring a new employee, the
dealer shall forward to the local police agency the name, address, and
thumbprint of the new employee.
(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.007 POLICE DEPARTMENT REVIEW.
   The Hamtramck Police Department shall review the application and determine
whether the application complies with the provisions of this chapter and the
Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act (Act 95 of 1981, being M.C.L.A. §§ 445.481 et
seq). The dealer shall complete his or her examination and issue a
determination within 30 days upon receipt of the application described herein.
(Ord. 21013-008, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.008 REVIEW BY BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   The Building Inspector shall within 15 days of the submittal of an
application review the premises in order to determine whether the precious
metal and gem dealer activities are compliant with the zoning ordinance. Such
determination shall be issued to the Police Department.
(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.009 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION: DURATION; RENEWAL; CHANGES.
   Not less than ten days before a dealer changes the name or address under
which the dealer does business, the dealer shall notify the Police Department
in writing of the change.
(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.010 DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   Upon receipt of the certificate of registration from the local police
agency, the dealer shall post it in a conspicuous place in the dealer’s place
of business.
(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.011 PRECIOUS ITEM RETENTION; ALTERATION OR DEFACING UNLAWFUL.
   A precious item received by a dealer shall be retained by the dealer for
nine calendar days after it was received, without any form of alteration other
than that required for an accurate appraisal of its value.
(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.012 PRECIOUS ITEMS: ACCEPTANCE PROHIBITED AND UNLAWFUL.
   A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer shall not:
   (A)   Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from any person who is
less than 18 years of age or any person known by the dealer or agent or
employee of the dealer to have been convicted of theft or receipt of stolen
property within the preceding five years, whether the person is acting in his
or her own behalf or as the agent of another.
   (B)   Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from a person unless
that person presents a valid driver’s license or a valid State of Michigan
personal identification card.
(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.013 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   Any dealer, agent, or employee of a dealer who is convicted of any
misdemeanor pursuant to this act, or under section 535 of the Michigan Penal
Code, 1931, Public Act 328, M.C.L.A. § 750.535, or of the Precious Metal and
Gem Dealer Act M.C.L.A. §§ 445.481 et seq., shall not be permitted to operate
as a dealer within this state for a period of one year after conviction. A
dealer, or an agent, or employee of a dealer who is convicted of a felony under
M.C.L.A. §§ 445.481 et seq. (Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act), or under
Section 535 of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 Public Act 328, M.C.L.A. §
750.535, shall not be permitted to operate as a dealer within this state for a
period of five years after conviction.
(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 115.999 PENALTY.
   Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment of not more than 90 days and/or a fine of $500, or
both in addition to any other penalty provisions provided for violation of a
misdemeanor as set forth in the general penalty provisions of this Code of
Ordinances.
(Ord. 2013-008, passed 1-22-2013)
CHAPTER 116: HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Section
Hawkers and Peddlers
   
116.001   License required
   
116.002   City Clerk authorization
   
116.003   License fee
   
116.004   Exemptions
   
116.005   Prohibitions
   
116.006   Location restrictions
   
116.007   Restrictions and enforcement
   
116.008   Request to refrain from exercising occupation
   
116.009   Revocation; blocking traffic prohibited
Transient Merchants
   
116.020   License required
   
116.021   Definitions
   
116.022   Application requirements
   
116.023   License approval and fee
   
116.024   Deposits
   
116.025   License void
   
116.026   License revocable
 
   
116.999   Penalty
HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS
§ 116.001 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person or persons shall follow or engage in the business or
occupation of a hawker or peddler, or the helper of a hawker or peddler, within
the city without first securing a license from the City Clerk.
   (B)   No more than two persons, including the owner, shall sell or operate
on or in connection with any hawker or peddler’s vehicle. The owner or person
in charge of the vehicle shall have a proper hawker and peddler’s license and
the other person, if any, shall have a helper’s license.
   (C)   Upon the issuance of a license to a hawker or peddler, there shall be
delivered to each licensee using a wagon or other vehicle in peddling, one
license plate which shall be furnished free of charge by the city. The license
plate shall be made of some durable material of a design to be determined by
the City Clerk and shall contain the number of the license, the year issued and
the words “Peddler, City of Hamtramck.” The licensee shall affix the license
plate to the right side of his or her vehicle in a conspicuous place. No person
shall use a wagon or other vehicle peddling or vending on which the license
plate is not so displayed. No licensee shall transfer the license plate from
one vehicle to another. Licenses issued under this subchapter are neither
assignable or transferable.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929; Am. Ord. 124, passed 6-28-1934; Am. Ord. 133,
passed 1-17-1935)
§ 116.002 CITY CLERK AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   The Clerk of the city is hereby authorized to license any person or
persons of good character who desire to follow or engage in the business or
occupation of a hawker or peddler in the city upon the payment by the persons
and each of them, of the sum prescribed in §
116.003.
   (B)   No person can take out more than one license in his or her name, or
authorize any person to operate under a license issued to him or her. All
licenses granted under this subchapter shall be deemed as granted for the terms
of one year commencing May 1 unless some other period of time should be
expressly stated in the section.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929; Am. Ord. 124, passed 6-28-1934; Am. Ord. 375,
passed 3-22-1977)
§ 116.003 LICENSE FEE.
   Any person or persons soliciting a license as provided for in this
subchapter shall pay therefor to the City Treasurer of the city the amount of
$50 for a license for hawking or peddling with any conveyance or motor vehicle.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929; Am. Ord. 124, passed 6-28-1934; Am. Ord. 375,
passed 3-22-1977)
§ 116.004 EXEMPTIONS.
   This subchapter is not intended to apply to any mechanic of this state
selling or offering for sale, any article of his or her own manufacture or
construction, or to any farmer selling or offering for sale the products of his
or her own farm.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929)
§ 116.005 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No licensee shall shout or call out in a loud, boisterous or unseemly
manner or to the disturbance of the citizens or dwellers of the city, nor shall
any licensee use any horn or bell or other noise-making device to call
attention to his or her wares.
   (B)   Hawking or peddling on foot or from hand-carts or portable stands on
public streets in the city is hereby expressly prohibited.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929; Am. Ord. 124, passed 6-28-1934) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.006 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   No hawker or peddler within the limits of the city shall pursue his or her
vocation of hawking or peddling upon Bismark Avenue, or upon Joseph Campau
Avenue between the south line of Newton Avenue and the Michigan Central Belt
Line Railroad in the city, or upon any other street in the city where congested
traffic conditions exist, if requested by any police officer, or other duly
authorized officer of the city, to refrain from pursuing his or her vocation on
account of the congested traffic conditions.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929; Am. Ord. 124, passed 6-28-1934) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.007 RESTRICTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   No licensee shall sell, offer or expose for sale, or have in or about
his or her cart, wagon, or other vehicle, any fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs
unless the same is covered and free from exposure to animals, flies, insects,
dust, dirt, the elements and from handling by persons, except as shall be
necessary in the vending and delivery to the purchaser, provided that the
provision of this section shall not apply to fruits, nuts or other articles of
food having a natural covering protecting them from infection or contamination
and which must be removed before consumption.
   (B)   The City Council may, from time to time, by resolution, designate
streets or portions of the city within which hawking and peddling shall be
prohibited and the Police Department of the city shall have power and authority
to enforce the provisions of the resolution.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929; Am. Ord. 124, passed 6-28-1934) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.008 REQUEST TO REFRAIN FROM EXERCISING OCCUPATION.
   The Police Department of the city shall have power and authority to require
any hawker or peddler to refrain from exercising his or her occupation within
the limits of any street or alley, or part thereof, where congested traffic
conditions exist and the refusal of any hawker or peddler to refrain from
exercising the business within the limits of the street or alley, or part
thereof, when so requested by a member of the Police Department shall
constitute a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.009 REVOCATION; BLOCKING TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.
   No hawker or peddler shall operate or maintain any vehicle in a manner that
the customers or traders with the hawker or peddler occupy or congregate within
the limits of the city in a manner as to block traffic and travel and no hawker
or peddler shall be permitted to use the streets, alleys or other public places
of the city for the service of customers or for the transaction of business in
a manner as to block traffic or travel.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929; Am. Ord. 124, passed 6-28-1934) Penalty, see §
116.999
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
§ 116.020 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal or agent, to engage
in business as a transient merchant in the city without first securing a
license from the City Council.
(Ord. 239, passed 11-3-1955) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.021 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any corporation, partnership, individual or two or more persons
having a joint and common interest.
   TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS. As defined in §
116.001 by any person for a period of less than six months consecutively shall
be prima facie evidence that the person was a transient merchant with the
intent and meaning hereof.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation engaging temporarily in a retail sale of goods, wares or
merchandise within the city and who for the purpose of conducting the business
occupies any lot, building, room or structure of any kind. The term shall not
be construed to apply to any person selling goods, wares or merchandise of any
description raised, produced or manufactured by the individual offering the
same for sale nor to persons handling vegetables, fruits or perishable farm
products at any established city market.
(Ord. 239, passed 11-3-1955) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.022 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   An application for a license shall be made in writing and filed with
the City Clerk.
   (B)   The application shall give the age and full name the applicant; the
names and addresses of all persons interested in the issuing of the license; if
the applicant be a corporation or the names and addresses of the officers; if
the applicant be a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners and in
addition stating where the person intends to do business, the kind of business
and the length of time for which a license is desired.
(Ord. 239, passed 11-3-1955) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.023 LICENSE APPROVAL AND FEE.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall then refer the matter to the City Council for the
city. Upon receipt of the application, the City Council, before acting upon it,
may refer the same for investigation to any office or officers of the city, who
shall report to the Council their finding within a reasonable time. If upon
receiving the application, or if referred as above provided, upon receipt of
the report, the City Council is satisfied that the business to be conducted by
the applicant is not intended to cheat or defraud the public and the granting
of the license will not be detrimental to the interest of the public nor in
violation of any statute or ordinance of the city, the Council shall authorize
the City Clerk to issue the license to the applicant.
   (B)   Before the license shall be issued the applicant shall deposit the sum
of $500 with the City Treasurer and shall pay to the City Clerk a fee equal to
$100 per month for the length of time for which the license is to be issued or
if for a period of less than one month, then the fee shall be at a rate of $10
per day for the period of the license. A surety company bond in like amount may
be deposited with the City Treasurer in lieu of a cash deposit.
(Ord. 239, passed 11-3-1955)
§ 116.024 DEPOSITS.
   Deposits made with the City Treasurer as required by §
116.023 shall be subject to claims of creditors in all cases where a judgment
has been obtained against the transient merchant in any court in this state and
the time for appealing the judgment has expired. In the cases garnishment
proceeding may be commenced in a court against the City Treasurer. It shall
thereupon be the duty of the City Treasurer to remit to any court any balance
of the cash deposit remaining in his or her hands not exceeding the amount of
the judgment for the purpose of satisfying the same. Any balance of the cash
deposit remaining in the hands of the City Treasurer four months after the
expiration of the license shall be remitted to the transient merchant,
provided, if at the date, the City Treasurer shall have received notice of any
suit then pending against the transient merchant, the deposit shall not be
returned until 60 days after the termination of the suit.
(Ord. 239, passed 11-3-1955)
§ 116.025 LICENSE VOID.
   Any license shall be void as soon as the deposit made with the City
Treasurer, as provided in §
116.023 herein, shall have been exhausted, because of garnishment suits as
aforementioned in §
116.024.
(Ord. 239, passed 11-3-1955)
§ 116.026 LICENSE REVOCABLE.
   Any license granted under this subchapter shall be revocable by the City
Council at any time for a violation of any law of the state or any rule,
regulation or ordinance of the city, or for other cause shown, after giving the
licensee reasonable notice and opportunity to be heard.
(Ord. 239, passed 11-3-1955)
§ 116.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Hawkers and peddlers. Every person convicted of violating any of the
provisions of §§
116.001 through
116.009 shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $100 and costs of
prosecution and, in default of the payment of the fine and costs, the court may
make a further sentence that the offender be imprisoned in the Wayne County
Jail, or another place of imprisonment as may be hereafter established by the
City Council as a place of confinement, until the fine and costs be paid, but
not longer than 90 days, or, in the discretion of the court having jurisdiction
of the cause, both a fine and imprisonment may be imposed.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-22-1929)
   (B)   Transient merchants. Every person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation convicted of violating or failing to comply with the provisions of
§§
116.020 through
116.026 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100 and costs of
prosecution, or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both a fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court and when a fine and costs are
imposed the court may provide that in default of the payment thereof, the
offender shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days, unless the
fine and costs shall be sooner paid; provided, no person shall be imprisoned
for a single violation of §§
116.020 through
116.026 for a longer period than 90 days. In the event that there shall be
imposed upon any corporation any fine or costs, or either, or both, for the
violation of any terms of §§
116.020 through
116.026 then it shall be lawful to collect the fine and costs, or either, or
both, in any action or assumpsit before any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 239, passed 11-3-1955)
CHAPTER 117: PUBLIC SALES
Section
Auctions
   
117.001   Restrictions on items offered
   
117.002   License required
   
117.003   City Clerk authorization
   
117.004   License fee
   
117.005   Application
   
117.006   Sales prohibited without license
   
117.007   Return of purchased goods
   
117.008   Sign posted
   
117.009   Induced sales and substitutions prohibited
   
117.010   Boosting or capping prohibited
   
117.011   False representations prohibited
   
117.012   Goods from minor prohibited
   
117.013   Down hill selling prohibited
   
117.014   Auction location prohibitions
   
117.015   Noise restrictions
   
117.016   Hours of operation
   
117.017   Recordkeeping
   
117.018   Refusal to sell
   
117.019   Personal taxes to be paid before sale
   
117.020   Revocation or suspension of license
Garage Sales
   
117.035   Title
   
117.036   Definitions
   
117.037   Permit required
   
117.038   Sale period no longer than three days
   
117.039   Number of permits allowed per year
   
117.040   Violation
   
117.041   Permit to be posted; storage of goods
   
117.042   Signs
 
   
117.999   Penalty
AUCTIONS
§ 117.001 RESTRICTIONS ON ITEMS OFFERED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation to sell,
dispose of, or offer for sale in the city at public auction, or to cause or
permit to be sold, disposed of or offered for sale in the city at public
auction any gold, silver plated ware, precious stones, watches, clocks or
jewelry, whether the same shall be their own property or whether they sell the
same as agents or employees of others. This shall not apply to judicial sales
or sales by executors or administrators or to sales by or on behalf of licensed
pawnbrokers of unredeemed pledges in the manner provided by law, nor to the
sale at public auction of the stock on hand of any person or persons, firm or
corporation continuously in business in the city as a retail or wholesale
merchant of gold, silver, plated ware, precious stones, watches, clocks or
jewelry. The sale at public auction of the stock on hand of a merchant or
merchants shall be held on successive days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted
and shall not continue for more than 30 days in all within the period of one
year.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-23-1929) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.002 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No persons or persons shall follow or engage in the business or occupation
of an auctioneer within the city without first securing a license from the City
Clerk.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.003 CITY CLERK AUTHORIZATION.
   The Clerk of the city is hereby authorized to license any person or persons
of good character who desire to sell personal property at public auction in the
city at a place to be named in his or her license, upon application being made
in writing to the City Clerk for a license and upon the payment by the person
or persons and each of them, to the City Treasurer of the city of the sum of
$100 and upon the execution of a bond to the city in the sum of $1,000 with two
sureties who shall be freeholders, or a surety company bond in the sum of
$1,000 to be approved by the City Attorney, the bond to be conditioned for the
faithful observance of the regulations of this city.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.004 LICENSE FEE.
   Every license so granted shall expire on the April 15 following the date of
issue. In no case shall a license be issued for a fee of less than $100 even
though it be wanted for a period of less than one year.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)
§ 117.005 APPLICATION.
   Every person desiring to obtain a license as an auctioneer shall make an
application in writing to the City Clerk, setting forth in the application his
or her name, place of residence, place of business and the name and address of
his or her sureties and thereupon the City Clerk may issue, or cause to be
issued a license to the applicant authorizing the applicant to act as an
auctioneer at the place mentioned in the license in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter for the during the period of the license.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.006 SALES PROHIBITED WITHOUT LICENSE.
   No person or persons shall sell, or attempt to sell at public auction in the
city any personal property (except under and by virtue of legal process, or
under and by virtue of a mortgage) without first having obtained a license
therefor as herein required.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.007 RETURN OF PURCHASED GOODS.
   The purchaser at any auction sale of any personal property shall have the
right to return it to the auctioneer at any time within five days after the
date of the sale if the personal property be not of the quality represented to
him or her, and the auctioneer shall return to the purchaser the price of the
article; and the bondsmen of the auctioneer shall be liable for the return to
the purchaser of the purchase price; and it is hereby provided that if it shall
be made to appear, to the satisfaction of the City Council, that the place of
sale, or the place of business, of any auctioneer shall have been closed at any
time during the five days, for the purpose of avoiding any offer to return any
article so sold, the City Council shall revoke the license of the auctioneer.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.008 SIGN POSTED.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person licensed under this subchapter to
post in a conspicuous place so that it can be readily seen a sign or placard
containing the information in §
117.007. The sign shall be printed in 14-point linwood type and prepared and
furnished by the City Clerk free of cost.
   (B)   The place of posting the sign shall be designated by the Chief of
Police, or some member of the Police Department designated by him or her, and
it shall be the duty of every auctioneer, his or her agents and employees, to
maintain the placard or sign as herein provided in the place designated.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.009 INDUCED SALES AND SUBSTITUTIONS PROHIBITED.
   No auctioneer, his or her agents or employees, shall offer for sale at
auction any article, and induce its purchase by any bidder, and afterward
substitute any article in lieu of that offered to and purchased by the bidder.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.010 BOOSTING OR CAPPING PROHIBITED.
   No person operating a public auction, by virtue of a license issued as
herein provided, shall permit or allow any person or persons to remain in or
upon the premises wherein the public auction is being conducted to engage in
the practice of boosting or capping, or assist or take part in the practice of
any fraud of any kind, nature or description, or to misrepresent the quality or
description of any article or thing offered to be sold.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.011 FALSE REPRESENTATIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No auctioneer or person being present when any personal property is
offered for sale, shall knowingly, with the intent to induce any person or
persons to purchase the same, or any part thereof, make any false
representation or statement as to the ownership of or the character or quality
of the property offered for sale, or as to the property or circumstances of the
owner or pretended owner of the property.
   (B)   No auctioneer or any of his or her agents or employees shall sell, or
attempt to sell by auction, or advertise for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise falsely representing or pretending that the goods, wares, or
merchandise are in whole or in part a bankrupt or insolvent stock, or damaged
goods, or goods saved from fire, or make any false statement as to the previous
history or character of the goods, wares or merchandise. Every person convicted
of violating the provisions of this section shall, in addition to the penalty
provided in §
117.999, be liable in an action of contract to any person purchasing any goods,
wares or merchandise because of the representation or statement, in an amount
equal to three times the amount paid therefor; and if the false prepresentation
is made by the auctioneer or by any person with the auctioneer’s knowledge and
consent or connivance, the license of the auctioneer shall be revoked.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.012 GOODS FROM MINOR PROHIBITED.
   No auctioneer shall receive for sale by auction any goods from a minor.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.013 DOWN HILL SELLING PROHIBITED.
   Selling at auction under this subchapter shall mean the offering for sale or
selling of personal property to the highest bidder; or offering for sale or
selling of the property by the method known as DOWN HILL SELLING. By DOWN HILL
SELLING is meant the first offering of any article at a high price and then
offering the same at successive lower prices until a buyer is secured.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.014 AUCTION LOCATION PROHIBITIONS.
   No personal property shall be sold at auction, or exposed for sale, by any
auctioneer in any street, avenue, alley or public place in the city.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.015 NOISE RESTRICTIONS.
   No bellman or crier, nor any drum or fife, or other instrument of music, nor
any show signal, or means of attracting the attention of the public, other than
a sign or flag, shall be employed, or suffered or permitted to be used in
connection with any auction sale at or near any place of the sale, or at or
near any auction room.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.016 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No person or persons shall operate a public auction or sell goods at public
auction, within the meaning of this subchapter, except on weekdays between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.017 RECORDKEEPING.
   Every person licensed under the provisions of this subchapter shall, at the
place of business named in the license keep a book in which shall be written in
ink at the time of the purchase, or at the time of the selling of any personal
property a description thereof, the name, age, address and personal description
of the person or persons from whom the purchase was made, and the name and
address of the person to whom the sale is made, also the day and hour of the
purchase or sale. The book shall at all times be open to public inspection.
Every licensee shall make out and file with the City Clerk, before 10:00 a.m.
each day, a report of all sales made and the name and address of the persons to
whom the sale was made. The report shall be made out on a blank form to be
furnished by the City Clerk and shall give the full details in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter, of all transactions the day previous and up
to the time of making the report.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.018 REFUSAL TO SELL.
   When any article is advertised or offered for sale at public auction, no
auctioneer shall refuse to sell the same providing there have been two bids on
the article so offered for sale.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.019 PERSONAL TAXES TO BE PAID BEFORE SALE.
   No personal property shall be sold at public auction until a certificate has
been obtained from the City Treasurer of the city that the personal taxes on
the property have been paid.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.020 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   The City Council may at any time suspend or revoke any license granted under
the provisions of this subchapter and order the place of business of the
licensee closed for any infraction of this subchapter or other violation of the
law. All licenses granted hereunder shall be issued and accepted with the
understanding that they are subject to suspension or revocation at the will of
the City Council for cause.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)
GARAGE SALES
§ 117.035 TITLE.
   This subchapter may be cited, pleaded and referred to, and as the short
title of Garage Sales Subchapter of the city.
(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989)
§ 117.036 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARAGE SALE, LAWN SALE, ATTIC SALE, RUMMAGE SALE, YARD SALE, BASEMENT SALE
or FLEA MARKET SALE or OTHER SIMILARLY TERMED SALES. Any sale of tangible
personal property not otherwise regulated in the city regulations.
   PERSON. All individuals, firms, corporations or organizations.
(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989)
§ 117.037 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct a sale within the city limits without having first
procured from the City Clerk a permit therefor. The fee therefor shall be $5.
(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.038 SALE PERIOD NO LONGER THAN THREE DAYS.
   Any person conducting the sale may not conduct the sale for a period of more
than three consecutive days.
(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.039 NUMBER OF PERMITS ALLOWED PER YEAR.
   No person, including non-profit organizations, shall be allowed more than
two permits within any 12-month period.
(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.040 VIOLATION.
   Any person who shall conduct a garage sale or rummage sale without having
procured a permit from the City Clerk shall be considered guilty of violating
this subchapter.
(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.041 PERMIT TO BE POSTED; STORAGE OF GOODS.
   The permit issued by the City Clerk shall be posted at the location of sale
so as to be visible to the public. There shall be no overnight outside storage
of the goods or merchandise held for purchase in the garage sale.
(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989) Penalty, see §
117.999
§ 117.042 SIGNS.
   (A)   No signs advertising a garage sale shall be placed upon any public
property. Two signs advertising a garage sale are permitted to be placed upon
private property with the consent of the owner of the property.
   (B)   Within 24 hours of the conclusion of a garage sale, all advertising
signs shall be removed.
(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989)
§ 117.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Restrictions on items offered. Any person, persons, firm or
corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of §
117.001 shall, upon conviction thereof, by punished by a fine of not to exceed
$500 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of the payment of the fine and
costs, the court may make a further sentence that the offender by imprisoned in
the Wayne County Jail, or another place of imprisonment as may be hereafter
established by the City Council as a place of confinement, until the fine and
costs be paid, but no longer than 90 days, or, in the discretion of the court
having jurisdiction of the cause; both a fine and imprisonment may be imposed.
In the event that there shall be imposed upon any corporation any fine and
costs, or either, or both, for the violation of any of the terms of §
117.001, then it shall be lawful to collect the fine and costs, or either, or
both in an action of assumpsit before any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 89, passed 7-23-1929)
   (B)   Auctions - §§
117.002 through
117.020. Every person who shall violate any provision of §§
117.002 through
117.020, or shall fail to comply with the same, shall upon conviction thereof,
be punished by a fine at not to exceed $100 and costs of prosecution, and, in
default of the payment of the fine and costs, the court may make a further
sentence that the offender be imprisoned in the Wayne County Jail, or another
place of imprisonment as may be hereafter designated by the City Council as a
place of confinement, until a fine and costs be paid, but not longer than 90
days, or, in the discretion of the court having jurisdiction of the cause, both
a fine and imprisonment may be imposed.
(Ord. 90, passed 3-25-1930)
   (C)   Garage sales. Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
117.035 through
117.042 shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than
$100 or imprisonment for a period of not more than five days, or both a fine
and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 436, passed 10-26-1989)
CHAPTER 118: AMUSEMENTS
Section
Mechanical Games
   
118.001   Definitions
   
118.002   Licenses required; display
   
118.003   Application for license; inspections required
   
118.004   Issuance of licenses and related fees
   
118.005   Prohibitions and restrictions
Merchandise, Service and Music Vending Machines
   
118.020   Definitions
   
118.021   License required; display of license
   
118.022   Application for license; inspections required
   
118.023   Issuance of license; license fee
   
118.024   Prohibitions and restrictions
General Provisions for Mechanical Games, Pinball Machines and Music Vending
Machines
   
118.035   Revocation of license
   
118.036   Seizure and destruction of machines
Billiard Rooms, Pool Halls and Bowling Alleys
   
118.050   License required
   
118.051   Application
   
118.052   License fee
   
118.053   Definition
   
118.054   Prohibitions regarding minors
   
118.055   Intoxicants prohibited
   
118.056   Revocation of license
   
118.057   Previous revocation of license
   
118.058   Hours of operation
   
118.059   Window restrictions
Public Shows, Exhibitions and Amusements
   
118.070   License required; fee
   
118.071   City Clerk authorization
   
118.072   Exemptions
   
118.073   Disorderly conduct prohibited
   
118.074   Nuisance prohibited
   
118.075   Bond
   
118.076   Grounds to refuse issuance of license
   
118.077   Definition
   
118.078   Revocation
   
118.079   License expiration
Public Dance Hall
   
118.095   Definition
   
118.096   License required
   
118.097   Owner’s duty
   
118.098   Right to inspect
   
118.099   Proper ventilation, toilets and drinking fountains required
   
118.100   Refusal to grant license
   
118.101   Chief of Police
   
118.102   Disorderly conduct prohibited
   
118.103   Marathon dancing prohibited
   
118.104   Hours of operation
   
118.105   License fee
Gaming Apparatus
   
118.120   Search warrants
   
118.121   Tabulation of all seized property
   
118.122   Seized property to be stored
   
118.123   Property to be restored to owner
 
   
118.999   Penalty
MECHANICAL GAMES
§ 118.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARCADE HALL. A commercial establishment where five or more mechanical games
are available on the premises for operation by members of the public.
   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who places any mechanical games, as herein defined,
in any place or establishment, for operation and for the purpose of receiving
any type of compensation.
   MECHANICAL GAME. A pinball machine, a skee ball machine, shuffleboard or
miniature pool table, or any similar machine, instrument, device or contrivance
which is an object of commerce that is operated for a pecuniary obligation,
including but not limited, to those machines activated by the insertion of
United States currency or any tokens.
   OWNER. Any person who owns, operates or conducts any place or establishment
in which any mechanical game, as herein defined, may be operated.
   PERSON. A natural person, partnership, corporation, association or other
legal entity.
   PINBALL MACHINE. A mechanical, electrical or other device, apparatus, or
machine which, for pecuniary obligation, including, but not limited to,
machines activated by insertion of a United States currency or any token, is
available to play or operate and the play or operation of which, whether by
reason of the skill of the operator or the application of an element of chance,
or both, enables the person playing or operating the machine to score points as
a ball or object propelled or stimulated by an electronic or mechanical impulse
touches pins or targets, or entitles the person playing or operating the
machine to score points as a ball or object propelled or stimulated by an
electronic or mechanical impulse touches pins or targets, or entitles the
person playing or operating the machine to replay it at no additional cost.
(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977)
§ 118.002 LICENSES REQUIRED; DISPLAY.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for any
person, in either capacity as a distributor or owner, to allow the maintenance
and/or distribution for the purpose of operation any mechanical game without
having first procured a license for the device pursuant to the provisions of
the City Code of Ordinances.
      (2)   It shall be the joint and several duty of the owner(s) and/or
distributor(s) to post the license or licenses permanently and conspicuously at
the location of the machine in the premises wherein the device is to be
operated and maintained.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for an owner to
maintain any mechanical game without first obtaining a license for the
commercial establishment, store, or place where the device is being maintained
or operated.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor for any person to
act as a distributor of mechanical games without first obtaining a license as a
distributor.
(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.003 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   License applications for mechanical games shall be made to the City
Clerk in the form and manner required by him or her and in accordance with the
provisions of the City Code of Ordinances, and the application shall state,
among other things:
      (1)   The number of machines or devices intended to be operated on the
premises;
      (2)   The type of machine or device;
      (3)   The name, address and location of the commercial establishment,
store or place where the devices or machines will be located;
      (4)   The name and address of the owner of the commercial establishment,
store or place wherein the devices or machines are located;
      (5)   The name and address of the person(s) responsible for operating or
managing the devices or machines;
      (6)   The name and address of the distributor(s); and
      (7) The location and description of motor vehicle parking facilities
provided for patrons utilizing these devices or machines.
   (B)   If, after the issuance of the license, the licensee desires to operate
other mechanical games, in addition to the number stated in the application for
a license, he or she shall make a new application to the City Clerk in the same
form and manner as the original application for a license.
   (C)   Under this subchapter, the application for a distributor’s license
shall be accompanied by the fingerprints of the applicant, and, in the event
the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be accompanied by the
fingerprints of the officers thereof and the names of the stockholders thereof.
   (D)   Each and every application under this subchapter shall be in writing
and made out in duplicate, one copy being referred to the Chief of Police and
the other copy to the Director of the Department of Public Works.
      (1)   The Chief of Police shall investigate the location wherein it is
proposed to operate the machine to determine whether it violates any
prohibition of the city ordinances, shall ascertain if the owner and/or
distributor is a person of good moral character by an investigation to
determine if he or she was guilty of any criminal activity or offense involving
moral turpitude, and on the basis of aforesaid investigation shall either
approve or disapprove the application.
      (2)   Director of the Department of Public Works shall:
         (a)   Assign an electrical inspector to inspect all wiring and
connections to the devices or machines listed in the application and determine
if the same complies with the city electrical code; and
         (b)   Shall assign a zoning inspector to inspect the location to see
if same complies with the pertinent sections of the city zoning regulations.
Further, the Director of the Department of Public Works shall determine whether
applicant’s designated building has a proper certificate of occupancy.
      (3)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless approved by the
Chief of Police and the Director of the Department of Public Works.
   (E)   Within 90 days after receipt of the application and the related
application fees, the Chief of Police and Director of the Department of Public
Works shall approve or disapprove the application.
   (F)   If the Chief of Police and Director of the Department of Public Works
disapproves an application for a license relating to mechanical games, the
reasons for the disapproval shall be stated in writing. Further, the Chief of
Police and the Director of the Department of Public Works shall have full and
absolute power to disapprove an application for either a new license or renewal
of a previous license for any of the following specified reasons:
      (1)   Applicant makes a false statement of material fact in the
application;
      (2)   Applicant has been found guilty of criminal conduct or offense
involving moral turpitude;
      (3)   Applicant violates this subchapter; or
      (4)   Applicant is delinquent in taxes owed to a municipality.
   (G)   A person whose application for a license is disapproved shall not be
eligible to reapply for a license until the expiration of one year after the
date of the Chief of Police’s or the Superintendent of Building and Safety
Engineering’s disapproval.
   (H)   A license issued pursuant to this section of the subchapter shall be
valid for one year expiring annually on May 1.
   (I)   A license is not assignable or transferable.
   (J)   A license may be renewed annually upon the submission of an
application provided by the City Clerk and upon the licensee’s payment of the
annual license fee.
(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.004 ISSUANCE OF LICENSES AND RELATED FEES.
   (A)   Upon meeting the above requirements, the City Clerk is authorized to
issue a license upon the payment of the following annual fees.
 
Distributor            $200
Owner                  $50
Each machine or device $25
 
   (B)   The applicant must also pay for any inspections by the Director of the
Department of Public Works which were necessitated in the processing of the
application.
(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.005 PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any minor to operate
or play any mechanical game, in violation of the following age limitations and
restrictions.
      (1)   Unless accompanied by a parent or guardian, a minor prior to his or
her fifteenth birthday shall not be allowed to enter, loiter, remain,
congregate or play any mechanical game in an arcade hall.
      (2)   Unless accompanied by a parent or guardian, a minor between his or
her fifteenth and seventeenth birthdays shall not be allowed to enter, loiter,
remain, congregate or play any mechanical game in an arcade hall on any day
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 1:00 a.m.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed as permitting the issuance
of a license for any slot machine or as legalizing any coin operated machine or
device in which is incorporated any gambling feature, and all use thereof for
gambling of any kind is prohibited.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to
operate any device regulated by this subchapter which would display, expose,
produce or emit any motion picture, printed matter, advertisement, writing,
song, recitation, speech, music or other matter that is obscene, indecent,
pornographic or contrary to good morals.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association
holding a license under this subchapter to permit the operation of a device, as
defined in §
118.001 between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. of any day.
   (E)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as prohibiting the
keeping and use of pool tables, billiard tables, bowling alleys, shuffle boards
or other licensed amusements and their usual appurtenances in places duly
licensed and operated under applicable regulations of the city.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for the arcade owners and/or operators to allow
anyone under the age of 17 years to patronize their establishment(s) in
violation of the city curfew regulations.
(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977) Penalty, see §
118.999
MERCHANDISE, SERVICE AND MUSIC VENDING MACHINES
§ 118.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COIN OPERATED MUSIC DEVICE. A piano, phonograph, juke box or any similar
machine or contrivance which emits recitations, songs, speeches or music upon
the insertion of a coin.
   MERCHANDISE VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical device which, upon insertion of
a coin, returns the value in merchandise of the sum thus inserted or renders a
service for same.
   PERSON, FIRM, CORPORATION or ASSOCIATION. Any person, firm, corporation or
association which own any machine; the person, firm, corporation or association
in whose place of business any machine is placed for use by the public; and the
person, firm, corporation or association in whose place of business any machine
is placed for use by the public; and the person, firm, corporation or
association having control over the machine.
(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977)
§ 118.021 LICENSE REQUIRED; DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation or association displaying for public
patronage or keeping for operation any merchandise, service, and/or music
vending machine, as herein defined by §
118.020 shall be required to obtain a license from the city. Application for
the license shall be made to the City Clerk upon a form to be supplied for that
purpose.
   (B)   The license or licenses herein provided for shall be posted
permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises
wherein the device is to be operated or maintained to be operated.
   (C)   The license may be transferred from one machine or device to another
similar machine upon application to the City Clerk to the effect and the giving
of a description and the serial number of the new machine or device. Not more
than one machine shall be operated under one license and the applicant or
licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and every machine
displayed or operated by him or her.
   (D)   A license shall not be transferrable from person to person, and shall
be usable only at the place and by the person designated in the license.
However, if the licensee shall move his or her place of business to another
location within the city, the license may be transferred to a new location upon
application to the City Clerk, giving the street and number of the new
location. The new location shall be approved by the Chief of Police and the
Director of the Department of Public Works in the same manner as provided in §
118.022 of this subchapter.
(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.022 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   The application for a merchandise, service or music vending machine
license shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth;
      (2)   Prior criminal convictions of applicant, if any;
      (3)   Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and
the business conducted at that place; and
      (4)   Description of machine to be covered by the license, mechanical
features, name of manufacturer, serial number.
   (B)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he or she shall be
over 18 years of age and a citizen or permanent resident of the United States.
   (C)   Application for a merchandise service or music vending machine license
shall be made out in duplicate, one copy being referred to the Chief of Police
and the other copy to the Director of the Department of Public Works.
      (1)   The Chief of Police shall ascertain if the vending machine
applicant is a person of good moral character, by an investigation to determine
if he or she was guilty of any criminal offense and based on the investigation
either approve or disapprove the application.
      (2)   The Director of the Department of Public Works shall inspect his or
her files to see if the commercial establishment wherein the licensed machine
is located complies with the municipal ordinances of the city, and has a valid
certificate of occupancy, and based upon this investigation either approve or
disapprove the application.
   (D)   A license issued under §§
118.020 through
118.024 of the subchapter shall be valid for one year expiring annually on June
30.
(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.023 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   Every applicant, before being issued a license shall pay an annual
license fee, pursuant to the city licensing ordinances, for the privilege of
operating or maintaining for operation each machine, as defined in §§
118.001 and
118.020.
   (B)   No license issued under this subchapter shall be issued to any
applicant unless approved by the Chief of Police and the Director of the
Department of Public Works.
(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.024 PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association
holding a license under this subchapter to operate any machine as defined §
118.020, of this subchapter which has not been approved and/or listed by a
recognized testing laboratory such as Underwriters Laboratory (U.L.) and
Factory Mutual Research Corporation.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a coin operated music
device any day from 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m., except when the Liquor Control
Commission permits extension of its normal hours beyond 2:00 a.m.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to electrically connect food and beverage vending
machines by the use of extension cords.
   (D)   Nothing in this subchapter shall in any way be construed to authorized
license or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has
been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary law,
or that may be contrary to any future laws of the state.
   (E)   All electrical connections made by the flexible cord that supplies the
machine shall be of the three-wire grounding type. Vending machines shall be so
as not to overload any existing circuit that it may be attached to.
   (F)   For the installation of these vending machines that require the
installation of an electrical circuit or the extending of a circuit, an
electrical permit and inspection is required.
   (G)   The installation of electrical circuits shall be made by an electrical
contractor and an electrical permit secured from the city offices.
(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977) Penalty, see §
118.999
GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR MECHANICAL GAMES, PINBALL MACHINES AND MUSIC VENDING
MACHINES
§ 118.035 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Every person licensed under §§
118.001 through
118.005 and §§
118.020 through
118.024 is subject to the right, which is hereby expressly reserved, to revoke
or suspend the license should the license, directly or indirectly permit the
operation of any mechanical game, coin operated merchandise, service or music
vending device contrary to the provisions of the city, or the law of the state.
   (B)   The license may be suspended or revoked if the licensee is found
guilty of any criminal offense or offense involving moral turpitude.
   (C)   (1)   The license may be suspended or revoked by the municipal court
judge after written notice to the licensee by the court clerk, which notice
shall specify the ordinance or law violations with which the licensee is
charged and if, after a hearing, the licensee is found to be guilty of the
violation, ten days notice of hearing shall be given the licensee.
      (2)   At the hearing the licensee and his or her attorney may present and
submit evidence of witnesses in his or her defense.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of police officers to make routine inspections of
all devices, and if any unlawful practices are observed in connection
therewith, they shall report the same to the Chief of Police for the action as
he or she may deem proper, and the Chief of Police may recommend the immediate
revocation or suspension of the license.
   (E)   A licensee whose license is revoked as a consequence of a violation of
this subchapter shall be ineligible to apply for a license for a period of one
year after the revocation.
   (F)   A suspended or revoked license shall be returned immediately to the
office of the City Clerk by the licensee.
(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.036 SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF MACHINES.
   If the Chief of Police shall have reason to believe any mechanical amusement
device is used as a gambling device, the machine may be seized by the police
and impounded, and if upon trial of the exhibitor for allowing it to be used as
a device, the exhibitor be found guilty, then the machine shall be destroyed by
the police.
(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977)
BILLIARD ROOMS, POOL HALLS AND BOWLING ALLEYS
§ 118.050 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person or persons, firm or corporation shall operate, conduct or maintain
a billiard room, pool room or bowling alley, or any combination of them, within
the city without having first obtained from the City Clerk of the city a
license therefor.
(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.051 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person or persons, firm or corporation desiring to open or
establish a billiard room, pool room or bowling alley, or any combination of
them, within the city shall first make application for a license therefor to
the City Clerk of the city, setting forth in the application his or her age and
correct name, post office address and residence, the length of time he or she
has resided within this state, and where, and his or her place of residence for
the past five years immediately before the time of the application.
   (B)   In case the applicant for a license is a corporation authorized to do
business in this state, the application shall be made by the agent of the
corporation who will have principal charge of the place proposed to be
established, and the application shall contain all of the statements and
furnish all the facts in respect to the agent as are required in the case of a
private individual herein. In case of a partnership, each active partner in the
business shall join in the application for the permit and shall furnish all of
the information required of an individual applicant. The application shall also
set forth the street and number of the place where the business is proposed to
be conducted, together with the description of the property as to lot number
and subdivision. No license shall be granted to any person under the age of 21
years, nor to any person who has been convicted of a felony, nor to any firm or
corporation or copartnership, of which any number has been convicted of a
felony. No license shall be granted to any person, firm, corporation or
copartnership, to operate, conduct, or maintain a billiard room, pool room or
bowling alley, or any combination of them, within a radius of 1,000 feet of any
other billiard room, pool room or bowling alley, provided, however, that the
provision shall not apply to the renewal of licenses for business places
operated and licensed prior to 1933.
(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928; Am. Ord. 97, passed 7-21-1931)
§ 118.052 LICENSE FEE.
   The sum of $5 shall accompany the application as a license fee, and the
license shall entitle the holder thereof to conduct the business until May 1
following the issuance of the license, unless sooner revoked by the City
Council.
(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928; Am. Ord. 116, passed 7-6-1933) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.053 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   POOL ROOM or BILLIARD ROOM. Any room, place or premises in which persons are
permitted to play billiards or pocket billiards, (commonly known as POOL) and
for which pay, money, or its equivalent, or any check or counter, or ticket, in
lieu of money, is paid or received,
(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928)
§ 118.054 PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS.
   (A)   No person or persons, firm or corporation licensed as prescribed in
this subchapter shall permit or suffer any gambling to be carried on in the
licensed premises, nor knowingly employ in carrying on the business any person,
who has been convicted of a felony, nor permit or suffer any child, actually or
apparently under the age of 14 years, to play billiards or pool or to bowl on
the licensed premises, or to be or remain in or upon the premises unless
accompanied by the parents or guardian of the child, and it is hereby made the
duty of all proprietors, owners or managers, licensees or anyone connected with
the licensed premises of operating or maintaining any commercial billiard
parlor to ascertain the correct age of any person subject to the regulation by
this section. A violation by a licensee of this requirement shall be the basis
for a suspension and revocation of his or her license.
   (B)   A person less than 14 years of age may be permitted to play in the
bowling alley between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928; Am. Ord. 318, passed 7-14-1969) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.055 INTOXICANTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person or persons, firm or corporation licensed as prescribed in
this subchapter shall permit or suffer the sale or possession within the
billiard room, pool room or bowling alley of any habit-forming drugs or any
appliances for administering the same, nor permit nor suffer the sale or
possession in the aforesaid rooms or places of any intoxicating liquors.
   (B)   The phrase “intoxicating liquor” shall be construed to include
alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, gin, beer, ale, porter and wine, and, in
addition thereto, any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquors, liquids
and compounds, whether medicated, proprietary, patented or not, or by whatever
name called, containing one-half of 1%, or more, of alcohol by volume, which
are fit for beverage purposes.
(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.056 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Every license issued hereunder shall be revoked for any of the
following causes:
      (1)   Intoxicating liquors are herewith sold or drunk on the premises, or
that persons under the influence of intoxicating liquor are permitted to
frequently be in or remain on the premises;
      (2)   Gambling in any form is permitted in or about the premises;
      (3)   The licensee conducts the place in a manner as to permit the same
to become a public nuisance; and
      (4)   Fights, brawls, or other indecent and immoral practices are
permitted therein to an extent as to break the public peace or disturb the good
order of the community.
   (B)   In any of the foregoing cases the Council of the city shall revoke the
license and give notice of the revocation to the holder.
   (C)   (1)   For the purpose of enforcing these provisions for revocation the
Council may act on its own initiative or on complaint of any resident. When the
revocation is sought the City Clerk shall, at the request of the Council, give
a written notice to the licensee personally, or by leaving the same with his or
her agent or employee at his or her place of business, in which notice shall be
stated the charge made against him or her for which revocation of his or her
license is sought, the time and place at which he or she may appear to defend
against the charges, which time shall be not sooner than three full days from
the serving of the notice.
      (2)   For the hearing, the Council may subpoena witnesses in the same
manner as witnesses are now subpoenaed in criminal cases in District Court. The
hearing need not follow the strict legal requirement of court trials. If, after
the investigation the Council is convinced that the charges have been
sustained, it shall revoke the license. If the Council shall determine that the
license shall be revoked, the City Clerk shall personally notify the licensee,
or his or her agent or employee in charge of his or her place, in writing, and
the license shall be revoked from and after midnight of the day.
(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.057 PREVIOUS REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   No license shall be issued to any person who has been previously licensed to
conduct a billiard room, pool room or bowling alley, whose license shall have
been revoked during the year immediately preceding the time of making an
application, as herein mentioned, nor to any firm or corporation, any member of
which has been licensed to conduct a billiard room, pool room or bowling alley,
whose license has been revoked during the year immediately preceding the time
of the making of the application therefor.
(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.058 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   All billiard rooms, pool rooms and bowling alleys within the city shall be
closed not later than 12 midnight, Eastern Standard Time, of each day and kept
closed until 7:00 a.m. of the following day.
(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.059 WINDOW RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Where there is a window, or windows, in the room or place, at
least the lower one-third part of the window or windows shall be of clear
glass, and shall not be screened or curtained at any time of the day or night,
nor shall there be any article or thing in the rear of the window or windows
its to prevent a full, clear and unobstructed view of the room or place.
      (2)   No enclosed box or stall or private room and no partitions forming
boxes or stalls or private rooms shall be permitted.
      (3)   There shall be no interior door or entrance and the door or other
doors entering the rooms or places shall have therein a section of clear glass
sufficient to afford a clear view of the room or places from the outside.
      (4)   All billiard rooms or pool rooms or bowling alleys shall have a
floor space of at least 400 square feet, and shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary manner.
   (B)   None of these provisions, however, shall be construed to prevent the
maintenance of wash rooms or toilet rooms for proper purposes, or the
maintaining of closets for store purposes exclusively.
(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
118.999
PUBLIC SHOWS, EXHIBITIONS AND AMUSEMENTS
§ 118.070 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.
   No person or persons, company or companies, shall exhibit or maintain in the
city, any circus, menagerie, carnival, play, game or theatrical exhibition, or
give any concert, vocal or instrumental or exhibit any natural or artificial
curiosity, or give a show of any kind for which pay is demanded or received,
without first obtaining a license from the City Clerk of the city, and for any
license granted for any business, purpose or object herein specified there
shall be collected in advance from the person or persons, firm or corporation
receiving the same the following fee.
   (A)   The license fee for a circus or menagerie, or both, where an admission
fee is charged, shall be $150 for the first day upon which an exhibition shall
occur and $100 for each subsequent day.
   (B)   (1)   The license fee for a carnival or open-air exhibition which
consists of or comprises an aggregation of amusements, exhibitions, shows,
games and like amusements, shall be the sum of $25 per day, to be paid in
advance; and, before the granting of a permit for the exhibition or carnival,
the management thereof shall submit to the Director of Public Works of the city
a schedule or list of the amusements, exhibitions, shows, games and like
amusements comprising the carnival or exhibition, and the Director of Public
Works shall examine the same and make investigation thereabout and if satisfied
that the amusement, exhibitions, shows, games and like amusements are proper,
shall endorse the application with his or her approval, but unless the approval
be endorsed upon the application no license for the carnival or open air
exhibition shall be issued by the City Clerk. The payment of the sum of $25, as
aforesaid, shall be held to cover and include the license fee otherwise
chargeable for each amusement, exhibition, show, game and like amusement
operated in connection with the carnival or open air exhibition.
      (2)   Provided, that before any license shall be granted under divisions
(A) or (B) of this section there shall be deposited by the applicant for the
license, with the City Clerk, a cash bond of not more than $500 conditioned
that no damage will be done to the streets, sewers, trees or adjoining
property, and that no dirt, paper, litter or other debris will be permitted to
remain upon the streets or upon any private property by the licensee, and
containing other conditions as the City Clerk may require. The City Clerk shall
fix the amount of the bond up to $500 depending upon the nature and size of the
property equipment of the applicant, the length of haul and other pertinent
facts.
   (C)   The license fee for a zoological garden, permanently located and
established in the city shall be the sum of $25 annually.
   (D)   The license fee for all baseball parks or grounds, where professional
baseball is played, shall be the sum of $25 annually.
   (E)   The license fee for a play or theatrical exhibition, except as
hereinafter specified, shall be the sum of $10 for the first day and $5 for
each subsequent day.
   (F)   The license fee for a concert, vocal or instrumental or operatic
performance, shall be $10 for the first day and $5 for each succeeding day.
   (G)   The license fee for concert, vocal or instrumental or operatic
performances, moving pictures, vaudeville acts, minstrel show or other form of
entertainment given in the open air or in a tent within the limits of the city
shall be $15 a month, the sum payable in advance and the license to be granted
for the term of four months only; provided, that during the performance of any
of the above enumerated entertainments, no articles, souvenirs or prizes shall
be sold, donated or given away for advertising purposes; and provided further,
that during the rendition of any show as above enumerated it shall be unlawful
to advertise, give away or sell any medicine, salve, lineament or other
ingredient for the cure of the ailment of man or beast.
   (H)   The license fee for a museum permanently located and established in
the city shall be the sum of $50 annually in advance.
   (I)   The license fee for a museum temporarily located in the city shall be
the sum of $10 for the first day and $5 for each succeeding day.
   (J)   The license fee for a whirligig, merry-go-round, shooting gallery or
games of like character, permanently located in the city shall be the sum of
$50 annually in advance.
   (K)   The license fee for a whirligig, shooting gallery or games of like
character, temporarily located in the city, shall be the sum of $10 for the
first day and $5 for each succeeding day.
   (L)   The license fee for the exhibition of any natural or artificial
curiosity shall be the sum of $10 for the first day and $5 for each succeeding
day.
   (M)   The license fee for all observation stands shall be the sum of $100
annually, payable in advance.
   (N)   The license fee for roller and ice skating rinks, penny exhibits and
phonographic exhibits, permanently located in the city, shall be the sum of $50
annually, payable in advance.
   (O)   The license fee for roller and ice skating rinks, penny exhibits and
phonographic exhibits, temporarily, located in the city, shall be the sum of
$10 for the first day and $5 for each succeeding day.
   (P)   The license fee for all concert, musical and lecture halls shall be
the sum of $50 annually, payable in advance; provided, that the sum so paid
shall be in lieu of any other sum required to be paid for a license, for any
performance, theatrical, musical or otherwise, that may occur therein.
   (Q)   The license fee for moving picture shows and all shows of a like
character, permanently located with the city, shall be the sum of $25 per show
for shows having a capacity of not more than 500 persons. The license fee for
all shows with a larger seating capacity than 500 persons shall be $25 per
annum plus $5 for each additional 100 seats, or fraction thereof, over 500.
Provided, however, that the maximum license fee for the shows shall be $50 per
annum. All applications for licenses for moving picture shows and all shows of
like character shall specify the number of seats in each show for which a
license is desired and all statements contained in the application shall be
subscribed and sworn by the applicant before a notary public.
   (R)   The license fee for all opera houses and play houses where theatrical,
dramatic and operatic, or so-called vaudeville or burlesque shows are given,
shall be the sum of $100 annually, payable in advance. Provided, that the sum
so paid shall be in lieu of any other sum or sums of money required to be paid
for a license, for any performance, theatrical, musical or otherwise that may
occur therein.
   (S)   The license fee for all amusement parks or amusement places,
maintaining and operating six or more than six kinds or variety of exhibits,
shows or amusements, shall be the sum of $1,000 annually, payable in advance.
   (T)   The license fee for any public entertainment or amusement not already
designated, and for which pay is demanded or received, shall be the sum of $10
for the first day and $5 for each succeeding day.
(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929; Am. Ord. 147, passed 8-29-1935) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.071 CITY CLERK AUTHORIZATION.
   The City Clerk of the city is hereby authorized to issue, to the person or
persons entitled to the same under the provisions of this subchapter, a proper
license for the purposes specified, upon the payment of the amount of the
license fee therefor to the City Treasurer of the city and upon the
continuation of any license fee from day to day. It shall be the duty of the
Chief of Police of the city, or his or her subordinates to see that the proper
license fee for the continuance is paid in advance and a receipt therefor,
countersigned by the City Clerk, delivered to the person properly entitled to
the license.
(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929)
§ 118.072 EXEMPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not extend to any exhibition by the pupils of any
private or public school, or to any musical entertainment given by the members
and for the benefit of any resident musical society, or to any exhibition of
painting, engraving, sculpture of fine art displayed by any citizen of the city
in the course of his or her ordinary business, or to any concert or musical
entertainment, fair, festival or lecture for the benefit of any church or
benevolent object where the entire proceeds of the concert, musical
entertainment, fair, festival or lecture shall be given to the church or other
benevolent object, or to any game of baseball, cricket, lacrosse, football,
tennis or other games or amusements managed and given by any resident
association, club or company where the entire proceeds of the game, amusement,
entertainment or exhibition shall be wholly received and given for the benefit
of the resident association, club or company.
(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929)
§ 118.073 DISORDERLY CONDUCT PROHIBITED.
   No person or persons, firm or corporation receiving a license under this
subchapter shall permit in, or about, his, her, or their, place of amusement or
exhibition any disorderly conduct, or the use of any language inciting
disorderly conduct, or permit the sale, giving away, delivering, drinking, or
use of any beer, wine, malt, or intoxicating liquor or beverage of any
description, or have connected with the place of amusement or exhibition, by
side entrances or otherwise, any bar, saloon, or place where malt or
intoxicating liquors are sold or given away, or permit the place of amusement
or exhibition to become and be a place for the resort of thieves, prostitutes
or other disorderly persons.
(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.074 NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   No licensee shall permit the exhibition or public entertainment for which he
or she has received the license to become a public nuisance, and shall, in the
carrying on of the same, observe ordinances of the city and laws of the state.
Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be sufficient
grounds for the revocation of the license by the City Council.
(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.075 BOND.
   The City Clerk is hereby authorized to issue licenses to the parties and for
the purposes aforesaid upon the person, persons, company or companies executing
a bond to the city in the penal sum of $1,000 with two sufficient sureties,
conditioned for the faithful observance of this subchapter and the Charter and
ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.076 GROUNDS TO REFUSE ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   The City Clerk may refuse to issue licenses when the purpose for which the
license is requested shall be so notoriously indecent, filthy, vile or
blasphemous as to be subversive of public morals and a reproach to the
community; provided, however, that in case the City Clerk of the city shall
refuse to issue a license as hereinbefore provided, the applicant may appeal
from the decision of the City Clerk to the City Council, which may, upon
hearing of the facts, order the license to be issued.
(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929)
§ 118.077 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TEMPORARILY LOCATED. The continuous location and operation of an amusement
or public entertainment at any one place for a period of less than six months.
(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929)
§ 118.078 REVOCATION.
   The City Council may revoke any license granted under this subchapter upon
proof submitted to the City Council of the violation of, or failure to comply
with, the statutes of the state or any ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929)
§ 118.079 LICENSE EXPIRATION.
   All licenses issued under the provisions of this subchapter for amusements
or exhibitions permanently located in the city shall expire on September 15
following the issuance of the license unless sooner revoked by the City Council
for cause.
(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929) Penalty, see §
118.999
PUBLIC DANCE HALL
§ 118.095 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC DANCE HALL. Any room, place or space in which a public dance or
public ball shall be held, or hall or academy in which classes in dancing are
held and instructions in dancing are given for hire, or where admission can be
had by payment of a fee or by the purchase, possession or presentation of a
ticket or token, or in which a charge is made for care of clothing or property,
or where the public generally may gain admission with or without payment of a
fee.
(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928)
§ 118.096 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person or persons, firm or corporation shall hold any public dance or
public ball, or hold classes in dancing, or give instructions in dancing for
hire in any hall or academy in the city until the operation and maintenance of
the hall shall have been licensed according to the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.097 OWNER’S DUTY.
   No owner, proprietor, lessee, manager or other person shall allow any hall
or academy to be used for the purposes stated in §
118.095 without having obtained the license for the purpose from the City
Clerk.
(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.098 RIGHT TO INSPECT.
   Whenever an application shall have been filed with the City Clerk of the
city for a license to operate and maintain a public dance hall, it shall be the
duty of the City Clerk and the Chief of Police, respectively, to make
inspection of the place to be used as a public dance hall and, upon full
compliance with the rules and regulations of the respective departments
relative to the safety, health, convenience and comfort of the public, the City
Clerk shall issue a certificate of inspection and recommendation of permission,
which shall be approved by and the Chief of Police which certificate approved
as aforesaid, shall thereupon bring the matter of application before the City
Council for its approval or rejecting and, if the application shall be
favorably passed upon by the City Council, by resolution duly adopted, the City
Clerk shall forthwith issue the license to operate the public dance hall upon
the payment to the City Treasurer by the applicant of the license fee
hereinafter provided for.
(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.099 PROPER VENTILATION, TOILETS AND DRINKING FOUNTAINS REQUIRED.
   It shall be the duty of the health officer, before approving of the
certificate of inspection provided for in §
118.098, to require the hall or academy to have proper provisions made for
ventilation and to be supplied with sufficient toilet conveniences and with a
sanitary drinking fountain or fountains, the number to be regulated by the
Board of Health.
(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.100 REFUSAL TO GRANT LICENSE.
   The City Council may refuse to grant a license to any applicant and may
revoke any license already issued to any owner, proprietor, lessee or manager
of any public dance upon proof submitted to the City Council of the violation
by the applicant or owner, proprietor, lessee or manager of any public dance
hall, of any statute of the state for which violation a fine may be imposed or
a sentence of imprisonment in the state prison, the Wayne County Jail may
attach or be imposed, and the Council may revoke any license already issued to
any owner, proprietor, lessee or manager of any public dance hall upon proof
submitted to the City Council of the violation of any regulation of the city
regulating, controlling or in any way relating to health, sanitation, fire
protection or the public peace, or for the violation of any of the provisions
of this subchapter.
(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.101 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   Any proprietor, lessee, owner or manager operating a public dance hall or
academy under the provisions of this subchapter, and in whose place there shall
be held any public dance of any character, kind or description, shall at all
times open the dance hall for inspection by the Chief of Police or any member
of the Police Department. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized, and it is
hereby made his or her duty, to inspect or cause to inspected, all licensed
dance halls.
(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.102 DISORDERLY CONDUCT PROHIBITED.
   No owner, proprietor, lessee or manager of any public dance hall receiving a
license under this subchapter shall permit any disorderly conduct or the use of
any immoral, profane or indecent language, or permit the hall or place of
amusement to become a place of resort of thieves, prostitutes or other
disorderly persons.
(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928; Am. Ord. 154, passed 12-17-1935) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.103 MARATHON DANCING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any proprietor, lessee, operator or manager of any
dance hall or academy, or any other place of public assemblage, or any other
person, firm or corporation for gain or profit to permit marathon and/or
endurance dancing, running, walking or any other endurance contest, in any
public dance hall or academy or any other place of public assemblage in the
city.
(Ord. 127, passed 6-28-1934) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.104 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No public dance hall shall be kept open, nor shall any dancing or amusement
of any kind be allowed therein between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Eastern Standard Time.
(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928; Am. Ord. 154, passed 12-17-1935) Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.105 LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee for all public dance halls shall be the sum of $1 and the
license when issued shall entitle the holder thereof to operate and maintain a
public dance hall until May 20 next following the issuance of the license,
unless sooner revoked by the City Council for cause.
(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
118.999
GAMING APPARATUS
§ 118.120 SEARCH WARRANTS.
   The Chief of Police or his or her designee, may, upon complaint made under
oath, request a search warrant, when satisfied that there is a reasonable cause
to search for and seize any gaming apparatus or implements used or kept and
provided to be used in unlawful gaming in any gaming house or place resorted to
for unlawful gaming, or any articles, equipment, furniture, loud speakers and
amplifying apparatus, adding machines, calculators, money changers and boxes
and money found therein or in or on gambling apparatus or material used in
connection with or promotion of gambling or gambling places.
(Ord. 189, passed 5-27-1943)
§ 118.121 TABULATION OF ALL SEIZED PROPERTY.
   When any member of the Police Department, or any other officer, in the
execution of a search warrant issued under the provisions of this subchapter
shall find any stolen or embezzled property or shall seize any of the other
things for which a search warrant is allowed, the officer shall make a complete
and accurate tabulation of all property and money so seized and shall file a
copy of the tabulation forthwith with the court or magistrate and the property
and money so seized shall be suppressed by order of the court until the final
disposition of the case, unless otherwise ordered.
(Ord. 189, passed 5-27-1943)
§ 118.122 SEIZED PROPERTY TO BE STORED.
   All the property and things so seized under this subchapter shall be safely
kept by the direction of the court or magistrate, issuing a search warrant so
long as shall be necessary for the purpose of being produced or used as
evidence during any trial.
(Ord. 189, passed 5-27-1943)
§ 118.123 PROPERTY TO BE RESTORED TO OWNER.
   All stolen or embezzled property shall be restored to the owner thereof as
soon as may be afterwards, and all other things seized by virtue of any warrant
shall be, upon conviction, destroyed under the discretion of the court,
providing, however, that pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 122, being
M.C.L.A. § 205.13, as amended by Public Act 615 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §
445.2001, any monies and other useful property lawfully seized and not stolen
or embezzled, shall be, upon conviction, turned over to the city if the same
was seized by its officers under a search warrant duly issued, and all monies
shall be credited to the General Fund of the city.
(Ord. 189, passed 5-27-1943)
§ 118.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.
   (B)   Mechanical games and music vending machines. Any person convicted of
violating any of the provisions of §§
118.001 through
118.036 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 376, passed 4-26-1977)
   (C)   Billiard rooms, pool halls and bowling alleys. Every person, firm or
corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of §§
118.050 through
118.059 shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $100 and costs of
prosecution and, in default of the payment of the fine and costs, the court may
make a further sentence that the offender be imprisoned in the Wayne County
Jail, or another place of imprisonment as may be hereafter established by the
City Council as a place of confinement, until the fine and costs be paid, but
not longer than 90 days, or, in the discretion of the court having jurisdiction
of the cause, both a fine and imprisonment may be imposed. In the event that
there shall be imposed upon any corporation any fine and costs, or either, or
both, for the violation of any of the terms of §§
118.050 through
118.059, then it shall be lawful to collect the fine and costs, or either, or
both, in an action of assumpsit before any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 70, passed 8-2-1928)
   (D)   Public shows, exhibitions and amusements. In addition to any other
penalty or punishment hereinbefore provided, every person or persons, firm or
corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of §§
118.070 through
118.079 shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $100 and costs of
prosecution and, in default of the payment of the fine and costs, the court may
make a further sentence that the offender be imprisoned in the Wayne County
Jail, or another place of imprisonment as may be hereafter established by the
City Council as a place of confinement, until the fine and costs be paid, but
not longer than 90 days, or, in the discretion of the court having jurisdiction
of the cause, both a fine and imprisonment may be imposed. In the event that
there shall be imposed upon any corporation any fine and costs, or either, or
both, for the violation of any of the terms of §§
118.070 through
118.079, then it shall be lawful to collect the fine and costs, or either, or
both, in an action of assumpsit before any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 63, passed 1-22-1929)
   (E)   Public dance hall. Each and every violation, or failure to comply with
the provisions of §§
118.095 through
118.105 shall be cause for revocation of the license issued hereunder and shall
also be punished by a fine of not to exceed $100 and costs of prosecution and,
in default of the payment of the fine and costs, the court may make a further
sentence that the offender be imprisoned in the Wayne County Jail, or another
place of imprisonment as may be hereafter established by the City Council as a
place of confinement, until the fine and a costs be paid, but not longer than
90 days, or, in the discretion of the court having jurisdiction of the cause,
both a fine and imprisonment may be imposed, in the event that there shall be
imposed upon any corporation any fine and costs, or either, or both, for the
violation of any of the terms of §§
118.095 through
118.105, then it shall be lawful to collect the fine and costs, or either, or
both, in an action of assumpsit before any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 56, passed 8-2-1928)
CHAPTER 119: RESTAURANTS AND FOOD-RELATED SERVICES AND PRODUCTS
Section
Restaurants
   
119.001   License required
   
119.002   License fee
   
119.003   Inspections
   
119.004   Building and equipment to conform
   
119.005   Conduct of business
   
119.006   Hours of operation
   
119.007   Fees to be deposited in General Fund
   
119.008   Revocation or suspension of license
Public Markets
   
119.020   Definitions
   
119.021   Public market; license required
   
119.022   Producer or huckster; license required
   
119.023   Restriction for huckster
   
119.024   Articles allowed to be sold in public markets
   
119.025   Inspection
   
119.026   Products unlawful to sell
   
119.027   Garbage and rubbish receptacles
   
119.028   Sanitation requirements
   
119.029   Unlawful to rent to unlicensed person
   
119.030   Revocation of license
   
119.031   Licenses and receipts to be displayed and furnished
   
119.032   Health officer supervision
   
119.033   Expiration of license
   
119.034   Building and equipment requirements
   
119.035   Hours of operation
Sale of Tainted Meat, Vegetables and Other Foodstuffs
   
119.050   Prohibiting the sale or offering for sale, or having in possession
for the purpose of selling or offering for sale, of any decayed, tainted or
spoiled meats, vegetables or other food stuffs
   
119.051   Violation
   
119.052   Keeping tainted food near good food prima facie evidence of violation
   
119.053   Inspection
Sale of Fresh or Smoked Meat
   
119.065   License required
   
119.066   City Clerk authorization
   
119.067   Restricting handling by public
   
119.068   Sanitary conditions required
   
119.069   Sanitary transport of goods
   
119.070   Meat from unfit animals
   
119.071   Meat from calf less than four weeks old
   
119.072   Meat purchased from source other than a United States inspected
establishment
   
119.073   Personal hygiene
   
119.074   Sanitary refrigerators, meat counters, blocks, tools, utensils and
apparatus required
   
119.075   Forfeiture of license
Sale of Food to the Public in Bulk
   
119.090   Permanent structure or building required
   
119.091   Definition
   
119.092   City Clerk authorization
   
119.093   Certificate from Health Department
   
119.094   Application for certificate
   
119.095   Refusal to issue or revocation of license
   
119.096   Violation
   
119.097   Garbage and refuse
   
119.098   License required for each business
   
119.099   Compliance required
Sale of Food Supplies and Food Product at Retail
   
119.110   License required
   
119.111   Application for license
   
119.112   Application and City Clerk
   
119.113   License fee
   
119.114   Parties covered by these provisions
Poultry
   
119.155   License required
   
119.156   Fee
   
119.157   Definitions
   
119.158   Diseased poultry
   
119.159   Conformance to sanitary requirements
   
119.160   Regulations governing poultry slaughterhouses
   
119.161   Floor space
   
119.162   Plans and specifications
   
119.163   Construction and maintenance of poultry slaughterhouse
   
119.164   Permit
   
119.165   Maintenance
   
119.166   Structural changes
   
119.167   Deviation from subchapter
   
119.168   Permits; renewal annually
   
119.169   New permit
   
119.170   Basements
   
119.171   Not applicable to butcher
   
119.172   Enforcement
Bakery
   
119.185   License required
   
119.186   Application
   
119.187   Certificate required
   
119.188   Sanitary conditions required
Food Handler Card
   
119.200   Definitions
   
119.201   Card required
   
119.202   Application
   
119.203   Annual fee
Mobile Food Vehicle Vendors
   
119.220   Short title
   
119.221   Definitions
   
119.222   Scope
   
119.223   License required
   
119.224   Regulations
   
119.225   Enforcement
 
   
119.999   Penalty
RESTAURANTS
§ 119.001 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CLASS A RESTAURANT, BUFFET, LUNCH ROOM, LUNCH COUNTER, PUBLIC DINING HALL
OR PLACE WHERE VICTUALS AND FOOD ARE PREPARED OR MANUFACTURED. Every
restaurant, buffet, lunch room, lunch counter, dining room of hotel and every
other place where food is served, sold or consumed on the premises and where
beer, whiskey, wine, or other spiritous and/or intoxicating liquor is served
with the food and shall include restaurants as defined in Public Act 8 of 1933
(Extra Session), § 1, being M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1801 through 426.1815.
      CLASS D RESTAURANT, BUFFET, LUNCH ROOM, LUNCH COUNTER, PUBLIC DINING HALL
OR PLACE WHERE VICTUALS AND FOOD ARE PREPARED OR MANUFACTURED. Every
restaurant, buffet, lunch room, lunch counter, dining room of hotel and every
other place where food is served, sold or consumed on the premises and where no
beer, whiskey, wine or other spiritous and/or intoxicating liquor is served,
sold or consumed in the premises.
   (B)   License for Class A establishment required. No person, firm or
corporation shall keep, maintain or operate a Class A restaurant, buffet, lunch
room, lunch counter, public dining hall or place where the victuals and food
are prepared or manufactured in the city without first having obtained a
license from the City Clerk.
   (C)    License for Class D establishment required. No person, firm or
corporation shall keep, maintain or operate a Class D restaurant, buffet, lunch
room, lunch counter, public dining hall or place where the victuals and food
are prepared or manufactured in the city, without first having obtained a
license from the City Clerk.
(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923; Am. Ord. 121, passed 12-28-1933; Am. Ord. 138,
passed 2-7-1935) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.002 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The license fee for businesses herein designated as Class A shall be
$10. The license fee for businesses herein designated as Class D shall be $5.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall cover but one
place of business, which shall be stated therein, and shall not be assignable
except by resolution of the City Council. Every license shall expire on May 1
of each year, unless sooner revoked by the City Council for cause. In case the
time intervening between the date of application and the date of expiration
shall be three months or less, the City Treasurer shall collect only one-half
of the license fee herein prescribed.
   (B)    Application for the license shall be made in writing and shall be
upon printed blanks to be furnished by the City Clerk, and shall set forth,
among other things, the place where the business is to be conducted, the name
of the person, firm or corporation by whom the business is to be carried on and
the place of residence of the applicant. The application shall also contain an
agreement by which the applicant consents and agrees that the inspectors of the
Health Department, Fire Department and Police Department may enter and inspect
any part of the premises used in conducting the business or manufacturing any
victuals or food products for the purpose of analysis. Applications for Class A
restaurants, buffets, lunch rooms, lunch counters, public dining halls or
places where the victuals and food are prepared or manufactured in the city,
shall also contain an agreement that the applicant will abide by and comply
with the laws of the Untied States and the state relative to the sale of
alcoholic liquors and the rules and regulations of the Liquor Commission of the
state.
   (C)   No license shall be granted to conduct a Class A restaurant, buffet,
lunch room, lunch counter, public dining hall or place where the victuals and
food are prepared or manufactured within a radius of 250 feet of any church or
school unless written permission therefor, signed by the priest or minister of
the church or the superintendent of the school, is submitted with the
application.
   (D)   No license shall be granted to conduct a Class A restaurant, buffet,
lunch room, lunch counter, public dining hall or place where the victuals and
food are prepared or manufactured to any person, firm or corporation who is
delinquent in the payment of personal taxes.
(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923; Am. Ord. 121, passed 12-28-1933; Am. Ord. 138,
passed 2-7-1935; Am. Ord. 156, passed 3-26-1936) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.003 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Before a license can be issued by the City Clerk on the application
for either a Class A or Class D restaurant, buffet, lunch room, lunch counter,
public dining hall or place where victuals and food are prepared or
manufactured in the city, the application shall be presented to the health
officer and the Chief of the Fire Department as hereinafter provided in this
subchapter.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall submit to the City Council the application
together with the report of the Chief of Police, health officer and the Chief
of the Fire Department thereon. If the Council shall find, as a result of its
investigation and the reports made to it by the officers hereinbefore
mentioned, that the applicant is of good moral character and is a suitable
person to conduct and operate a restaurant, buffer, lunch room, lunch counter,
public dining hall or place where victuals and food are prepared or
manufactured and, in cases where application is made for a license to conduct
the business herein designated as Class A, that the applicant is a citizen of
the United States, it shall direct the City Clerk to issue a license therefor,
and thereupon, the City Clerk shall issue a license to conduct and operate the
business upon the payment of the license fee herein prescribed.
(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.004 BUILDING AND EQUIPMENT TO CONFORM.
   Before the health officer shall approve the application set forth in §
119.001, he or she shall be satisfied that the building and equipment for the
business conforms to the following rules.
   (A)   Floors. Tight and solid, easily washed.
   (B)   Walls and ceilings. Constructed of material that will make tight and
smooth surface easily cleanable.
   (C)   Building. To be properly lighted and ventilated.
   (D)   Equipment.
      (1)   Water running, hot and cold, connected to a three compartment metal
sink, except if a dish washing machine is provided which has a rinse of 180°F
of water.
         (a)   All multi-service, eating and drinking utensils including all
dishes, knives, forks, spoons, cups, glasses and the like, shall be thoroughly
cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process.
         (b)   All multi-use utensils, including pots, pans, urns, skillets and
the like, used in preparation of food and drink shall be thoroughly cleaned and
effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process immediately following
the day’s operation.
      (2)   Ice box, proper sewerage connections for the ice box and sink.
      (3)   Adequate toilet facilities for men and women.
      (4)   Garbage containers with covers.
   (E)   Basements. Not recognized unless built for handling and preparing
foods.
   (F)   Living or sleeping rooms. No living or sleeping rooms in direct
connection with any part of the restaurant will be tolerated.
(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923; Am. Ord. 271, passed 7-3-1962) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.005 CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   No licensee shall permit any disorderly conduct in his or her place of
business, nor shall any licensee permit his or her place of business to become
a resort or meeting place for thieves, prostitutes or other disorderly persons,
nor shall any licensee permit any gambling in his or her place of business or
permit the placing or use of any gambling apparatus or paraphernalia about his
or her premises, nor shall any licensee permit any lewd, obscene or immoral
exhibition or entertainment on his or her premises or any other conduct likely
to corrupt the morals of the youth.
   (B)   Licensees providing entertainment, amusement, exhibitions, music or
places for dancing shall comply with and abide by all rules and regulations of
the Police Department and other proper authorities relating thereto.
   (C)   All licensees operating under Class A licenses may open their places
of business at 5:00 a.m. and remain open not later than 2:00 a.m. of the
following morning and no longer.
   (D)   No licensee operating under a Class A license shall sell, procure for,
or furnish, directly or indirectly, to any minor under the age of 21 years, any
beer, wine, whiskey or other intoxicating liquor, nor permit any minor to
loiter in or about his or her place of business.
   (E)   No licensee operating under a Class A license shall employ any person
under the age of 21 years to do any work in connection with that place of
business.
(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923; Am. Ord. 121, passed 12-28-1933) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.006 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Whenever the business shall be carried on in conjunction with some other
form of business which, under a provision of the regulations regulating the
same, shall be required to close at a particular hour or remain closed until a
particular time, then the business herein proposed to be licensed shall be
closed according to the provisions of the regulations covering the business
operated in connection therewith.
(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.007 FEES TO BE DEPOSITED IN GENERAL FUND.
   The money derived from the issuance of the licenses shall be turned over to
the City Treasurer and deposited in the General Fund of the city.
(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.008 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The City Council may, at any time, for sufficient cause proved to the
satisfaction of the Council after notice and hearing, suspend or revoke any
license granted under the provisions of this subchapter and order the business
so licensed to be closed.
   (B)   After the notice closing the business, no business of the nature
herein proposed to be licensed shall be conducted or carried on in the place
until a new license shall have been issued under the provisions of this
subchapter and the issuance thereof approved by the City Council or the
suspension imposed by the City Council be lifted.
(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923) Penalty, see §
119.999
PUBLIC MARKETS
§ 119.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HUCKSTER. Any person who sells food or other products not produced,
manufactured or made by himself or herself, which he or she has purchased for
resale, by virtue of or which have been consigned for him or her for sale.
   MARKET MASTER. Any person who, by virtue of owning, leasing, or controlling
vacant property, rents or leases, stands, stalls or places the same thereon for
the buying and selling of articles of food.
   PERSON. All natural persons, firms, partnerships, corporations and all
associations of natural persons, incorporated or unincorporated, whether acting
by themselves or by a servant, agent or employee. All PERSONS who violate any
of the provisions of this subchapter, whether as owner or as agent, servant or
employee, shall, except as herein otherwise provided, be equally liable as
principals.
   PRODUCER. Any person who vends in a public market, articles or products
grown or produced by him, her or any member of his or her family residing with
him or her upon property owned, rented or controlled by him or her. It shall
include any person who represents exclusively a non-profit association of
producers of farm products which markets the products produced by its members.
   PUBLIC MARKET or MARKET PLACE. A place on vacant property used for buying
and selling farm products and the accommodation of producers’ and hucksters’
wagons in which the products are brought to or taken from the place.
(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930; Am. Ord. 153, passed 11-29-1935; Am. Ord. 158,
passed 10-6-1936)
§ 119.021 PUBLIC MARKET; LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall establish or conduct a public market or market place as
herein defined within the corporate limits of the city without first having
obtained a license from the City Clerk. Application for the license shall be
made in writing to the City Clerk and shall be upon printed blanks to be
furnished by the City Clerk, which shall set forth, among other things, the
place where the business is to be conducted, the name, age, residence and
previous experience of the applicant. If the applicant be a partnership, the
names and addresses of all partners and the name under which the business is to
be conducted shall be given. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and
addresses of all the officers and the name of the corporation shall be given.
The application shall, before the issuance of the license, be referred to the
health officer, who shall make an investigation and recommendation to the City
Clerk within a reasonable time after the filing of the application. If the City
Clerk is satisfied that the applicant is a suitable person to conduct a public
market or market place, has never been convicted of a felony, that the proposed
public market or market place is equipped with one automatic dial scale of 300
pounds capacity and one computing scale of 100 pounds capacity, sealed by the
Sealer of Weights and Measures (the scales to be located for the convenience of
customers in checking the weights of purchases), then he or she shall grant the
license upon the payment to the City Treasurer of a license fee in the amount
of $200 and the filing with the City Clerk of a surety company bond in the
amount of $1,000 conditioned for the faithful observance of the terms of this
subchapter or any ordinance amendatory thereof or supplemental hereto.
Provided, however, that no license shall be granted to any person, firm,
partnership or corporation to operate or conduct a public market or market
place within a radius of 2,000 feet of any other market or market place
licensed under the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930; Am. Ord. 105, passed 8-18-1932; Am. Ord. 150,
passed 10-24-1935) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.022 PRODUCER OR HUCKSTER; LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No producer or huckster shall engage in his or her business in a
public market or market place within the corporate limits of the city without
first having obtained a licence therefor from the City Clerk. Application for a
producer’s license to engage in business in a public market or market place
shall be made in writing upon blanks furnished by the City Clerk, giving the
name, age, address and previous experience of the applicant, the names and
kinds of the products he or she produces and intends to sell at the market, the
place where he or she raises the products, the names of all persons in his or
her employ who shall appear at the market to sell the products the names of all
persons employed by him or her at the premises where he or she raises the
products and any other information as may be deemed necessary for the
protection of the public welfare and the proper enforcement of this subchapter,
together with an agreement that, if license is granted to him or her, he or she
will not allow or permit anyone to sell his or her products in a market other
than the members of his or her immediate family or the persons actually
employed by him or her in the raising of produce and that a violation of the
agreement shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of his or her license.
The City Clerk may require all information to be sworn to be the applicant. The
application shall be referred to the health officer who shall make an
investigation and recommendation to the City Clerk within a reasonable time
after receiving the application. If the City Clerk if satisfied that the
applicant is a suitable person to engage in the business, has not been
convicted of any felony, or the offense of short weight, or been barred from
any public market, he or she shall grant the license and issue the same upon
the payment to the City Treasurer of the license fee of $1.
   (B)   Application for huckster’s license shall be made in writing upon
blanks furnished by the City Clerk, giving the name, age, address and previous
experience of the applicant, the names and kinds of the products he or she
intends to sell at the market and any other information as may be deemed
necessary for the protection of the public welfare and the proper enforcement
of this subchapter. The City Clerk may require all information to be sworn to
by the applicant. The application shall be referred to the health officer who
shall make an investigation and recommendation to the City Clerk within a
reasonable time after receiving the application. If the City Clerk is satisfied
that the applicant is a suitable person to engage in the business, has not been
convicted of a felony, or the offense of short weight, or been barred from any
public market, he or she shall grant a license and issue the same upon the
payment to the City Treasurer of the license fee of $25.
   (C)   At the time of the issuance of the license, the City Clerk shall give
to each producer or huckster a suitable plate to be displayed by the licensee
in a conspicuous place at the stall where he or she engages in his or her
business in the public market. No producer or huckster shall operate more than
one stall under one license.
(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930; Am. Ord. 105, passed 8-18-1932) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.023 RESTRICTION FOR HUCKSTER.
   No huckster who has been licensed to peddle on the streets and alleys of the
city shall do business within 500 feet of any public market. The huckster shall
not do business in any public market in the city unless he or she first obtains
the license required by this subchapter. It shall be unlawful for any producer
to sell his or her products on the streets, alleys or public places of the city
without first obtaining a license therefor.
(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.024 ARTICLES ALLOWED TO BE SOLD IN PUBLIC MARKETS.
   (A)   The following articles are allowed to be sold in public markets or
market places: any article of food or food products of any nature whatsoever,
provided that the handling, sale and storage of same complies with all sanitary
regulations of the Health Department and the regulations of the city. It shall
be unlawful to sell, display, expose or offer for sale any other articles than
food or food products in a public market, or to sell, display, expose or offer
for sale, or demonstrate or solicit patronage for any business, merchandise,
goods or real estate.
   (B)   The term FOOD as used herein, shall include all articles used for
food, drink, confectionery or condiment intended to be eaten or drank by man or
other animals, whether simple, mixed or compound.
(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930; Am. Ord. 126, passed 7-3-1934) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.025 INSPECTION.
   All articles of food in a public market shall be subject to the inspection
of the health officer at all reasonable times.
(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.026 PRODUCTS UNLAWFUL TO SELL.
   It shall be unlawful to sell, offer or expose for sale in any public market
any adulterated, bad, diseased, impure or unwholesome articles of food or food
products. It shall be the duty of the market master to prevent the display of
those articles.
(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.027 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH RECEPTACLES.
   The market master shall furnish suitable garbage and rubbish receptacles of
a number and type required and approved by the health officer of the city. It
shall be his or her duty to cause producers and hucksters to deposit all
garbage and rubbish in the receptacles.
(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.028 SANITATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Producers and hucksters are hereby required to thoroughly clean their
stalls, stands or places after market hours and before leaving the same. No
person shall deposit vegetable refuse or other garbage, broken crates, boxes,
barrels or pieces thereof, paper or other rubbish in any place in a public
market except in the proper permanent concrete or iron or steel receptacles
which shall be erected by the market master. It shall be unlawful to burn any
garbage or rubbish in any public market.
(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.029 UNLAWFUL TO RENT TO UNLICENSED PERSON.
   It shall be unlawful for a market master to rent or allow the use of any
stall stand or place in any public market or market place to any person who is
not licensed under the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.030 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   A violation of the provisions of this subchapter, a conviction of the charge
of having violated any other ordinance of the city, repeated verified
complaints against any producer or huckster who sells in a public market,
giving reasonable conclusive evidence that the person has practiced deception
in his or her dealings in the market by displaying or selling his or her
produce so packed and faced as to misrepresent the average quality or condition
of the produce in the package, or by knowingly giving false information
regarding the origin, variety, quality, condition or value of the products
which he or she sells, or by similar sharp practices, shall, in addition to any
other penalties which may be inflicted, be cause for the City Council to bar
the person from the privileges and grounds of the public markets for a period
of time as may be deemed advisable by the Council and to revoke the license
issued to the person. The action shall be preceded by a hearing before the City
Council at which the person involved shall have an opportunity to fully present
his or her defense against the charges made against him or her. It shall be
unlawful for the market master to permit any person barred as aforesaid by the
City Council to occupy any place in or do business in a public market.
(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.031 LICENSES AND RECEIPTS TO BE DISPLAYED AND FURNISHED.
   All producers and hucksters shall display their licenses and furnish signed
receipts for goods purchased upon request. Stalls, stands or places occupied by
hucksters in a public market shall be plainly designated as that by appropriate
signs furnished by the market master and approved by the health officer or City
Manager’s designee.
(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.032 HEALTH OFFICER SUPERVISION.
   Public markets and market places shall be under the supervision of the
health officer of the city or any officer so authorized by the City Manager.
(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930)
§ 119.033 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on May 30 each year unless sooner
revoked by the City Council for cause. No license shall be issued for less than
one year, nor shall any license be assigned or transferred to any other person.
(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.034 BUILDING AND EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Before the health officer or City Manager’s designee shall approve the
application for a public market or market place, he or she shall be satisfied
that the building and equipment for the business conform to the following
rules.
   (A)   Floor. Tight and solid, constructed of concrete or similar substance,
easily washed and flushed.
   (B)   Garbage and rubbish receptacles. Of a number and type required by the
health officer with covers.
   (C)   Equipment. Permanent roof over dressed meat, fish and poultry. Cases
and counters containing meat, fish and poultry to be protected by partitions of
glass, wood or metal so erected as to keep the same in a cleanly and sanitary
manner to meet the approval of the food inspector of the city, the meat, fish
and poultry to be kept and displayed so that it shall not be exposed to the
elements.
   (D)   Drainage facilities. To be approved by the health officer or City
Manager’s designee.
   (E)   Adequate toilet facilities. For men and women.
(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.035 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Public markets and market places licensed under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be closed at 6:00 p.m. each day, with the exception of
Thursday of each week, and kept closed until 4:00 a.m. of the following day; on
Thursday of each week the public markets and market places shall be closed at
8:00 p.m. and kept closed until 4:00 a.m. of the following day.
   (B)   Provided, however, that the markets and market places shall be closed
all day on the first day of each week, commonly called Sunday.
   (C)   After the closing of the public markets and market places, it shall be
the duty of the market master to see that the place is thoroughly cleaned and
the floors flushed.
(Ord. 91, passed 7-22-1930; Am. Ord. 105, passed 8-18-1932) Penalty, see §
119.999
SALE OF TAINTED MEAT, VEGETABLES AND OTHER FOODSTUFFS
§ 119.050 PROHIBITING THE SALE OR OFFERING FOR SALE, OR HAVING IN POSSESSION
FOR THE PURPOSE OF SELLING OR OFFERING FOR SALE, OF ANY DECAYED, TAINTED OR
SPOILED MEATS, VEGETABLES OR OTHER FOOD STUFFS.
   No person or firm or corporation shall sell, offer for sale, or have in
possession for the purpose of selling or offering for sale, any decayed,
tainted or spoiled meat, vegetables or food stuffs of any kind, within the
city.
(Ord. 60, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.051 VIOLATION.
   Each and every person who shall sell, offer for sale, or have in possession
for the purpose of selling or offering for sale, any decayed, tainted or
spoiled meat, vegetables, food stuffs of any kind within the city, either as
principal, officer, agent or employee shall be deemed to be violating the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 60, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.052 KEEPING TAINTED FOOD NEAR GOOD FOOD PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF
VIOLATION.
   The having or keeping of any decayed, tainted or spoiled meat, vegetables or
food stuffs of any kind in any refrigerator, ice box or case, wherein are
usually kept good meat, vegetables or other food stuffs to be sold or offered
for sale in the city, shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the violation of
terms of this subchapter.
(Ord. 60, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.053 INSPECTION.
   It shall be the duty of the health officer and food inspector of the city or
City Manager’s designee to investigate the premises in every case where there
is reasonable ground to believe that decayed, tainted or spoiled meat,
vegetables or food stuffs of any kind are being sold, offered for sale, or had
in the possession for the purpose of offering for sale, and for that purpose
the officers shall have the right at reasonable hours to enter the premises of
any store, meat market, butcher shop, restaurants or lunch room where meat,
vegetables or any other food stuffs whatsoever are publicly or offered for
sale.
(Ord. 60, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
119.999
SALE OF FRESH OR SMOKED MEAT
§ 119.065 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person or persons, firm or corporation shall, own, operate, or conduct
any business consisting, wholly or in part of the sale of fresh or smoked meats
at retail within the city, without first securing from the Clerk a license
therefor, as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.066 CITY CLERK AUTHORIZATION.
   The City Clerk of the city is hereby authorized and directed to issue
license to any person or persons, firm or corporation to own, operate, or
conduct within the city a business consisting wholly or in part of the sale of
fresh or smoked meats at retail upon filing with the Clerk a bond, to be
approved by the City Council, in the sum of $100, conditioned upon the faithful
compliance by the licensee with all the provisions of the state laws now or
hereafter enacted relating to the business of selling fresh or smoked meats at
retail and all ordinances, or parts of ordinances, of the city now in effect or
which may be hereafter adopted relating in any way to the business of selling
fruit or smoked meats at retail within the city. Before the license shall be
issued there shall be paid to the City Treasurer the license fee of $1. The
license when issued shall entitle the licensee to conduct business until April
1 next following the issuance of the license, unless revoked sooner by the City
Council for cause.
(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.067 RESTRICTING HANDLING BY PUBLIC.
   No fresh or smoked meats shall be exposed for sale upon any counter, block
or slab, in any meat market, butcher shop, store, stall or booth in which fresh
or smoked meats are sold at retail in the city in a manner as to permit
handling by the general public, but shall be protected by partitions of glass,
wood or metal, so erected as to keep the same in a clean and sanitary manner to
meet the approval of the food inspector.
(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.068 SANITARY CONDITIONS REQUIRED.
   Every meat market, butcher shop, store, stall or booth in the city in which
fresh or smoked meats are sold at retail shall be kept in a neat, orderly,
clean and sanitary condition, subject at all reasonable hours to inspection by
the proper officials of the city.
(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.069 SANITARY TRANSPORT OF GOODS.
   All fresh or smoked meats carried or transported to, or from, any meat
market, butcher shop, store, stall or booth, in the city, where fresh or smoked
meats are sold at retail shall be so carried and transported only in vehicles
that are kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and all fresh meats carried
therein, shall at all times, be kept clean and protected by proper coverings
from dust, flies and filth.
(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.070 MEAT FROM UNFIT ANIMALS.
   No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale, at retail, or barter or
trade, the meat of any animal which is in any way crippled, diseased, emaciated
or otherwise unfit for human food.
(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.071 MEAT FROM CALF LESS THAN FOUR WEEKS OLD.
   No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale at retail, or barter or
trade, the meat of any calf less than four weeks old.
(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.072 MEAT PURCHASED FROM SOURCE OTHER THAN A UNITED STATES INSPECTED
ESTABLISHMENT.
   Every person, firm or corporation licensed under the provisions of this
subchapter shall report to the food inspector of the city, within 24 hours
thereafter, the matter of the purchase of any fresh meat or meat food products
purchased from any other source than from a United States inspected
establishment or a slaughtering or meat food product manufacturing
establishment, licensed by either the Detroit Board of Health or the City
Council; the report shall give the name and address of the persons from whom
the meat or meat products, are purchased, together with a statement and
description of the articles comprising the purchase.
(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.073 PERSONAL HYGIENE.
   Each and every person handling fresh meats at retail, either as owner,
butcher, clerk or employee, in any meat market, butcher shop, store, stall or
booth, in the city, shall at all times keep himself or herself and all parts of
his or her clothing in a clean and sanitary condition, and no person who shall
be affected with any vile, contagious diseases shall be at any time permitted
to handle or sell any fresh meats at retail within the city.
(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.074 SANITARY REFRIGERATORS, MEAT COUNTERS, BLOCKS, TOOLS, UTENSILS AND
APPARATUS REQUIRED.
   All ice boxes, refrigerators, meat counters, blocks, tools, utensils and
apparatus used in connection with any business of selling fresh meats at retail
within the city shall be kept in a neat, clean and sanitary condition.
(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.075 FORFEITURE OF LICENSE.
    Any person or persons, firm or corporation, selling fresh or smoked meats
at retail within the city who, or which, shall be convicted of the violation of
any of the terms of this subchapter shall, in addition to all other penalties
prescribed by law or ordinance, as punishment for the violation, be liable to
forfeiture of license granted under the provisions of this subchapter, upon
proper action by the City Council.
(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928) Penalty, see §
119.999
SALE OF FOOD TO THE PUBLIC IN BULK
§ 119.090 PERMANENT STRUCTURE OR BUILDING REQUIRED.
   No person or persons, firm, partnership or corporation shall, own, operate
or cause to be operated within the city, any business conducted for the purpose
of selling articles of food unless the business is operated in a permanent
structure or building meeting the requirements of the Building Code, without
first obtaining a license therefore from the Clerk and complying with the terms
of this subchapter.
(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.091 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   STORE, SHOP AND PLACE OF BUSINESS, WHERE FOOD IS SOLD TO THE PUBLIC. Shall
not be deemed to include restaurants or meat markets, nor the wagons or
vehicles used by hucksters or peddlers or parks primarily used for amusement
purposes, or markets.
(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932)
§ 119.092 CITY CLERK AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   The City Clerk is hereby authorized to grant a license to any person
of good character, or to any partnership or corporation, to engage in the
business of operating or conducting a store, shop or other place of business
for the sale of food to the public in bulk upon receiving from the applicant
the proper certificate from the Health Department as hereinafter provided, and
upon payment to the City Treasurer of the sum of $1 as a license fee.
   (B)   The license shall cover but one place of business, which shall be
stated therein. Provided, that the license fees shall not be in lieu of the
license fees required to be paid under the provisions of the regulations of the
city relative to the sale of baked goods or any other specific food products
for the sale of which regulations are now in effect or may be hereafter adopted
providing for the license of the same.
   (C)   Every license shall expire on December 31 of each year.
(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932; Am. Ord. 111, passed 5-2-1933)
§ 119.093 CERTIFICATE FROM HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
   Before the City Clerk shall issue any license provided for in §
119.090, the applicant shall furnish him or her a certificate from the Health
Department stating that the establishment where applicant conducts, or intends
to conduct, the business is a proper place in which to conduct the business.
(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932)
§ 119.094 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE.
   Blank applications for the certificate shall be issued by the Health
Department. The applications shall contain the information as shall be required
by the Health Department, and shall further contain an agreement by which the
applicants consent to have the inspectors of the Health Department enter,
examine, and inspect any part of the premises used in conducting such business,
or any produce or food sold or for sale therein, and to take samples of the
food for the purpose of analysis. The applications shall further contain an
agreement that the premises occupied by the business shall be provided with
sanitary toilets having at least one stool therein for every 25 persons
employed on the premises, and with suitable and sanitary wash rooms and toilet
facilities, and with sanitary refuse receptacles, and with floors that can be
properly cleansed and flushed, and that the applicants will at all times keep
the floors thereof properly cleansed and flushed. The applications shall
further contain an agreement that the applicant agrees to conform to the rules
and regulations of the Health Department relative to the conduct of the
business. The Health Department is authorized to issues certificates upon
application of any person, firm or corporation desirous of engaging in or
continuing to engage in the business, after determining that the place or
establishment where the applicants conduct or intend to conduct the business is
a proper place in which to conduct the business. No determination shall be made
until the Health Department determines by inspection that the premises meet
with all the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.095 REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The City Clerk is hereby authorized to refuse to issue a license, or the
Council may revoke a license upon satisfactory proof that the applicant is not
of good character, or is not the proper person to have a license, or that the
applicant conducts the place or establishment in violation of the rules of the
Health Department, or that the place or establishment where he or she conduct
ths business is not a proper place in which to conduct the business, or that
the place or establishment does not comply with all of the requirements of §
119.094, or that the place or establishment is not kept and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition at all times.
(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932)
§ 119.096 VIOLATION.
   The conviction of any licensee on the charge of having violated any of the
provisions of this subchapter shall be cause for suspension or revocation of
his or her license.
(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932)
§ 119.097 GARBAGE AND REFUSE.
   No person shall deposit vegetable refuse or other garbage, broken crates,
boxes, barrels, or pieces thereof, paper, or other rubbish on or in the place
or establishment, nor burn any garbage or rubbish in a place or establishment,
except in places which may be provided for that specific purpose.
(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.098 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH BUSINESS.
   Where several businesses for selling articles of food are conducted under
one roof by separate individuals, partnerships, associations or corporations,
each owner of the business shall be required to secure a license in accordance
with the provisions herein.
(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932)
§ 119.099 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   Any person, partnership, association or corporation now operating any
business conducted of the purpose of selling articles of food at the present
time in noncompliance with this subchapter shall have 90 days from the date at
which this subchapter becomes effective to comply with the provisions herein.
(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932)
SALE OF FOOD SUPPLIES AND FOOD PRODUCT AT RETAIL
§ 119.110 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm, corporation, association or partnership shall operate,
maintain, open or establish, any business consisting wholly or in part of the
sale of food supplies and food products at retail within the city, without
first having obtained a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 101, passed 11-10-1931) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.111 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Every person, firm, corporation, association or partnership desiring to
operate, maintain, open or establish within the city a business consisting
wholly or in part of the sale of food supplies and food products at retail,
shall make application for a license therefor to the City Clerk of the city, on
a form prescribed and furnished by the City Clerk, which application shall set
forth the name of the owner, manager, trustee lessee, receiver or other person
desiring the license, the name of the store, the location, including the street
number of the store, and the other facts as the City Clerk may require. If the
applicant desires to operate, maintain, open or establish more than one place
of business, he or she shall make a separate application for a license to
operate, maintain, open or establish each place of business, but the respective
places for which the applicant desires to secure licenses may all be listed on
one application blank.
(Ord. 101, passed 11-10-1931) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.112 APPLICATION AND CITY CLERK.
   (A)   As soon as practicable after the receipt of the application, the City
Clerk shall carefully examine the same to ascertain whether it is in proper
form and contains the necessary and requisite information, If, upon
examination, the City Clerk shall find that any application is not in proper
form and does not contain the necessary and requisite information, he or she
shall return the application for correction.
   (B)   If an application is found to be satisfactory, and if the license fee
as herein prescribed shall have been paid, the City Clerk shall issue to the
applicant a license for each place of business for which an application for
license shall been made.
   (C)   Each licensee shall display the license so issued in a conspicuous
place in the place of business for which the license is issued.
(Ord. 101, passed 11-10-1931) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.113 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   Every person, firm, corporation, association or copartnership,
opening, established, operating or maintaining one or more places of business
within the city under the same general management, supervision or ownership,
shall pay the license fees hereinafter prescribed:
      (1)   The license fee for one place of business consisting, wholly or in
part of the sale of food supplies and food products at retail shall be $25.
      (2)   The license fee for two places for business under the same general
management, supervision or ownership, shall be $50 for each place of business.
      (3)   The license fee for three places of business under the same general
management, supervision or ownership, shall be $75 for each place of business.
      (4)   The license for four or more places of business under the same
general management, supervision or owners shall be $1,000 for each place of
business.
   (B)   The license, when issued, shall entitle the licensee to conduct the
business until April 15 next following, the issuance of the license, unless
sooner revoked by the City Council for cause. The license fee shall be paid to
the City Treasurer before the issuance of the license and, in case the time
intervening between the date of application and the date of expiration shall be
less than one year, the City Treasurer shall receive the prorata amount of the
license fee, which however, in no case shall be less than one-half thereof.
(Ord. 101, passed 11-10-1931) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.114 PARTIES COVERED BY THESE PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall be construed to apply to every
person, firm, partnership, corporation or association, either domestic or
foreign, which is controlled on held with others by majority stock ownership,
or ultimately controlled or directed by one management or association of
ultimate management.
(Ord. 101, passed 11-10-1931) Penalty, see §
119.999
POULTRY
§ 119.155 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of a wholesale slaughter
poultry dealer, wholesale poultry dealer, retail poultry dealer or retail stand
dealer in the city unless he or she shall has obtained a license therefor from
the City Clerk; and no dealer shall vend poultry on or off the streets, alleys
or sidewalks of the city; all sales to be in a building only.
   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed:
      (1)   To prevent any farmer from killing, dressing and selling, in the
open market, unless diseased, any poultry intended for food that he or she has
raised, fed or slaughtered, nor any dealer or merchant from buying or selling
the same as provided by, state law;
      (2)   As affecting interstate commerce; or
      (3)   To prevent a hauler from bringing poultry into the city and to sell
or consign same to a licensed wholesale dealer; but the handling, killing,
dressing, sale, purchase or merchandising of the poultry shall be subject to
the terms of this subchapter to the extent that same does not conflict with any
state or federal law.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.156 FEE.
   (A)   Annual licenses of a poultry dealer under this subchapter shall be
issued in the name of the City Clerk to any person who qualifies as herein
provided.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall charge and collect as follows:
 
Wholesale slaughter poultry dealer $25 per year
Wholesale poultry dealer           $25 per year
Retail poultry dealer              $10 per year
Retail stand of live poultry       $5 per year
 
   (C)   All licenses required in this subchapter shall expire on May 1 of each
year.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.157 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Individuals, partnership, firm, association or corporation.
   RETAIL POULTRY DEALER. Every person, individual, partnership, firm,
association or corporation not a wholesale poultry dealer who deals in and/or
sells poultry at retail.
   VEHICLE. The conveyance in which the poultry is carried, and includes
automobile, truck, wagon or cart.
   WHOLESALE POULTRY DEALER. Every person, individual, partnership, firm,
association or corporation:
      (1)   Operating a regularly established store or warehouse for the
purchase, sale or consignment of poultry at wholesale in the city, or who deals
in, purchases, sells or offers for sale or delivery at wholesale any poultry
used or intended for human consumption; or
      (2)   Not operating a regularly established store or warehouse for the
sale of poultry at wholesale in the city who deals in, sells or offers for sale
or delivery at wholesale any poultry used or intended for human consumption, by
traveling from place to place or along or upon the streets, alleys or public
thoroughfares of the city from one prospective buyer to consignee to another,
and offers to sell or consign, or does sell or consign and/or delivers from a
vehicle poultry to another person, who buys or receives the poultry for re-sale
in some form, and not for personal consumption.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)
§ 119.158 DISEASED POULTRY.
   No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale at retail, wholesale, or
trade, any poultry afflicted with downers, tuberculosis, gaps, swollen heads or
eyes, other disease or defects which render the poultry unfit for human food.
The city veterinarian, or health inspector in consultation with the city
veterinarian, shall have the power to condemn, seize and destroy all poultry
unfit for human consumption, under the rules and regulations as the Board of
Health may adopt.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.159 CONFORMANCE TO SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring within the limits of the
city, to be sold or offered for sale therein at wholesale or retail, any
poultry for any slaughterhouse situated outside its limits, whose owner, lessee
or occupant has not substantially conformed to the sanitary requirements of the
Board of Health.
   (B)   The Board of Health is hereby authorized to require from any person an
affidavit or other satisfactory proof of compliance with this provision.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)
§ 119.160 REGULATIONS GOVERNING POULTRY SLAUGHTERHOUSES.
   Application for the approval of plans and specifications and for permit
shall be made by the owner of the site to the Department of Health, upon
official blanks furnished for that purpose by the Department. No permit to
conduct a poultry slaughterhouse shall be issued by the Department of Health
unless the, plans and specifications of the proposed slaughterhouse shall have
been approved by the Department.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.161 FLOOR SPACE.
   The floor space of the building used as a poultry slaughterhouse shall cover
an area of at least 550 square feet in order to permit the receipt and delivery
of poultry and poultry in crates and the storage of empty crates, entirely
within the premises of the poultry slaughterhouse.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.162 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Application for the approval of the plans and specifications of the
poultry slaughterhouse proposed to be erected shall be made upon official forms
furnished by the Department of Health and duplicate copies of the plans and
specifications shall be submitted with the application. Specifications shall be
submitted with all plans, explaining in detail the work to be done and the
material to be used, and where the work to be done is shown on the plans and
not mentioned in the specifications or where mentioned in the specifications
and not shown on the plans, it shall be taken as mentioned in both.
   (B)   Duplicate copies of the plans and specifications shall be submitted
and when the plans and specifications are approved, construction work must be
started within 90 days thereafter, and the work shall be continuous until
completed in a thorough, workmanlike manner.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.163 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF POULTRY SLAUGHTERHOUSE.
   No permit to conduct a poultry slaughterhouse will be issued by the
Department of Health unless, the following minimum requirements as to
construction shall have been in each instance fully complied with in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications.
   (A)   Floors, construction. The floors shall be constructed of cement,
concrete or other approved water-tight, non-absorbent material, so graded and
drained as to discharge all liquid matter in properly trapped sewer in
compliance with the Building Code.
   (B)   Ceilings and walls. The ceilings shall be of a smooth, hard impervious
material free from crevices, cracks, ledges or projections. The walls shall be
of cement, concrete or other approved water-tight, non-absorbent material with
a smooth finish to the entire height of the ceiling and shall be painted. The
junctions with the ceilings and floors shall be maintained in a tight and
sanitary manner.
   (C)   Height of ceilings. All ceilings shall be at least ten feet in height,
measured from the surface of the floor to the ceiling.
   (D)   Ventilation. Adequate ventilation to extend ten feet above adjacent
properties to the external air by natural means shall be provided for every
room in which poultry is stored, killed or which is used in connection with the
slaughterhouse, and in compliance with the Building Code of the city.
   (E)   Lights. Adequate natural or artificial light approved by the
Department of Health shall be provided in every room in which poultry is stored
or killed.
   (F)   Killing room. A separate room shall be provided which shall be used as
a killing room, which shall have an area of at least 80 square feet. The width
or length of this room shall not be less than eight feet. A bleeding trough
must be provided; it shall be of adequate capacity and be approved by the
Department of Health. The walls and face of the trough must be of cement,
concrete or other approved water-tight, non-absorbent material with a smooth
finish and shall discharge over properly trapped and sewer connected drains. A
proper metal receptacle shall be provided to hold each bird after being
slaughtered, the receptacle shall be placed where the poultry may be disposed
of in a sanitary manner. The provisions of this regulation shall not apply to a
poultry slaughterhouse in which a wholesale business is carried on principally,
except that poultry shall be killed in places in receptacles approved by the
Department of Health.
   (G)   Dry plucking rooms. Where dry plucking is the method always employed,
a separate room shall be provided, which shall be used exclusively for the dry
plucking of poultry killed at the premises. The area of this room shall be at
least 100 square feet. The width or length of this room shall not be less than
eight feet. The walls shall be constructed of approved water-tight,
nonabsorbent tile or brick, and the floor and ceiling shall be constructed of
non-absorbent, water-proof material; floor to be graded and drained. Proper
receptacles shall be provided for the holding, storing or keeping of all
feathers.
   (H)   Waiting room. A separate room shall be provided as a waiting room for
the customers. The area of this room shall be at least 550 square feet.
   (I)   Storage; crates or batteries. A separate room shall be provided for
the storage of live poultry in crates or batteries. The area of this room shall
be at least 270 square feet. Cages or batteries shall be elevated at least one
foot above the floor level and shall not be placed nearer than two feet from
the side walls of the building.
   (J)   Water supply. Permanent fixtures shall be provided for the furnishing
of an adequate supply of fresh water for flushing all parts of the premises.
   (K)   Rat-proofing. The room or receptacle for the storage of food for the
poultry shall be constructed rat-proof.
   (L)   Toilet facilities. Adequate water-closet accommodation for male and
female persons shall be provided, and sufficient fixtures with hot and cold
running water for washing purposes shall be provided at all times; the toilet
room or rooms shall be ventilated to the outside air by a direct or an approved
indirect method.
   (M)   Screening. All doors, windows and other openings to the outer air
shall be properly and adequately screened. All doors shall be equipped with
self closing devices.
   (N)   Hot water. Adequate facilities shall be provided to ensure a
sufficient supply of running hot water at all times.
   (O)   Odors. Suitable and adequate means shall be provided for the disposal
of offensive odors.
   (P)   Empty crates. A separate room shall be provided for the storage of
empty crates.
   (Q)   Garbage disposal. All garbage shall be disposed by Saturday, midnight,
by the operators of the poultry business. It shall be unlawful for the
operators or their employees to deposit the garbage in the alleys or other
public places. The garbage shall be burned in incinerators or carried out
beyond the confines of the city.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.164 PERMIT.
   The application for the permit to conduct a poultry slaughterhouse shall be
made upon official forms furnished by the Department of Health. No permit will
be unless the plans and specifications of the proposed poultry slaughterhouse
shall have first been approved by the Department in accordance with the
provisions of these regulations.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)
§ 119.165 MAINTENANCE.
   Every poultry slaughterhouse shall be conducted in strict compliance with
the following rules which shall govern the maintenance and operation.
   (A)   Cleanliness. Every poultry slaughterhouse, the yard adjoining same and
all air shafts, courts and open places connected therewith shall be at all
times kept in a clean, sanitary condition, free from accumulation of refuse,
garbage and offensive material and nuisances of all kinds.
   (B)   Floors; washing. All floors shall be kept and maintained in a clean,
sanitary condition and in good repair and free from rubbish and offensive
material.
   (C)   Walls; cleaning. The side walls of all rooms used for the storage or
killing of poultry shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition and in good
repair. Walls and ceilings shall be cleaned and painted whenever required by
the Department of Health.
   (D)   Ventilation. All parts of every poultry slaughterhouse shall be
properly ventilated and adequately lighted at all times.
   (E)   Plumbing. All plumbing fixtures and toilet facilities shall be kept
and maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and in good repair.
   (F)   Plucking room. All plucking of poultry shall be done exclusively in
the plucking room.
   (G)   Feather receptacles. Plucking of poultry shall be performed in a
manner that all feathers shall be thrown or placed in the receptacles provided
for the purpose.
   (H)   Storage of empty crates. All empty crates shall be kept and stored
exclusively in the storage room. The area of this room shall be at least 150
square feet. No empty crates shall be kept or permitted to remain outside of
the poultry slaughterhouse.
   (I)   Poultry at large; prohibited. No poultry shall be allowed or permitted
at large upon the premises but shall be kept at all times in the batteries or
crates provided for that purpose.
   (J)   Screens. The screens, windows, doors and other openings to the outer
air shall be kept clean and in good and repair.
   (K)   Doors not to be left open. All doors shall be half-closing and not
permitted to remain open except for ingress or egress.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.166 STRUCTURAL CHANGES.
   No structural change or alterations shall be made in any poultry
slaughterhouse building unless the same shall have first been approved or
ordered by the Department of Building or the Department of Health.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.167 DEVIATION FROM SUBCHAPTER.
   In existing poultry slaughterhouses, where it would be impracticable or
unreasonable to require strict compliance with this subchapter, the health
officer with the approval of the City Council may permit deviation therefrom.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)
§ 119.168 PERMITS; RENEWAL ANNUALLY.
   Permits to carry on or conduct a poultry slaughterhouse in the city shall be
granted by the Department of Health of the city for each poultry slaughterhouse
conducted or maintained in the city and each permit shall expire on May 1 of
the calendar year following the issue thereof, and shall be renewed annually
before the expiration thereof.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)
§ 119.169 NEW PERMIT.
   Upon proof by report from the Inspector of the Department of Health that the
premises on which a poultry slaughterhouse permit has been issued by the
Department of Health has become vacant or has not been used or is discontinued
for use as a slaughterhouse for the period of six months or more, or where the
permittee has died, or where the premises has been destroyed by fire, a new
permit must be obtained and new plans and specifications filed, passed upon and
approved by the Department of Health, as herein provided.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)
§ 119.170 BASEMENTS.
   No poultry shall be killed in any basement.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.171 NOT APPLICABLE TO BUTCHER.
   The terms and provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to a regular
licensed butcher who slaughters 50 or less fowl per week upon his or her own
premises.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)
§ 119.172 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Department of Health shall be charged with the enforcement of this
subchapter, and the Department of Health is hereby authorized to adopt the
rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions
of this subchapter.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)
BAKERY
§ 119.185 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall not be lawful for any person, firm or corporation to carry on or
conduct the trade or business of a baker, either in person or by employing any
other person to carry on the trade or business under his, her or its direction
within the city, without having obtained from the Clerk a license for that
purpose.
(Ord. 40, passed 7-14-1925) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.186 APPLICATION.
   Every person, firm or corporation desirous of carrying on or conducting the
trade or business shall make application in writing to the Clerk of the city
for a license, setting forth the street number of the place of business in
which the trade or business is intended to be carried on. The Clerk shall have
power to grant the license upon the payment of $5. All licenses shall expire
upon May 1 next following the issuance of the same. The Clerk shall record in a
book, to be kept in his or her office for public inspection, the name, street
and number of the place of business of each person, firm or corporation to whom
the license shall be issued.
(Ord. 40, passed 7-14-1925) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.187 CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   Before the Clerk shall issue any license, the applicant shall furnish to him
or her a certificate from the Board of Health stating that the establishment
where the applicant conducts or is about to conduct the business is a proper
place in which to conduct the business. The Board of Health is hereby
authorized to issue the certificate upon application of any person, firm or
corporation desirous of engaging in or of continuing to engage in the business.
Blank applications for the purpose shall be issued by the Board of Health.
Applications shall contain the information, having relation to the health of
the city, as shall be required by the Board of Health; and shall further
contain an agreement by which the applicant consents to the inspectors of the
Board of Health having the right to enter the premises where the business is
conducted for the purpose of examining or inspecting same, or any bread or
other baked goods manufactured or kept therein. The application shall further
contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that he or she will conform
to the rules and regulations of the Board of Health relative to the conduct of
the business.
(Ord. 40, passed 7-14-1925) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.188 SANITARY CONDITIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every licensee shall conduct his or her establishment in a cleanly and
sanitary manner.
   (B)   No licensee shall sell or offer for sale or manufacture any bread or
other goods baked or prepared by him or her which are not clean and wholesome
and which would be deleterious to health.
(Ord. 40, passed 7-14-1925) Penalty, see §
119.999
FOOD HANDLER CARD
§ 119.200 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Any place in the city in which food or beverage is
served or sold for human consumption on the premises or elsewhere. The
establishments shall include, but not be limited to, restaurants, cafeterias,
coffee shops, taverns, soda foundations, itinerant restaurants, bakeries and
grocery stores.
   VENDOR. Anyone who transports, distributes or operates equipment to
transport or distribute food for human consumption in the city.
(Ord. 270, passed 6-5-1962)
§ 119.201 CARD REQUIRED.
   No person shall be employed or shall work in a food handling establishment
in the city or be employed as a vendor unless he or she has a food handler’s
card from the Board of Health of the city as hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 270, passed 6-5-1962) Penalty, see §
119.999
§ 119.202 APPLICATION.
   Applicants for the food handlers cards in the city shall file an application
for the card with the Board of Health of city on forms approved by the Board of
Health, which shall issue the food handlers card to the applicant, when a
negative chest x-ray report has been approved and filed by the Board of Health.
(Ord. 270, passed 6-5-1962)
§ 119.203 ANNUAL FEE.
   Before the food handlers’ card is issued to any applicant by the Board of
Health, the applicant shall pay to the City Treasurer an annual fee of $2, and
the food handlers’ card issued to the applicant shall be effective from the
date of the issue until April 30 next following. Providing however, that person
handling food for fraternal, religious, educational, social or civic
organizations and not in their employ shall not required to pay the fee. Cards
issued without payment of fee shall be effective only in conjunction with food
handling in the fraternal, religious, educational, social or civic
organizations.
(Ord. 270, passed 6-5-1962) Penalty, see §
119.999
MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE VENDORS
§ 119.220 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter may be referred to as the City of Hamtramck Mobile Food
Vehicle Ordinance.
(Ord. 2013-052, passed 3-12-2013)
§ 119.221 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE. A motorized vehicle which may upon issuance of a
license by the City Clerk and conformance with the regulations established by
this subchapter may temporarily park upon a public street and engage in the
service, sale or distribution of ready to eat food for individual portion
service to the general public directly from the vehicle.
   MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE VENDOR. The registered owner or a mobile food vehicle or
the owner’s agent or employee; and referred to in this subchapter as “vendor.”
(Ord. 2013-052, passed 3-12-2013)
§ 119.222 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this subchapter apply to mobile food vehicles engaged in
the business of cooking, preparing and distributing food or beverage with or
without charge upon or in public and private restricted spaces. This subchapter
does not apply to vehicles which disperse food and that move from place to
place and are stationary in the same location for no more than 15 minutes at a
time, such as ice cream trucks. This subchapter does not apply to mobile food
vehicles participating in special events sponsored or approved by the city.
(Ord. 2013-052, passed 3-12-2013)
§ 119.223 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including any religious,
charitable or nonprofit organization, to operate within the city a mobile food
vehicle without having obtained from the City Clerk a current and valid license
for that purpose.
   (B)   A person or organization desiring to operate a mobile food vehicle
shall make written application for such license to the City Clerk and shall
include the following:
      (1)   Name, signature, phone number, email contact and business address
of the applicant.
      (2)   A description of the preparation methods and food product offered
for sale including the intended menu.
      (3)   Information on the mobile food vehicle to include year, make, and
model of the vehicle and dimensions, which shall not exceed 36 feet in length
or nine feet in width.
      (4)   Information setting forth the proposed hours of operation, area of
operations, plans for power access, water supply and wastewater disposal.
      (5)   Copies of all necessary license or permits issued by the Wayne
County Health Department.
      (6)   Insurance coverage:
         (a)   Proof of general comprehensive liability policy with limits of
no less than $1,000,000 combined single limit coverage issued by an insurer
licensed to do business in the State of Michigan and which names the city as an
additional insured.
         (b)   Proof of public liability and property damage motor vehicle
policy with limits of no less than $1,000,000 issued by an insurer licensed to
do business in the State of Michigan.
   (C)   All vendors receiving a license under this subchapter shall pay the
annual fee as set from time to time by the City Council.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall issue no more than ten active mobile food vehicle
licenses for any calendar year. Each mobile food vehicle license shall expire
on June 30 of each year.
   (E)   A license issued under this subchapter shall not be transferable from
person to person.
   (F)   A license is valid for one vehicle only and shall not be transferred
between vehicles.
(Ord. 2013-052, passed 3-12-2013)
§ 119.224 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No operator of a mobile food vehicle shall park, stand, or move a
vehicle and conduct business in areas of the city where the license holder has
not been authorized to operate. Mobile food vehicles are permitted in the
following locations: public parking spaces and commercial alleyways fronting
and adjacent to Joseph Campau, Conant, Caniff and Holbrook; public parks as
approved by the Department of Community and Economic Development. Special
locations may be authorized from time to time as approved by the Department of
Community and Economic Development after consultation and approval from the
Fire Chief and Police Chief.
   (B)   The customer service area for mobile food vehicles shall be on the
side of the truck that faces a curb, lawn, or sidewalk when parked. No food
service shall be provided on the driving lane side of the truck. No food shall
be prepared, sold, or displayed outside of mobile food vehicles.
   (C)   No mobile food vehicle vendor shall provide or allow any dining area
within ten feet of the mobile food vehicle, including but not limited to tables
and chairs, booths, stools, benches or stand up counters.
   (D)   Customers shall be provided with single service articles such as
plastic utensils and paper plates and a waste container for disposal. All
mobile food vehicle vendors shall offer a waste container for public use which
the vendor shall empty at its own expense. All trash and garbage originating
from the operation of mobile food vehicles shall be collected and disposed of
off-site by the operator(s) each day. Spills of food or food by-products shall
be cleaned up forthwith. No dumping of gray, or waste water on the streets is
permitted.
   (E)   No mobile food vehicle shall make or cause to be made any unreasonable
or excessive noise. The operation of all mobile food vehicles shall be in
compliance with the city noise ordinance, including generators. No loud music,
other high-decibel sounds, horns, or amplified announcements are permitted.
   (F)   Signage is only allowed when placed on the mobile food vehicles. No
separate freestanding signs are permitted.
   (G)   No flashing or blinking lights, or strobe lights are allowed on mobile
food vehicles or related signage when the vehicle is parked and engaged in
serving customers. All exterior lights over 60 watts shall contain opaque, hood
shields to direct the illumination downward.
   (H)   Mobile food vehicles when parked on public streets shall be parked in
conformance with all applicable parking restrictions, and shall not hinder the
lawful parking or operation of other vehicles.
   (I)   A mobile food vehicle shall not be parked on the street overnight or
left unattended or unsecured at any time food is in the vehicle. Any mobile
food vehicle found to be unattended shall be considered a public safety hazard
and may be ticketed, towed and/or impounded.
   (J)   A vendor shall not operate a mobile food vehicle within 500 feet of
any fair, festival, special event or civic event that is licensed and
sanctioned by the city unless the vendor has obtained permission from both the
city and event coordinator.
   (K)   The issuance of a mobile food vehicle license does not grant or
entitle the vendor to the exclusive use of any service route or parking space.
   (L)   A vendor shall not operate on private property without first obtaining
written consent to operate from the affected private property owner. A private
property owner shall not permit parking by a mobile food vehicle until a
special use permit has been obtained to permit such use.
   (M)   No mobile food vehicle shall use external signage, bollards, seating
or other equipment not contained within the vehicle. When extended, awnings for
mobile food vehicles shall have a minimum clearance of seven feet between the
ground level and the lowest point of the awning or support structure.
   (N)   Any power required for the mobile food vehicle located on a public way
shall be self- contained and a mobile food vehicle shall not use utilities
drawn from the public right-of-way. Mobile food vehicles on private property
may use electrical power from the property being occupied or an adjacent
property, but only when the property owner provides written consent to do so.
All power sources must be self-contained. No power cable or equipment shall
extend at or across any city street, alley, or sidewalk.
   (O)   Mobile food vehicles shall not be parked within 150 feet of an
existing, brick and mortar restaurant during the hours when such restaurant is
open to the public for business unless the owner has provide written consent to
do so. This does not include LCC establishment where the primary source of
revenue is generated from a source other than dining.
(Ord. 2013-052, passed 3-12-2013)
§ 119.225 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any license holder operating a mobile food vehicle in violation of any
provision of this subchapter or any rules and regulations promulgated by the
city shall be subject to a civil fine to be set by City Council ordinance. Each
day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   Once a license has been issued it may be revoked, suspended or not
renewed by the City Clerk for failure to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter and any rules or regulations promulgated by the city.
(Ord. 2013-052, passed 3-12-2013)
§ 119.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.
   (B)   Restaurants. Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall
violate any of the provisions of §§
119.001 through
119.008, or shall fail to comply with the same, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100, together with costs
of prosecution, or by imprisonment in the Wayne County Jail for a period of not
more than 90 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the
court trying the offender. In case any corporation shall be fined under the
provisions of §§
119.001 through
119.008 it shall be lawful to collect the fine and costs in an action of
assumpsit to be brought in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 38, passed 5-26-1923)
   (C)   Sale of tainted meat, vegetables and other foodstuffs.
      (1)   Every person, firm or corporation convicted of violating the
provisions of §§
119.050 through
119.053 shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $100 and costs of
prosecution, and, in default of the payment of the fine and costs, the court
may make a further sentence that the offender by imprisoned in the Wayne County
Jail, or another place of imprisonment as may be hereafter established by the
City Council of city as a place of confinement, until the fine and costs be
paid, but not longer than 90 days, or, in the discretion of the Court having
jurisdiction of the cause, both a fine and imprisonment may be imposed.
      (2)   In the event that there shall be imposed upon a corporation any
fine and costs, or either, or both, for the violation of any of the terms of §§
119.050 through
119.053, then it shall be lawful to collect the fine and costs, or either, or
both, in an action of assumpsit before any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 60, passed 8-2-1928)
   (D)   Sale of fresh meat or smoked meat. Every person, firm or corporation
convicted of violating the provisions of §§
119.065 through
119.075 shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $100 and costs of
prosecution, and, in default of the payment of the fine and costs, the court
may make a further sentence that the offender by imprisoned in the Wayne County
Jail, or another place of imprisonment as may be hereafter established by the
City Council as a place of confinement, until the fine and costs be paid, but
not longer than 90 days, or, in the discretion of the Court having jurisdiction
of the cause, both a fine and imprisonment may be imposed. In the event that
there shall be imposed upon a corporation any fine and costs, or either, or
both, for the violation of any of the terms of §§
119.065 through
119.075, then it shall be lawful to collect the fine and costs, or either, or
both, in an action of assumpsit before any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 64, passed 8-2-1928)
   (E)   Sale of food to the public in bulk. Any person, firm, corporation,
copartnership or association convicted of violating any of the provisions of §§
119.090 through
119.099 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100 and costs of
prosecution, or by imprisonment in the Wayne County Jail, or another place of
confinement as may be hereafter designated by the City Council, for a period
not to exceed 90 days, or both a fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the
court. In the event that there shall be imposed upon any corporation any fine
and costs, or either, or both, for the violation of any of the terms of §§
119.090 through
119.099, then it shall be lawful to collect the fine and costs, or either, or
both, in an action of assumpsit before any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 106, passed 10-25-1932)
   (F)   Sale of food supplies and food product at retail. Every person, firm,
corporation, association or copartnership who or which shall violate or fail to
comply with the provisions of §§
119.110 through
119.114 shall upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not to exceed
$100 and costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment of the fine and
costs, the court may make a further sentence that the offender be imprisoned in
the Wayne County Jail, or another place of imprisonment as may be hereafter
designated by the City Council as a place of confinement, until the fine and
costs be paid, but not longer than 90 days, or, in the discretion of the court
having jurisdiction of the cause, both the fine and imprisonment may be
imposed. In the event that there shall be imposed upon a corporation any fine
and costs, or either, or both, for the violation or failure to comply with the
terms of §§
119.110 through
119.114, it shall be lawful to collect the fine and costs, or either, or both,
in an action of assumpsit before any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 101, passed 11-10-1931)
   (G)   Poultry. Any violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of
§§
119.155 through
119.172 shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $100 and costs of
prosecution, or by imprisonment in the city prison, Wayne County Jail, or any
workhouse in the state authorized to receive prisoners from the city, for not
to exceed 90 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the
court.
(Ord. 223, passed 8-22-1950)
   (H)   Bakery. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of §§
119.185 through 119.188 or fail to comply with the same shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment far not
more than 90 days in the Wayne County Jail, or by both a fine and imprisonment
in the discretion of the court. In case of the conviction of any corporation of
the violation of the terms of §§
119.185 through
119.188, the amount of the fine and costs imposed upon a conviction, together
with the costs of same, may be collected in an action of assumpsit in any court
of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 40, passed 7-14-1925)
   (I)   Food handler card. Any person, firm, association or corporation, who
violates any of the provisions of §§
119.200 through
119.203 shall be prosecuted and upon conviction of the violation shall be
guilty of misdemeanor and punished by a fine not exceeding the sum of $100 or
by imprisonment in the Wayne County Jail, or another place of confinement as
may be hereafter, establishment by the City Council, not exceeding 90 days, or
both a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court having jurisdiction
of the cause.
(Ord. 270, passed 6-5-1962)
CHAPTER 120: HANDBILL DISTRIBUTORS AND HOUSE-TO-HOUSE SOLICITORS
Section
   
120.001   Purpose
   
120.002   Definitions
   
120.003   License required
   
120.004   Application
   
120.005   Investigation
   
120.006   License fees
   
120.007   Identification requirement
   
120.008   Transfer of license
   
120.009   Revocation of license
   
120.010   Appeal
   
120.011   Distribution
   
120.012   Exemptions
 
   
120.999   Penalty
§ 120.001 PURPOSE.
   To protect the people against the nuisance of, and incident to, the
promiscuous distribution of handbills and circulars, particularly commercial
handbills, with the resulting detriment and danger to public health and safety,
the public interest, convenience and necessity requires the regulation thereof,
and to that end the purposes of this chapter are specifically declared to be as
follows:
   (A)   To protect the people against the unlawful activities or operations of
solicitors or handbill distributors, by requiring the registration of all such
solicitors or handbill distributors, together with the names of their
employers, and by regulating the business of handbill and advertising
distribution through the imposition of reasonable license fees;
   (B)   To protect local residents against trespassing by solicitors or
handbill distributors upon the private property of such residents if they have
given reasonable notice that they do not wish to be solicited by such persons
or do not desire to receive handbills or advertising matter;
   (C)   To protect the people against the health and safety menace and the
expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the
promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and commercial
handbills;
   (D)   To preserve to the people their constitutional right to receive and
disseminate information by distinguishing between the nuisance created by the
promiscuous distribution of advertising and commercial circulars and the right
to deliver noncommercial handbills to all who are willing to receive the same.
(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)
§ 120.002 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   DISTRIBUTE. The act of handing out or delivering handbills or samples to any
structure within the city limits whether or not the handbill or sample is
affixed to that structure in some way or packaged in some manner in a box,
container, envelop, bag or like covering.
   HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature.
   HANDBILL DISTRIBUTOR. Any person engaging or engaged in the business for
hire or gain of distributing samples or handbills, other than newspapers
distributed to subscribers thereof, and any person receiving compensation
directly or indirectly for the distribution of such handbill.
   HOUSE-TO-HOUSE SOLICITOR. Any person, whether a resident of the city or not,
traveling either by foot or any type of conveyance from place to place, from
house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders
for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature
whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in
the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a
sample of the subject of such sale or whether such individual is collecting
advance payments on such sales or not. Such individual has, carries or exposes
for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether such individual is
collecting advance payments on such sales or not.
   NEWSPAPER. Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law,
any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United
States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper
filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and,
in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine
regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the
public.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling house, building, or other structure, designed
or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox
belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys, or
other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas,
grounds and buildings.
(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)
§ 120.003 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a house-to-
house solicitor or a handbill distributor, as previously defined without first
having obtained a license therefore; provided, that nothing contained herein
shall apply to any person advertising his or her business or activity upon his
or her own premises, if such business or activity is regularly established at a
definite location in the city, and also if a license has been obtained
therefor, if such license be required under the terms of any applicable law or
ordinance.
(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 120.004 APPLICATION.
   Applicants for a license under this chapter must file with the Clerk a sworn
application in writing on a form to be furnished by the Clerk, which shall
provide the following information:
   (A)   Name and description of applicant.
   (B)   Address (legal and local).
   (C)   A brief description of the nature of the business.
   (D)   If employed, the name and address of the employer.
   (E)   The approximate number of employees or agents so to be engaged.
   (F)   Such other information as may be required by the Clerk.
(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)
§ 120.005 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of such application for a license under this chapter, the
original shall be referred to the Police Department for investigation of the
applicant's business and moral character to be made as deemed necessary for the
protection of the public good. GOOD MORAL CHARACTER shall be  construed to mean
the propensity on the part of the person to serve the public in the licensed
area in a fair, honest, and open manner, to be determined as provided in Public
Act No. 381 of 1974 (M.C.L.A. 338.41 et seq.).
   (B)   If as a result of such investigation the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police
shall endorse on such application such disapproval and such reasons for the
same, and return the application to the Clerk, who shall notify the applicant
that the application is disapproved and that no license will be issued.
   (C)   If as a result of such investigation the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of
Police shall endorse on the application such approval and return the
application so endorsed to the Clerk. If the application shall be the initial
application for a license by the applicant, such application shall be referred
to the City Manager, and if the City Manager shall determine that such
applicant is a suitable, reputable and desirable person to engage in the
business for which the application for a license has been filed, and that the
business to be conducted thereunder is not detrimental to public safety, health
and welfare, the City Manager, by appropriate action, shall approve such
application; otherwise, the application shall be denied. Reputable and
desirable person to engage in the business for which the application for a
license has been filed, and that the business to be conducted thereunder is not
detrimental to public safety, health and welfare, the City Manager, by
appropriate action, shall approve such application; otherwise, the application
shall be denied.
(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)
§ 120.006 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Upon approval of any application for a license under this chapter, the
Clerk shall issue the required license.
   (B)   The fees for any license issued under the provisions of this chapter
or any renewal thereof, shall be as currently established or as hereafter
adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time.
   (C)   The license fees shall be payable to the City Clerk upon approval of
the license application.
   (D)   For all licenses issued for a handbill distributor or house-to-house
solicitor, such license shall be valid for use from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
local time, whichever occurs first, excluding any time on Sundays and the
following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving and Christmas.
(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)
§ 120.007 IDENTIFICATION REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the requirement of the licensee to provide each handbill
distributor or house-to-house solicitor or licensed under this chapter a
company identification card of which indicates the year for which the license
was issued. In addition, the full legible name of the handbill distributor or
house-to-house solicitor shall also be present on the company identification
card. The card must be carried and visible at all times upon the handbill
distributor or house-to-house solicitor so licensed. In addition, the card must
be displayed upon the request of any officer of the Police Department or
customer.
   (B)   Each day, or series of consecutive days limited to a maximum of five
consecutive days, that distribution of handbills is to be made within the city,
the licensee or his or her agent shall first register with the Police
Department and shall provide the Department with the following information:
      (1)   The name under which the license is issued.
      (2)   The license number.
      (3)   The agent's name.
      (4)   The address and the telephone number at which the licensee or his
or her agent or the person in charge of the distribution may be reached during
the period of distribution.
      (5)   The number of handbill distributors at work in the city and their
respective names and addresses.
      (6)   The length of time required to complete the distribution.
      (7)   Such other information as may be required by the Police Department
from time to time to properly enforce this chapter.
   (C)   Persons acting for licensees, as agents or employees, in the
distributing of handbills, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay a
fee, but each person shall comply with each and all of the other provisions
hereof, and be subject thereto.
(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 120.008 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to or used by a
person other than the one to whom it was issued.
(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 120.009 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the City
Manager after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
   (C)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business as handbill distributor or house-to-house solicitor.
   (D)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
   (F)   Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as
to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health,
safety or general welfare of the public.
   (G)   No refund of any license fee shall be made upon the revocation,
cancellation or surrender of a license.
   (H)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and
place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee
at the licensee's last known address at least ten days prior to the date set
for hearing.
(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)
§ 120.010 APPEAL.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the action of the Clerk or the Chief of Police
in the denial of a license applied for under this chapter shall have the right
of appeal to and a hearing before the City Manager.
   (B)   Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Manager, within 14
days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's
last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the
appeal. The City Manager shall set a time and place for a hearing on such
appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant in the same
manner as provided in §120.009(H) for notice of hearing on revocation. The
decision and order of the City Manager in such appeal shall be final and
conclusive.
(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)
§ 120.011 DISTRIBUTION.
   (A)   Distributing in public places. It shall be unlawful for any person,
house-to-house solicitor or handbill distributor to deposit, place, throw,
scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any public place within the city;
provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for any person, house-to-house
solicitor or handbill distributor to hand out or distribute, without charge to
the receiver thereof, any handbill in any public place to any person willing to
accept the same.
   (B)   Placing in vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person, to
distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any
automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed
to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any handbill to the
owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle who is willing to
accept the same.
   (C)   Distribution on uninhabited or vacant private premises. It shall be
unlawful for any person, house-to-house solicitor or handbill distributor to
knowingly distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or
upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant.
   (D)   Distribution on inhabited private premises. No person, house-to-house
solicitor or handbill distributor licensed under the provisions of this
chapter, or any other person, shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter
or cast any handbill in or upon any private premises which are inhabited,
except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner,
occupant, or any other person then present in or upon such private premises;
provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not
posted as provided in this chapter, the aforesaid licensed or other person,
unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or
deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such
handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from
being blown or drifted about such premises or elsewhere, except that mailboxes
may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations.
   (E)   Prohibiting distribution where properly posted. It shall be unlawful
for any person, house-to-house solicitor or handbill distributor to distribute,
deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill upon any premises, if
requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises
in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words:
“No Handbills,” “No Solicitors,” or any similar notice indicating in any manner
that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or to have
their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such
premises. Signs prohibiting distribution where properly posted shall be no
larger than 12 inches by three inches in dimension and letters shall not be
smaller than one inch.
(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010) Penalty, see §
54.999
§ 120.012 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to the
distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, nor to handbills
primarily or solely pertaining to religious, social or political activities,
when distributed without monetary charge.
(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)
§ 120.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.
(Ord. 2010-6, passed 5-11-2010)
CHAPTER 121: MARIJUANA BUSINESSES
Section
   
121.001   Purpose
   
121.002   Definitions
   
121.003   Authorization of facilities and fee
   
121.004   Requirements and procedure for issuing license
   
121.005   Other requirements for marijuana establishments or facilities
   
121.006   Denial of permit; appeal hearing
   
121.007   License renewal
   
121.008   Applicability
 
   
121.999   Penalty
§ 121.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the intent of this chapter to authorize the establishment of
certain types of marijuana establishments in the City of Hamtramck and provide
for the adoption of reasonable restrictions to protect the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the community at large; retain the character of
neighborhoods; and mitigate potential impacts on surrounding properties and
persons. It is also the intent of this chapter to help defray administrative
and enforcement costs associated with the operation of a marijuana
establishment in the City of Hamtramck through imposition of an annual,
nonrefundable fee of not more than $5,000 on each marijuana establishment
licensee, or other such fee as authorized in the Medical Marihuana Facilities
Licensing Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq., and the Michigan Regulation and
Taxation of Marijuana Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27951 et seq.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to grant immunity from criminal or
civil prosecution, penalty, or sanction for the cultivation, manufacture,
possession, use, sale, or distribution of marijuana, in any form, that is not
in compliance with the in the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act,
M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq., the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of
Marijuana Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27951 et seq.; the Marihuana Tracking Act,
M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27901 et seq.; and all other applicable rules promulgated by
the State of Michigan.
   (C)   As of the effective date of this chapter, marijuana remains classified
as a Schedule 1 controlled substance under the Federal Controlled Substances
Act, 21 U.S.C. Sec. 801 et seq., which makes it unlawful to manufacture,
distribute, or dispense marijuana, or possess marijuana with intent to
manufacture, distribute, or dispense marijuana. Nothing in this chapter is
intended to grant immunity from any criminal prosecution under federal laws.
(Ord. 2021-01, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 121.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, all of the words, terms and phrases
defined by the in the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act (MMFLA) and
the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marijuana Act (MRTMA), as amended, are
adopted herein by reference. As used in this chapter, they have the same
meaning as provided in the MMFLA and the MRTMA. The following words, terms, and
phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   CULTIVATE. To propagate, breed, grow, harvest, dry, cure, or separate parts
of the marijuana plant by manual or mechanical means.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs.
   MARIJUANA or MARIHUANA.
      (1)   All parts of the plant of the genus cannabis, growing or not; the
seeds of the plant; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant
or its seeds or resin, including marijuana concentrate and marijuana-infused
products. For purposes of this chapter, marijuana does not include:
         (a)   The mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks,
oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the
resin extracted from those stalks, fiber, oil, or cake, or any sterilized seed
of the plant that is incapable of germination;
         (b)   Industrial hemp; or
         (c)   Any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical
or oral administrations, food, drink, or other products.
      (2)   MARIJUANA has the same meaning as "marihuana" under the MMFLA and
MRTMA.
   MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT. A marijuana grower, marijuana safety compliance
facility, marijuana processor, marijuana microbusiness, marijuana retailer,
marijuana secure transporter, designated consumption center, or any other type
of marijuana-related business licensed by the Department as defined in the
MRTMA, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27951 et seq.
   MARIJUANA FACILITY. Enterprise at a specific location at which a licensee is
licensed to operate under the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act,
M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq., including a marijuana grower, marijuana
processor, marijuana provisioning center, marijuana secure transporter, or
marijuana safety compliance facility. The term does not include or apply to a
"primary caregiver" or "caregiver" as that term is defined in the Michigan
Medical Marihuana Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.26421 et seq.
   MARIJUANA GROWER. A person licensed to cultivate marijuana and sell or
otherwise transfer marijuana to marijuana establishments.
   MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCT. A topical formulation, tincture, beverage, edible
substance, or similar product containing marijuana and other ingredients and
that is intended for human consumption.
   MARIJUANA MICROBUSINESS. A person licensed to cultivate not more than 150
marijuana plants; process and package marijuana; and sell or otherwise transfer
marijuana to individuals who are 21 years of age or older or to a marijuana
safety compliance facility, but not to other marijuana establishments.
   MARIJUANA PROCESSOR. A person licensed to obtain marijuana from marijuana
establishments; process and package marijuana; and sell or otherwise transfer
marijuana to marijuana establishments.
   MARIJUANA PROVISIONING CENTER. A licensee that is a commercial entity
located in this state that purchases marihuana from a grower or processor and
sells, supplies, or provides marijuana to registered qualifying patients,
directly or through the patients' registered primary caregivers. Provisioning
center includes any commercial property where marijuana is sold at retail to
registered qualifying patients or registered primary caregivers.
   MARIJUANA RETAILER. A person licensed to obtain marijuana from marijuana
establishments and to sell or otherwise transfer marijuana to marijuana
establishments and to individuals who are 21 years of age or older.
   MARIJUANA SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITY. A person licensed to test marijuana,
including certification for potency and the presence of contaminants.
   MARIJUANA SECURE TRANSPORTER. A person licensed to obtain marijuana from
marijuana establishments in order to transport marijuana to marijuana
establishments.
   MMFLA. The Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.2701,
et seq.
   MRA. The Michigan Marijuana Regulatory Agency, or other similar agency,
established by the Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs to regulate
marijuana business in Michigan.
   MRTMA. The Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, Initiated Law
1 of 2018, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27951 et seq.
   PROCESS or PROCESSING. To separate or otherwise prepare parts of the
marijuana plant and to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or
prepare marijuana concentrate or marijuana-infused products.
   RULES. That portion of the Michigan Administrative Code, rules R420.1
through R420.1004, or any other rule or regulation promulgated by the Michigan
Marijuana Regulatory Agency.
   STATE LICENSE. A license issued by the Department that allows a person to
operate a marijuana establishment or marijuana facility.
(Ord. 2021-01, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 121.003 AUTHORIZATION OF FACILITIES AND FEE.
   (A)   The following types of marijuana businesses or marijuana
establishments are authorized to operate in the city of Hamtramck:
      (1)   Marijuana retailer that are in operation at the time of the
effective date of this chapter or who have received a license to operate a
marijuana retail establishment from the MRA prior to the effective date of this
chapter.
      (2)   Marijuana provisioning centers located in a marijuana retailer in
operation at the time this chapter is adopted, provided the operator holds an
equivalent license from the MRA allowing sale of both adult use and medical
marijuana in the same establishment.
   (B)   No new marijuana retailers or marijuana provisioning centers will be
authorized after the effective date of this chapter.
   (C)   All other uses authorized under either the MMFLA or MRTMA are
prohibited.
(Ord. 2021-01, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 121.004 REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURE FOR ISSUING LICENSE.
   (A)   A nonrefundable application fee shall be paid by the applicant for
each marijuana establishment or use sought to be licensed under this chapter,
in an annual amount not to exceed the state maximum, as set by resolution of
the City of Hamtramck Council as part of the annual budget process.
   (B)   No person shall operate a marijuana establishment in City of Hamtramck
without a valid marijuana establishment license issued by the City of Hamtramck
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Every applicant for a license to operate a marijuana establishment
shall file an application in the City Clerk's office upon a form provided by
the City Clerk, which shall be signed and verified under oath by the applicant,
if an individual, or by the authorized agent for any firm, partnership,
association, corporation, company or organization and shall set forth and/or
provide at a minimum, the following information and documentation:
      (1)   If the applicant is an individual, he/she must provide their: name,
address and telephone number;
      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership, or an employee, it must provide:
the name of the organization and each partner, residential and business address
and telephone number of each partner and the business;
      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation, it must provide: the name of the
organization, date of organization and certificate of good standing from the
state under which the corporation was organized, the names of the principal
officers, directors and local representatives of their organization, their
residential and business addresses, and telephone numbers;
      (4)   The length of time for which the right to do business as a
marijuana establishment is sought;
      (5)   A brief description of the product, products or services involved
at the marijuana establishment;
      (6)   The name, address and telephone number of the organization's
registered agent or the party that has the full power and authority to accept
service of process for and on behalf of applicant in respect to any matters
connected with or arising out of the business transacted under said license
with full acknowledgment that service on said agent shall be valid when
personally served on him/her;
      (7)   The location and mailing address and all telephone numbers where
the marijuana establishment will be located;
      (8)   The operator of the marijuana establishment shall be required to
submit proof, in a form acceptable to the Clerk, of ownership of the property
where the marijuana establishment is to be operated. If the location/property/
premises of the marijuana establishment to be licensed hereunder is not owned
by the operator of the marijuana establishment, the operator shall submit
alternate written proof in a form acceptable to the Clerk that the titled owner
of the location/property/premises to be licensed has given notarized written
consent to the operator to use the premises for the licensed use;
      (9)   Proof that all fees imposed hereunder have been paid in full and
that the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the city or in default of any
other provision of the Hamtramck City Code;
      (10)   A binding release of liability and agreement to hold harmless the
City of Hamtramck from any liability arising out of the operation of the
marijuana establishment; and
      (11)   Proof of insurance providing coverage for fire and loss liability
and claims arising out of conditions, activities, structures and facilities
maintained in relation to the marijuana establishment, in an amount of no less
than $1,000,000 umbrella coverage.
   (D)   Every applicant for a license to operate a marijuana establishment
shall submit with the application a photocopy of the applicant's valid and
current license issued by the State of Michigan in accordance with the Michigan
Medical Marijuana Facilities Licensing Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101, et seq, or
the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marijuana Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27951 et
seq., if it has been granted.
   (E)   Upon an applicant's completion of the above-provided form and
furnishing of all required information and documentation, the City Clerk shall
accept the application and assign it a sequential application number by
establishment type based on the date and time of acceptance. The City Clerk
shall notify an application not later than 30 days from the date the
application was accepted whether the application is complete, or if more
information is required.
   (F)   Within 90 days from the applicant submitting a completed application,
and payment of the application fee, the City Clerk shall approve or deny the
provisional marijuana establishment license. The City Clerk shall issue
marijuana establishment licenses in order of the sequential application number
previously assigned.
   (G)   A provisional license means only that the applicant has submitted a
valid application for a marijuana establishment license, and the applicant
shall not locate or operate a marijuana establishment without obtaining all
other permits and approvals required by all other applicable ordinances and
regulations of the City of Hamtramck. A provisional license will lapse and be
void if such permits and approvals are not diligently pursued to completion.
   (H)   Maintaining a valid marijuana retailer license or medical marijuana
provision center license issued by the state is a condition for the issuance
and maintenance of a marijuana establishment license under this chapter and
continued operation of any marijuana establishment. The operator of the
marijuana establishment must comply with all rules and regulations promulgated
by the MRA.
   (I)   A marijuana establishment license issued under this chapter is not
transferable.
   (J)   The City Clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant unless the Clerk
finds reason for denial including that the applicant's permit has previously
been revoked. The permit shall be for no more than one year in term. The
standards for denial of the application by the City Clerk are as follows:
      (1)   The application is not completely filled out as required by §
121.004(C).
      (2)   Verification of any of the information required by §
121.004(C) shows the information provided by the applicant to be fraudulent, a
misrepresentation, or a false statement.
      (3)   Failure to pay the nonrefundable application fee.
      (4)   Notification from the Michigan Marijuana Regulatory Agency that the
applicants request for a marijuana establishment license has been denied or
revoked by the Agency.
      (5)   No permit shall be issued to any applicant until such applicant
shall have obtained the age of 21 years.
      (6)   Any other competent, material and substantial evidence indicating
the applicant or any of the applicant's proposed employees pose an apparent
danger to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city and/or the
activity proposed to be permitted constitutes an apparent danger to the health,
safety and welfare of the people of the city.
(Ord. 2021-01, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 121.005 OTHER REQUIREMENTS FOR MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS OR FACILITIES.
   (A)   No marijuana establishment shall be located within:
      (1)   One thousand feet, of an operational school, including pre-
kindergarten that is located within a school; or
      (2)   One thousand feet, of the following buffered uses: Public parks; a
commercial child care organization (non-home occupation) that is required to be
licensed or registered with the Michigan Department of Health and Human
Services, or its successor agency; a church or other place of worship; or
another marijuana establishment.
   (B)   Every marijuana establishment or marijuana facility shall comply with
the following sections of the Michigan Administrative Code:
      (1)   Rule 420.208 regarding building and fire safety.
      (2)   Rule 420.209 regarding security measures, required security plan
and video surveillance system.
(Ord. 2021-01, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 121.006 DENIAL OF PERMIT; APPEAL HEARING.
   (A)   The Clerk may refuse to issue a permit for the reasons stated in §
121.004(J).
   (B)   Any person whose permit application has been denied shall have the
right to petition the City Council for an appeal. The City Council shall grant
a public hearing on this appeal, and the applicant shall have the right to
appear and present evidence on his/her behalf. Following such hearing, the
Council shall submit to the applicant a written statement of its findings and
determinations. The Council's determination shall be based upon competent,
material and substantial evidence showing failure to comply with the
requirements of § 121.004(J).
(Ord. 2021-01, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 121.007 LICENSE RENEWAL.
   (A)   A marijuana establishment license shall be valid for one year from the
date of issuance, unless revoked as provided by law.
   (B)   A valid marijuana establishment license may be renewed on an annual
basis by submitting a renewal application upon a form provided by the City of
Hamtramck and payment of the nonrefundable annual license fee, in the amount as
set by Council. Application to renew a marijuana establishment license shall be
filed at least 30 days prior to the date of its expiration.
(Ord. 2021-01, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 121.008 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and
establishment described herein, whether the operations or activities associated
with a marijuana establishment were established without authorization before
the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 2021-01, passed 2-9-2021)
§ 121.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the payment of a
civil fine of not more than $500, plus costs. Each day a violation of this
chapter continues to exist constitutes a separate violation. A violator of this
chapter shall also be subject to such additional sanctions, remedies and
judicial orders as are authorized under Michigan law.
   (B)   A violation of this chapter is deemed to be a nuisance per se. In
addition to any other remedy available at law, the City of Hamtramck may bring
an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain,
prevent, or abate any violation of this chapter.
   (C)   This chapter shall be enforced and administered by the City Clerk, or
such other city official as may be designated from time to time by resolution
of the Council.
(Ord. 2021-01, passed 2-9-2021)
CHAPTER 122: SMOKING LOUNGES
Section
   
122.001   Definitions
   
122.002   License required
   
122.003   Application for smoking lounge license
   
122.004   License fees
   
122.005   Investigation
   
122.006   Reasons for denial
   
122.007   Display of smoking lounge license
   
122.008   Transferability; change of ownership
   
122.009   Manager; change of manager
   
122.010   Hours of operation
   
122.011   Age restrictions
   
122.012   Parking restrictions loitering, exterior lighting, and monitoring
requirements
   
122.013   Standards of conduct
   
122.014   Disposal of ash or any burnt items
   
122.015   Compliance with laws
   
122.016   Right of entry
   
122.017   Revocation and suspension of a license
 
   
122.999   Penalty
§ 122.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OTHER LEGAL SUBSTANCES. Include clove cigarettes, kreteks, herbal
cigarettes, and any other legal substance that can be consumed by smoking.
   PRINCIPAL BUSINESS PURPOSE.
      (1)   The dedication of more than 50% of its interior floor space for the
smoking of tobacco products or other legal substances at the establishment; or
      (2)   The receipt of more than 35% of its revenues from one or both of
the following:
         (a)   The smoking of tobacco products or other legal substances to be
consumed at the establishment; or
         (b)   The renting or furnishing of smoking paraphernalia including but
not limited to: rolling papers, pipes, hookahs or narghiles to be used at the
establishment.
      (3)   The dedication of more than 35% of its advertising expenditures to
the advertising of smoking tobacco products or other legal substances at the
establishment.
   SMOKING LOUNGE. An establishment, which, as one of its principal business
purposes, is dedicated to the smoking of tobacco products or other legal
substances on its premises. The term SMOKING LOUNGE includes, but is not
limited to: cigar lounges, hookah cafés, tobacco lounges, tobacco clubs or
tobacco bars.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Cigars, cigarettes, or non-cigarette smoking tobacco.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 122.002 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a smoking lounge in the City of Hamtramck without
first obtaining a smoking lounge license issued pursuant to the provisions of
this title.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 122.003 APPLICATION FOR SMOKING LOUNGE LICENSE.
   (A)   An applicant shall submit to the City Clerk annually a fully completed
application, on a form that is prepared and furnished by the City Clerk.
   (B)   The application shall include at least the following information:
      (1)   The full and complete name and current address of the applicant(s).
      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each
partner shall be listed, and a copy of any partnership agreement shall be
attached to the application.
      (3)   If the applicant is a privately held corporation, the name and
address of each corporate officer, member of board of directors, and
stockholder shall be listed, and a copy of the articles of incorporation shall
be attached to the application.
      (4)   If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, the name and
address of each corporate officer, each member of the board of directors and
each stockholder who owns 10% or more of the corporate stock shall be listed on
the application.
      (5)   If the applicant is a limited liability company, the name and
address of each member, manager and assignee of a membership interest shall be
listed, and the articles of organization shall be attached to the application.
         (a)   The complete name, address, and telephone number of the proposed
licensed business;
         (b)   Written statement as to the applicant’s experience in operating
similar businesses;
         (c)   A concise statement as to the individual applicant’s past
employment;
         (d)   Any other information pertinent to the applicant and the
operation of the proposed licensed business.
   (C)   An applicant shall attach to the completed application a floor plan,
drawn to scale, showing the interior of the proposed business, and uses of the
proposed spaces.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 122.004 LICENSE FEES.
   The fee for a smoking lounge license shall be set in accordance with City
Council resolution annually and paid annually.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 122.005 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   After the City Clerk has received a completed application, it shall
be, at a minimum, forwarded to the following city departments for review and
investigation:
      (1)   Police;
      (2)   Fire; and
      (3)   Building Inspection.
   (B)   During city business hours or at another mutually agreeable time, the
applicant shall allow the representatives of the above referenced city
departments onto the property and into the proposed licensed premises to
complete an investigation.
   (C)   If all of the above listed city departments approve the application,
and it conforms to the provisions of this chapter, the City Clerk shall issue a
smoking lounge license to the applicant.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 122.006 REASONS FOR DENIAL.
   (A)   Requirements for applicants. A license may be denied as a result of
one or more of the following factors:
      (1)   An individual applicant, who has previously received a smoking
lounge license and has had the license revoked or been declared by a court of
law to be a nuisance, as defined under the Revised Judicature Act, M.C.L.A.§
600.3801; or been subject to an order of closure or padlocking.
      (2)   If the applicant is a co-partnership, and any of the members of the
co-partnership fail to qualify to obtain a smoking lounge license.
      (3)   A corporation if any officer, manager or director or a stock owner
or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 10% of the stock of such
corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license or related permit
hereunder for any reason.
      (4)   If the applicant proposes to hire a manager or agent to handle the
business operations, and the proposed manager or agent does not possesses the
same qualifications as those required of the licensee.
      (5)   If any of the individuals who are required to be identified on the
application, as set forth, have been convicted, found responsible, or nolo
contendere for a violation of any federal, state, or local law involving moral
turpitude, dishonesty, fraud, violence, controlled substances, the sale,
distribution, or furnishing of tobacco, or the sale, distribution, or
furnishing of alcoholic liquors may be disqualified, unless.
         (a)   The individual can demonstrate good cause as to why the
disqualifying factor should be granted a waiver.
            1.   I.e. a reasonable amount of time has elapsed, the individual
had made demonstrable changes in their life, the project significantly benefits
the city and the disqualifying factor does not relate to the project.
         (b)   In the discretion of the Chief of Police and City Manager they
have both approved a waiver.
      (6)   If an applicant does not own the premises for which a smoking
lounge license is sought or does not have a lease or other right of exclusive
possession of the premises proposed for the business for the full period for
which the license is issued.
      (7)   Requirement for the proposed licensed premises. Smoking lounge
license shall not be issued if there are any violation(s) of the applicable
building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, or fire prevention codes,
applicable zoning regulations, or applicable public health regulations, unless
such violation can be remedied within a stated period of time as determined by
the Fire Department or Building Department.
      (8)   Location. No license shall be issued to a business located within
500 feet, to the nearest lot line, to be measured as the shortest distance
which can be walked or driven on road or sidewalk, of a school.
      (9)   If the license is denied, within 20 days of the denial the
applicant may request in writing an appeal hearing before the City Council.
         (a)   Appeal hearing.
            1.   Notice of hearing. Upon receipt of a request for appeal, the
City Council shall provide the applicant with notice and an opportunity to be
heard. The City Council shall serve notice upon the applicant by certified
mail, not less than 20 days prior to the hearing date.
               a.   The notice shall state: The date, time and place of the
hearing.
               b.   A statement that the applicant may present evidence and
testimony, and may be represented by an attorney.
            (2)   Hearing and decision. The hearing shall be conducted by the
City Council and shall be open to the public. The City Council shall submit to
the applicant a written statement of its findings, decision, specific grounds
for its decision, and a statement that the decision may be appealed to a court
of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 122.007 DISPLAY OF SMOKING LOUNGE LICENSE.
   A smoking lounge license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be prominently displayed near the entrance of the licensed premises.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 122.008 TRANSFERABILITY; CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   Licenses issued under this title shall not be transferable.
   (B)   Each license issued under this title is separate and distinct, and no
person shall exercise any of the privileges granted under any license other
than that which he/she holds. A separate license shall be issued for each
specific smoking lounge business within the City of Hamtramck.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 122.009 MANAGER; CHANGE OF MANAGER.
   At least one registered manager who has been identified on the application
for a smoker’s lounge license shall be on the premises at all times that the
business is open. It shall be unlawful for any person not identified on the
smoker’s lounge license application to work as a manager of a smoking lounge
business unless the proposed manager or operator has submitted a registration
form with the individual’s legal name and any aliases, home address, telephone
numbers, date of birth, and driver’s license number, and is determined
qualified to serve as a manager by the Hamtramck City Clerk, using the criteria
as set forth in this chapter. All managers must be over the age of 21 years
old. The licensee shall be responsible for notifying the city of any proposed
change in management and insuring that the proposed new manager has obtained
the required approval before working or serving as a manager of the licensed
establishment.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 122.010 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for a smoking lounge business to be open for business
or for the licensee, manager or any employee of a licensee to allow patrons to
enter into the licensed premises between 2:00 a.m. of each day until 8:00 a.m.
the next day. All individuals except employees of the smoking lounge business
shall be required to leave or be removed from the building by 2:30 a.m. Only a
maximum of three employees shall remain on the premises after 2:30 am and each
shall carry proof of employment at the licensed establishment, such as an
identification badge. The manager and/or employees shall provide proof of such
employment when requested to do so by a member of the Hamtramck Police
Department or Hamtramck Fire Department.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 122.011 AGE RESTRICTIONS.
   No one shall be allowed on the premises of a smoking lounge business unless
the individual is the age of 21 years of age or older. The manager and/or
employees shall ensure that identifications of individuals on the premises have
been checked to determine that every individual is over the age of 21 years of
age or older before entry into the premises. The manager and/or employees shall
secure exit doors to ensure that no one has or is attempting to gain secret
entry into the premises.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 122.012 PARKING RESTRICTIONS LOITERING, EXTERIOR LIGHTING, AND MONITORING
REQUIREMENTS.
   The manager and/or employees shall require patrons to leave the parking lot
of the smoking lounge business by 2:30 a.m. The manager and/or employees shall
insure that patrons of the smoking lounge business are not parking in adjacent
or neighboring parking lots or in residential areas that are not part of the
parking area provided to the licensed premises. It shall be the duty of the
licensee or designated local agent:
   (A)   Signs. Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted
on the premises, no minors are permitted on the premises; and patrons must
leave the parking area immediately upon close of the business;
   (B)   Monitor. Designate one or more employees to monitor, while the
premises are open for business, the activities of the persons on the premises
by visually inspecting the interior and exterior of the premises at least once
every 90 minutes.
   (C)   Exterior. Ensure lighting of the exterior premises is provided,
including all parking areas, for visual inspection and security.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 122.013 STANDARD OF CONDUCT.
   The following standards of conduct shall be adhered to by managers and
employees of any smoker’s lounge business:
   (A)   Alcohol and liquor. No manager, employee, volunteer, or representative
of the licensee shall serve or engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages on the
premises, including, but not limited to: any spirituous, vinous, malt or
fermented liquor, beverages, liquids and compounds.
   (B)   Consumption of alcohol. It shall be unlawful to permit the consumption
of alcoholic beverages in any smoking lounge business. The licensee’s manager
and/or employees shall immediately remove any person who opens or consumes
alcoholic beverages on the premises.
   (C)   Controlled substances. It shall be unlawful to permit the use, sale or
presence of controlled substances (as defined under M.C.L.A. §§ 333.7212, et.
seq, of the Public Health Code as amended, or a rule promulgated under that Act
or Code), on the licensed premises. The manager and/or employees shall
immediately remove any person possessing, distributing, selling, consuming and/
or using controlled substances on the licensed premises.
   (D)   It is the duty of the licensee to ensure that at least one manager is
on duty and on the premises at all times that persons are on the licensed
premises, and that the manager is visible to any patron who is present on the
premises.
   (E)   It is the duty of the licensee and managers of the premises to ensure
that any doors to public areas on the premises remain unlocked during business
hours.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 122.014 DISPOSAL OF ASH OR ANY BURNT ITEMS.
   It is the duty of the licensee to ensure that the ash, charcoal, any burnt
items, objects or anything that may cause fire associated with this business
cool for at least 48 hours prior to disposal. The disposal process may be
immediate by pouring water over the hot charcoal and stirring it very carefully
prior to disposal. When the ash has cooled completely, wrap it in aluminum foil
and place it in a noncombustible outdoor trash bin. Plastic bins generally, or
the city provided roll-out waste bins are NOT noncombustible trash bins.
   (A)   It shall be the licensee’s responsibility to ensure that the outdoor
trash containers are locked at all times.
   (B)   The licensee is responsible for any trash fire caused in the trash
containers owned and operated by the business. It shall be presumed that any
fire within trash containers associated with the business is the sole
responsibility of the licensee. The licensee will be directly responsible for
any damage associated with said fire and may be immediately cited under this
chapter for any occurrence. It is the licensee’s responsibility to monitor the
trash containers associated with the business at all times.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 122.015 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.
   The business licensee, the manager and employees shall comply with all
federal and state laws and the City of Hamtramck Code of Ordinances, including,
but not limited to, building and fire codes.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 122.016 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The filing of an application for a smoker’s lounge license shall constitute
consent of the applicant and licensee and his/her or its agents, managers and/
or employees to permit the City’s Police Department, Building Department,
Planning Department or any other department or agent of the city to conduct
routine inspections of any licensed smoker’s lounge business during the hours
the establishment is conducting business and during any time that employees or
managers are on the premises. The Hamtramck Police Department and the Hamtramck
Fire Department shall be allowed unannounced access to the smoking lounge
premises to inspect for violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 122.017 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF A LICENSE.
   (A)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, may immediately revoke or
suspend a smoking lounge license, upon the applicant’s violation of any
provisions of this chapter or for other good cause.
      (1)   Upon the immediate suspension of a license the City Clerk shall
then issue a notice to the licensee which shall include the grounds for the
suspension and effective date(s) of the suspension.
         (a)   Within 20 days of the suspension the licensee may request in
writing an appeal hearing before the City Council.
      (2)   Upon immediate revocation of the license the City Clerk shall then
issue a notice to the licensee which shall include the grounds for the
revocation and effective date of the revocation.
         (a)   Within 20 days of the revocation the licensee may request in
writing an appeal hearing before the City Council.
   (B)   Appeal hearing.
      (1)   Notice of hearing. Upon receipt of a request for appeal, the City
Council shall provide the licensee with notice and an opportunity to be heard.
The City Council shall serve notice upon the licensee by certified mail, not
less than 20 days prior to the hearing date. The notice shall state:
         (a)   The date, time and place of the hearing.
         (b)   A statement that the licensee may present evidence and
testimony, and may be represented by an attorney.
      (2)   Hearing and decision. The hearing shall be conducted by the City
Council and shall be open to the public. The City Council shall submit to the
licensee a written statement of its findings, decision, specific grounds for
its decision, and a statement that the decision may be appealed to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 122.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500 and/or 90 days in jail, as well as the penalties provided herein.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-26-2020)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
133.   WEAPONS
      
134.   MINORS
      
135.   PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
Disorderly Conduct
   
130.001   Definitions
   
130.002   Acts prohibited
   
130.003   Authority to question
   
130.004   Unauthorized persons on school property
   
130.005   Loitering
   
130.006   Ticket scalping
   
130.007   Conduct in parking areas
   
130.008   Domestic violence
   
130.009   Solicitation
   
130.010   Minority or ethnic intimidation
Nuisances
   
130.025   Nuisance defined and prohibited
   
130.026   Dangerous structures and premises
   
130.027   Graffiti
   
130.028   Trash
   
130.029   Incomplete construction
   
130.030   Animal nuisances
   
130.031   Abandoned refrigerators
   
130.032   Drive-in restaurants
   
130.033   Landfills
Noise Control
   
130.050   Applicability
   
130.051   Definitions
   
130.052   General prohibition
   
130.053   Specific prohibitions
   
130.054   Maximum permissible sound levels
   
130.055   Limited exemptions
   
130.056   General exemptions
   
130.057   Temporary exemptions
   
130.058   Variances
   
130.059   Liability of owner, lessee or occupant
Fires
   
130.075   False alarm of fire
   
130.076   Obstructing and disobeying Fire Department officers in line of duty
Telephone Harassment
   
130.090   Repeated calling prohibited
   
130.091   Threatening, vulgar or insulting language over telephone prohibited
 
   
130.999   Penalty
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
§ 130.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LOITER. To stand or recline in one place or to move slowly about.
   MASCULINE PRONOUNS. Construed to include both male and female persons.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, alley, park, government-owned or government-
controlled building, common hallway or public room or any dwelling of greater
than two units, or any other place to which the public has lawful access.
§ 130.002 ACTS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Commit an assault, or an assault and battery, upon any person.
   (B)   Be intoxicated in a public place and either endanger directly the
safety of another person or of property.
   (C)   Be present in any public place with his or her ability to walk, talk
or see significantly impaired by the use of any controlled substance, as
defined by Public Act 368 of 1978, as amended, provided, however, that this
division shall not be construed to apply to a person whose faculties have been
impaired by medication prescribed by a physician and taken as directed.
   (D)   Knowingly prowl about premises owned or leased by another in the
nighttime without the express or implied consent of that person.
   (E)   Knowingly go upon property owned or leased by another and peep through
the window of a building on that property at any person without the express or
implied consent of that person.
   (F)    Engage in any fight in a public place.
   (G)   Remain in any public place after its regular closing hours after being
told to leave by one authorized to give such an order.
   (H)   Conduct himself or herself in any public place, or join with one or
more other persons in a public place, if he or she knows or should know that,
singly or together with the others with whom he or she has joined, he or she is
unreasonably obstructing the free and uninterrupted passage of the public along
any street or sidewalk, provided that this division is not to be interpreted to
conflict with the regulations of the National Labor Relations Board regarding
picketing in labor disputes. A violation of this division shall constitute a
civil infraction, which shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100 and
costs.
   (I)    Persist in disturbing the public peace and quiet by loud or
aggressive conduct, having once been clearly informed by persons affected that
he or she is, in fact, unreasonably causing such a disturbance, provided,
however, that notice need not be given when such persons affected reasonably
believe that to do so would constitute a risk to their personal safety.
   (J)   Persist in disturbing the peace and orderly conduct of any meeting of
a public body or any meeting open to the general public by any conduct or
communication which, by its very existence, inflicts injury or tends to incite
an immediate breach of the peace or which prevents the peaceful and orderly
conduct of such meeting after having been clearly informed that he or she is,
in fact, unreasonably causing such a disturbance.
   (K)   Solicit or accost any other person in a public place for the purpose
of inducing participation in an act of prostitution.
   (L)   Transport any person, for consideration, to a place where the business
of prostitution, gambling or the illegal sale of liquor is carried on, for the
purpose of enabling such person to be a customer of any such business.
   (M)   Knowingly harass any other person. HARASS is defined as any repeated
non-verbal conduct which is specifically intended to frighten, embarrass or
anger the person or persons who are the object of such conduct or which the
person accused has reason to know is likely to produce such reactions, or as
any repeated verbal communications which, by its very utterance, inflicts
injury or tends to incite an immediate breach of peace.
   (N)    Knowingly permit a person in any place owned or controlled by him or
her to disturb the public peace by loud or boisterous conduct.
   (O)    Knowingly obstruct or resist any member of the Police force or Fire
Department in the discharge of the officer’s lawful duties or fail to obey the
lawful order of said officer, knowing the officer to be a member of the Police
force or Fire Department.
   (P)   Urinate or defecate on any public street or sidewalk or on the floor
of that part of any building open to the public or any other place in view of
the public not specifically designated for that purpose.
   (Q)   Throw any object from any moving vehicle or toward any person or
moving vehicle if he or she knows or should know that damage to person or
property, or alarm, which may foreseeably produce damage to person or property,
is likely to result.
   (R)   Commit the offense of larceny by taking any property not his or her
own and to which he or she has no claim or right with the intent permanently to
deprive the owner of lawful possession or receive or possess any such property,
knowing the same to be stolen.
   (S)    Knowingly destroy, damage, deface or remove any public property or
other property not his or her own.
   (T)   Summon, without any good reason therefor, by telephone or otherwise,
the Police or Fire Department, any public or private ambulance or any other
service of any kind to go to any address where the service called for is not
needed.
   (U)   Knowingly take possession of and ride or take away any bicycle without
the express or implied permission of the owner.
   (V)   Telephone, visit or otherwise communicate with any person repeatedly
or cause the same to be done for the primary purpose of harassing such other
person or his or her family.
   (W)   Engage in any indecent or obscene conduct in any public place.
   (X)   Make any indecent exposure of his or her person in a public place.
Breastfeeding shall not be considered indecent exposure under this section.
   (Y)   Make or maintain an operating connection to public utility or cable
television facilities without the permission of the owner of such facilities.
   (Z)   When in proximity to a fire or other hazard, refuse or knowingly fail
to obey a reasonable official request or order to move for the purpose of
maintaining public safety.
   (AA)    Fail to accurately identify himself or herself when requested to do
so by a police officer after the officer observes that person commit a civil
infraction or when the officer has probable cause to believe the person has
committed a misdemeanor outside the officer’s presence.
   (BB)    While a spectator in a sport stadium, pass or assist in passing any
person, with or without that person’s consent, above spectators in the stadium.
   (CC)   Maintain a cigarette vending machine at any location which is open to
the public.
   (DD)   While in a store or in its immediate vicinity do any of the
following:
      (1)   While a store is open to the public, alter, transfer, remove and
replace, conceal or otherwise misrepresent the price at which property is
offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less
than the price at which the property is offered for sale.
      (2)   While a store is open to the public, steal property of the store
that is offered for sale.
      (3)   With the intent to defraud, obtain or attempt to obtain money or
property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid
for and belongs to the store.
Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.003 AUTHORITY TO QUESTION.
   Under circumstances where a police officer has good reason to believe that
any individual has committed or is about to commit any unlawful act, the
officer may ask the individual to identify himself or herself and explain his
or her presence on the scene, but failure to respond to such questioning shall
not constitute an offense; provided, however, that this section shall not be
construed to affect any obligation to respond which is otherwise imposed by
law.
§ 130.004 UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS ON SCHOOL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Any person found to be creating a disturbance in any private, public
or parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds, or on fields or
recreational areas or other grounds lawfully used for school activities while
such activities are in progress, shall leave immediately when so directed by
the principal or by any other person designated by the principal.
   (B)   No person shall enter and remain in any public, private or parochial
school building during regular or special sessions or other authorized
activities of such schools, who is not a regularly enrolled student, teacher,
authorized volunteer or other school district employee, unless he or she shall
have first and immediately proceeded to the administrative offices and
identified himself or herself to the principal or the principal’s designee.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter and remain in any public,
private or parochial school, or on surrounding school grounds within 250 feet
of the school building, after being requested to leave by the principal or his
or her designee.
Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.005 LOITERING.
   (A)   No person shall loiter on a public street, sidewalk or the premises of
a public building under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety or
health of any person or property in the vicinity.
   (B)   The following are circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether alarm is warranted:
      (1)   The person is one of a group of people threatening, making
threatening gestures at or otherwise menacing persons in the area.
      (2)   The person appears to be illegally consuming or using or concealing
illegal consumption or use of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances.
      (3)   The person is one of a group which is blocking the free passage of
pedestrian or vehicle traffic on a street or sidewalk.
   (C)   Prior to arrest for an offense under this section, a police officer
shall afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would
otherwise be warranted by requesting such person to identify himself or herself
and explaining his or her presence and conduct or by requesting him or her to
leave the area.
Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.006 TICKET SCALPING.
   (A)   No person shall sell or offer for sale upon a public street or other
public place, a ticket to a theatre, circus, athletic grounds, or place of
public entertainment or amusement, at a price in excess of that demanded or
received from the general public for the same privilege, or in excess of the
advertised or printed rate unless the owner, lessee, operator, or manager of
the place of public entertainment or amusement permits, in writing, a charge in
excess of the box office price.
   (B)   If the owner, lessee, operator, or manager of a circus, theatre,
athletic grounds, or place of public entertainment or amusement has sold a
ticket or admission to a person under restrictive conditions and at a less rate
than the general admission charged, and whose name appears on the face of the
tickets or is registered in the office of the owner, lessee, operator, or
manager as the holder of the ticket and if it is printed on the face of the
ticket that the ticket is nontransferable and sold only to the person whose
name appears on the face of the ticket or whose name is registered, the holder
of the ticket shall not sell the ticket to another person.
   (C)   A violation of this section shall be a civil infraction subject to a
civil fine of $25.
Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.007 CONDUCT IN PARKING AREAS.
   No person while within any public parking area or structure shall do any of
the following:
   (A)   Possess liquor in an open or uncapped container.
   (B)   Consume liquor.
   (C)   Start, maintain or assist in starting or maintaining any fire except
as may be necessary to light a cigarette, cigar or pipe.
   (D)   Remain inside or outside a vehicle for more than five minutes except
when going to and from a vehicle located within the public parking area or
structure and used by and for that person for transportation.
Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.008 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (A)   A police officer shall arrest a person when the officer has reasonable
cause to believe that person has, within the previous 24 hours, assaulted a
spouse, former spouse or other person residing or having resided in the same
household, if the victim has visible signs of injury from the assault or if the
assailant used or threaten to use a dangerous weapon (as defined in M.C.L.A. §
750.82). The obligation to arrest shall exist only if the assailant is present
or can be readily apprehended. A threat with a weapon is covered by this
section only if it is made at or about the time of the assault, if the weapon
is present and if there is an apparent ability to use it.
   (B)   When an arrest is made pursuant to division (B), prior to the release
of the assailant, the Police Department shall make a reasonable effort to
notify the victim and shall notify a SAFE House volunteer.
   (C)   When an officer responds to a complaint concerning an assault by a
person having the relationship described in division (A), the officer shall
provide the complainant a written statement indicating the officer’s name,
badge number, report number and follow-up telephone number.
   (D)   When an officer acts in good faith and exercises due care in making an
arrest pursuant to division (A), the city shall indemnify, defend and hold the
officer harmless as to any civil liability.
   (E)   This does not apply to assaults between parents or guardians and their
children or wards who are under 18 years of age.
§ 130.009 SOLICITATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit the immediate payment of
money or goods from another person, whether or not in exchange for goods,
services, or other consideration, under any of the following circumstances:
   (A)   On private property unless the solicitor has permission from the owner
or occupant;
   (B)   In any public transportation vehicle or public transportation
facility;
   (C)   In any public parking structure and within 12 feet of any entrance or
exit to any public parking structure;
   (D)   From a person who is in any vehicle on the street;
   (E)   By obstructing the free passage of pedestrian or vehicle traffic;
   (F)   Within 12 feet of a bank or automated teller machine;
   (G)   By moving to within two feet of the person solicited, unless that
person has indicated that he/she wishes to be solicited;
   (H)   By following and continuing to solicit a person who walks away from
the solicitor;
   (I)   By knowingly making a false or misleading representation in the course
of a solicitation;
   (J)   In a manner that appears likely to cause a reasonable person of
ordinary sensibilities to feel intimidated, threatened or harassed;
   (K)   Within 12 feet of the entrance to or exit from the Nickels Arcade,
located between State Street and Maynard Street; the Galleria, located between
S. University and the Forest Street parking structure; and the Pratt Building,
located between Main Street and the Ashley parking lot; or
   (L)   From a person who is a patron at any outdoor café or restaurant.
§ 130.010 MINORITY OR ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.
   (A)   A person is guilty of minority or ethnic intimidation if that person
maliciously, and with specific intent to intimidate or harass another person
because of that person’s race, color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, or
national origin, does any of the following:
      (1)   Causes physical contact with another person.
      (2)   Damages, destroys, or defaces any real or personal property of
another person.
         (a)   This can include the placing of any objects upon the vehicle of
another of any kind when done as a means of intimidation or with intent to
harass.
      (3)   Threatens, by word or act, to do an act described in division (1)
or (2), if there is reasonable cause to believe that an act described in
division (1) or (2) will occur.
   (B)   Minority or ethnic intimidation is a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days in jail, or by a fine of not more than
$500, or both.
   (C)   This offense shall be considered a separate offense from other crimes
against persons or property under the laws of the city and may be charged as an
additional offense to such offense.
(Res. 2023-123b, passed 9-12-2023)
NUISANCES
§ 130.025 NUISANCE DEFINED AND PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or
repose of the public; offends public decency; interferes with, obstructs or
renders dangerous any street, highway, navigable lake or stream; or in any way
renders the public insecure in life or property is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance. Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to,
whatever is forbidden by any provision of this chapter. No person shall commit,
create, or maintain any nuisance.
   (B)   Restrictions, prohibitions, and penalties hereunder, may be in
addition to those already provided for under this code.
Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.026 DANGEROUS STRUCTURES AND PREMISES.
   (A)   Generally. No person shall maintain any structure which is a menace to
the health, morals or safety of the public. No person owning or occupying any
premises shall permit any condition to exist thereon which endangers the public
health or safety.
   (B)   Emergency abatement. The City Manager may abate any such public
nuisance, if the public safety or health requires immediate action, without
preliminary order of the Council. Thereafter, the cost of abating such nuisance
shall be charged against the premises and the owner thereof.
Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.027 GRAFFITI.
   (A)   Graffiti constitutes a public nuisance and means any mark or marks on
any surface or structure made without the prior permission of the property
owner and made in any manner, including but not limited to, writing,
inscribing, drawing, tagging, sketching, spray-painting, painting, etching,
scratching, carving, engraving, scraping, or attaching. Chalk marks on
sidewalks are not graffiti. Graffiti does not include any posting of posters.
   (B)   No person shall apply graffiti to any surface or structure. A
violation of this division shall be a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of
the following:
      (1)   Community service that is as relevant and appropriate to the
violation as possible;
      (2)   Restitution; and/or
      (3)   A fine of not more than $500 plus costs.
   (C)   No person who owns or otherwise controls or manages any property shall
permit or allow any graffiti to be or remain on any surface or structure on the
property beyond the time indicated in a notice, which shall be no less than
seven calendar days after the notice is posted on the property or delivered to
the property owner and no less than nine calendar days if the notice is mailed.
If removal of the graffiti by the date set in the notice is not possible due to
weather or other reasonable cause, then on or before the date set in the notice
the person to whom the notice is issued or his or her agent shall contact the
city as indicated in the notice to request an extension. Removal of graffiti
may be by means of actual physical removal or covering the graffiti over with
paint or other similar substance applied to the surface or structure. A
violation of this division is not a civil infraction or a misdemeanor.
   (D)   Notice by the city to remove graffiti from a property may be made by
mailing it to the property owner, as shown on assessment records, delivering it
to the owner or posting it at a conspicuous place on the property.
   (E)   If any graffiti remains on the property beyond the time indicated in a
notice, then the city may remove the graffiti or have it removed in any
reasonable manner. The costs to the city for removal and administration shall
be charged to the owner and, if not paid, assessed against the property.
   (F)   The victim may proceed with any private right of action provided under
law against a person who has applied graffiti or the parent or guardian of a
minor.
§ 130.028 TRASH.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EXTERIOR. Any area of property outside a fully enclosed and covered
building, except in refuse containers.
      TRASH. Refuse, garbage and rubbish, as well as scrap materials,
including, but not limited to, wrecked or scrapped vehicles, rags, paper
products, scrap metal, used appliances, scrap plumbing supplies, or parts of
any of the foregoing or similar property.
   (B)   Prohibition of trash accumulation. No person owning or occupying
property in the city shall fail to keep the exterior area of that property free
from accumulations of trash. Violation of this section constitutes a civil
infraction punishable by a fine of not less than $100 for the first offense,
not less than $250 and up to $500 for the second offense, and not less than
$500 and up to $1,000 for each additional or subsequent offense within a two-
year time period, plus costs and all other remedies available by statute. The
maximum fine for any offense shall not exceed $1,000. Each day upon which such
violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   Removal of trash by city. If property is not cleared of trash in
violation of §
130.029 within ten days after notice is sent to the owner as indicated on
records of the City Assessor and, if occupied, to the address of the property,
the city may remove or have removed the trash from the premises. Prior to or
during removal of the trash, the items removed shall be photographed and, to
the extent possible, inventoried. All items having an apparent value of less
than $20 may be immediately deposited in the city landfill. Items having an
apparent value of $20 or more each shall be stored for five days prior to
disposal or sale. The reasonable cost of the removal, storage and disposal of
the trash shall be charged to the owner and assessed against the property.
   (D)   Stored items. Items removed and stored by the city pursuant to this
chapter will be released to the owner of the premises from which they were
removed upon payment of reasonable storage and removal charges.
   (D)   Court orders. Upon the request of the City Manager, the City Attorney
or his or her designee may commence suit in a court of appropriate jurisdiction
to obtain an order requiring a property owner or occupant to comply with this
chapter.
§ 130.029 INCOMPLETE CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Incomplete construction is any form of unfinished exterior
construction, including excavations, on which there has been no substantial
construction activity for at least six months.
   (B)   An owner of real estate containing incomplete construction shall be
deemed guilty of maintaining a nuisance. Each day such a nuisance exists
constitutes a separate offense. Each offense is punishable by a fine of up to
$500.
   (C)   An incomplete construction nuisance may be abated pursuant to an order
of the City Council. The cost of such abatement shall be charged against the
property.
   (D)   The City Manager may authorize the continuation of incomplete
construction for an additional period of up to six months. Such permission
shall be conditioned on the posting of a cash bond or letter of credit. The
form of such security must be approved by the City Attorney. The amount of the
security shall not be less than the Building Director’s estimate of the cost of
removal of the construction and restoration of the property.
§ 130.030 ANIMAL NUISANCES.
   No person shall keep, house, or maintain one or more animals that
constitutes a public nuisance as defined in this chapter. A person who violates
this section is subject to prosecution of the violation in the District Court
and/or a civil nuisance action in the County Circuit Court.
Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.031 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building
or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or
discarded ice box, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an
air-tight door, or lock which may not be released for opening from the inside
of said ice box, refrigerator or container.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building
or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or
discarded ice box, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an
air-tight snap-lock or other device thereon without first removing the snap-
lock or doors from the ice box, refrigerator or container.
Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.032 DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. Any establishment where food, frozen dessert and/or
beverage is sold to the consumer, and where motor vehicle parking space is
provided and where such food, frozen dessert, and/or beverage is intended to be
consumed in the motor vehicle parked upon the premises or anywhere on the
premises outside the building as well as inside the building.
      WASTE MATERIAL. Paper cups, straws, napkins, garbage, beverages, and all
other waste matter intended for disposal, which, if not placed in a proper
receptacle, tends to create a public nuisance by rendering property unclean,
unsafe, and unsightly.
   (B)   Owner not to maintain nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any owner,
manager or person in charge of any drive-in restaurant to cause, create, allow
or maintain any nuisance on its parking area whereby the peace, good order, or
sanitation of the neighborhood is disturbed, or persons owning or occupying
property in the neighborhood are disturbed or annoyed.
   (C)   Premises free from refuse.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the owner, manager or person in charge of
the drive-in restaurant, to keep the premises whereon the drive-in restaurant
is located, together with the parking area and that portion of any alley
adjoining the drive-in restaurant, free from their own waste material. Each
drive-in restaurant shall be provided with a sufficient number of containers of
legal type and size.
      (2) No person shall place, throw, or deposit any waste material upon the
outside premises or parking lot of a drive-in restaurant or upon any street,
alley, or property adjoining a drive-in restaurant, except in proper
receptacles provided for that purpose.
   (D)   Intoxicating liquors. No person, on the premises of a drive-in
restaurant, whether in or out of a motor vehicle, shall consume, knowingly have
in his possession or under his control, any beer, wine, or intoxicating liquor.
It shall be the duty of the owner, manager or person in charge of the premises
to post a notice of this provision in a conspicuous place at the entrance of
the premises.
   (E)   Noise and disturbances by patrons. No person or persons on the
premises of a drive-in restaurant shall race the motor of any vehicle,
needlessly bring to a sudden start or stop any motor vehicle, blow any horn, or
make or cause to be made any loud or raucous noise, nuisance or disturbance
whereby the quiet and good order of the premises or of the neighborhood is
disturbed.
   (F)   Driving through. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor
vehicle to drive through or upon any driveway or parking lot used in
conjunction with any drive-in restaurant, without stopping and making, or
attempting to make, a purchase.
Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.033 LANDFILLS.
   (A)   Private landfills; filling of another’s land. No person shall fill any
land owned by another person without the permission of the other person or his
or her agent.
   (B)   Condition of landfills. No person owning or controlling any land which
is open to public view or access, shall fill, or cause or permit any other to
fill, such land unless such owner or person controlling such land keeps the
surface free of litter, refuse, waste, junk or other noxious or unsightly
material. Provided, however, this provision shall not apply to construction
sites where work is progressing under a city building permit.
Penalty, see §
130.999
NOISE CONTROL
§ 130.050 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this subchapter apply to all sources of sound except motor
vehicles (as defined in the State Motor Vehicle Code, 1949 P.A. 300 (M.C.L.A.
§§ 257.1 et seq.) in operation on a public right-of-way; aircraft in flight or
in operation at an airport; and railroad equipment in operation on railroad
rights-of-way.
§ 130.051 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   dB(A). The intensity of a sound expressed in decibels read from a calibrated
sound level meter utilizing the A-level weighting scale and the fast meter
response, as specified in American National Standards Institute standard S 1.4-
1971.
   COMMERCIAL. A use of the property for purposes other than residential.
   PROPERTY LINE. The imaginary line which represents the legal limits of
property (including an apartment, condominium, room, or other dwelling unit)
owned, leased, or otherwise occupied by a person, business, corporation or
institution. In cases involving sound from an activity on a public street or
other public right-of-way, the PROPERTY LINE shall be the nearest boundary of
the public right-of-way.
   RESIDENTIAL. A legal use of property for temporary or permanent dwelling
purposes.
§ 130.052 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to create, assist in creating, permit,
continue or permit the continuance of any unreasonably loud, disturbing,
unusual or unnecessary noise which annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the limits of the
city.
Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.053 SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   The following activities are prohibited if they produce clearly
audible sound beyond the property line of the property on which they are
conducted:
      (1)   The operation, between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., of power tools or
equipment.
      (2)   The operation, between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., of any device for
killing, trapping, attracting, or repelling insects or other pests.
      (3)   The sounding, between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., of any bell, chime,
siren, whistle or similar device, except:
         (a)   To alert persons to the existence of an emergency, danger or
attempted crime; or
         (b)   As provided in §
130.055(E).
      (4)   The operation or playing between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any
radio, television, phonograph, drum or musical instrument.
      (5)   Construction, repair, remodeling, demolition, drilling or
excavation work at any time on Sunday and between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Monday through Saturday, except as permitted by §
130.055(B).
      (6)   The operation or use between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any
loudspeaker, sound amplifier, public address system or similar device used to
amplify sounds.
      (7)   The creation of a loud, unnecessary noise in connection with the
loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and closing or destruction
of bales, boxes, crates, or other containers.
      (8)   The use of any drums, loud-speakers, musical devices or other
instruments or devices for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation
of noise to any performance, show or sale or display of merchandise.
      (9)   A noise nuisance after 10:00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m.
      (10)   The creation of loud, unnecessary noise by fireworks between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless in conflict with state laws and
statutes. Permissible uses of fireworks are defined by the fireworks ordinance
in
Chapter 91 of this Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   The prohibitions of this section apply even if the sound level
produced by a prohibited activity does not exceed the applicable level
specified in §
130.054.
(Ord. 2013-113, passed 5-28-2013) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.054 MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS.
   No person shall conduct or permit any activity that produces a dB(A) beyond
his or her property line exceeding the levels specified. Where property is used
for both residential and commercial purposes, the residential sound levels
shall be used only for measurements made on the portion of the property used
solely for residential purposes.
 
Use of Property Receiving the 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
Sound
Residential                   61                      55
Commercial                    71                      61
All limited expressed in dB(A)
 
Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.055 LIMITED EXEMPTIONS.
   The following limited activities are exempted from the sound level
limitations of §
130.054:
   (A)   Operation of power equipment. Operation, between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m., of power equipment that does not produce a sound level exceeding 90 dB(A)
beyond the property line of the property on which the equipment is operated.
   (B)   Construction, repair, remodeling, demolition, drilling, wood cutting
or excavation work. Construction, repair, remodeling, demolition, drilling,
wood cutting or excavation work conducted between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
Mondays through Saturdays, except legal holidays, which does not produce a
sound level exceeding 105 dB(A) beyond the property line of the property on
which the work is being conducted. Also, a person may engage in such activities
at his residence between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sundays.
   (C)   Loud speakers, sound amplifiers, public address systems. Operation or
use, for any noncommercial purpose, of any loud-speaker, sound amplifier,
public address system, or similar device to amplify spoken words between 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m. This exemption applies to the use or operation of
mechanical loud-speakers on or from motor vehicles only if a specific permit
for the activity has been granted by the City Council. The City Council shall
cause such a permit to issue when it finds the following:
      (1)   The applicant has a noncommercial message that cannot be
effectively communicated to the public by the other means of communication
available.
      (2)   The applicant will limit the use of the loud-speakers to times,
locations and sound levels which will not unreasonably disturb the public
peace.
      (3)   The applicant will not use the equipment in residential areas
between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (D)   Killing, trapping, attracting, or repelling insects or other pests.
The operation between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. of any device for killing,
trapping, attracting, or repelling insects or other pests which does not
produce a sound level exceeding 83 dB(A) beyond the property line of the
property on which the device is operated.
   (E)   Bells or chimes. The use for noncommercial purposes of one or more
bells or chimes which does not exceed 90 seconds in duration in an hour.
   (F)   Carillon playing. Carillon playing between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
   (G)   Musical instruments. Playing or practicing with a single musical
instrument between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. without electric amplification for
not more than one hour a day that does not produce a sound level in excess of
67 dB(A) beyond the property line of the property on which the instrument is
used.
   (H)   Call to prayer and church bells. The city shall permit “call to
prayer,” “church bells” and other reasonable means of announcing religious
meetings to be amplified between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. for
duration not to exceed five minutes:
      (1)   The city shall have the sole authority to set the level of
amplification, provided, however, that no such level shall be enforced until
all religious institutions receive notice of the levels; and
      (2)   All complaints regarding alleged violations of this section shall
be filed with the City Clerk and placed on the agenda of the next regular
meeting of the City Council. The City Council shall take all appropriate action
it deems necessary to alleviate the complaints, with the action to include, but
not be limited to, an order to terminate use of amplification. If the City
Council deems that the means of announcing religious meetings must be reduced,
the Council shall amend this section of the subchapter. The Council may also
determine that a complaint is without justification and choose to take no
action on the complaint; if the determination is made, the decision shall be
made by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 2008-2, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 130.056 GENERAL EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The following activities are exempted from the sound level limitations
of §
130.054:
      (1)    Emergency work necessary to restore property to a safe condition
following a fire, accident or natural disaster. To restore public utilities, or
to protect persons or property from an imminent danger.
      (2)    Sound made to alert persons to the existence of an emergency,
danger, or attempted crime.
      (3)   Activities or operations of governmental units or agencies.
      (4)   Parades, concerts, festivals, fairs or similar activities subject
to any sound limits in the approval by the city.
      (5)   Athletic, musical, or cultural activities or events (including
practices and rehearsals) conducted by or under the auspices of public or
private schools, and public or private colleges or universities.
   (B)   The following activities are exempted from the requirements of §
130.053:
      (1)   Regular activities or operations of governmental units or agencies
provided the activity is approved in advance and in writing by both the
department head or agency director and the City Manager.
      (2)    Emergency work necessary to restore property to a safe condition
following a fire, accident or natural disaster or to restore public utilities,
or to protect persons or property from an imminent danger.
      (3)   Devices or activity creating sound made to alert persons to the
existence of an emergency, danger, or attempted crime.
      (4)   Equipment and activities creating sound from the collection of
solid waste, within the Downtown District, after 6:00 a.m. and before 10:00
p.m.
§ 130.057 TEMPORARY EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The City Manager is authorized to grant a temporary exemption from the
maximum permissible sound levels established by this subchapter if such
temporary exemption would be in the public interest and there is no feasible
and prudent alternative to the activity, or the method of conducting the
activity, for which the temporary exemption is sought.
   (B)   The following factors shall be considered by the City Manager in
determining whether to grant a temporary exemption:
      (1)   The balance of the hardship to the applicant, the community and
other persons in not granting the variance against the adverse impact on the
health, safety and welfare of persons adversely affected and any other adverse
effects of the granting of the variance.
      (2)   The nearness of any residence or residences, or any other use which
would be adversely affected by sound in excess of the limits prescribed by this
subchapter.
      (3)   The level of the sound to be generated by the event or activity.
      (4)   Whether the type of sound to be produced by the event or activity
is usual or unusual for the location or area for which the variance is
requested.
      (5)   The density of population of the area in which the event or
activity is to take place.
      (6)   The time of day or night which the activity or event will take
place.
      (7)   The nature of the sound to be produced, including but not limited
to, whether the sound will be steady, intermittent, impulsive, or repetitive.
   (C)   A temporary exemption must be in writing and signed by the City
Manager or his or her appointed representative and must set forth the name of
the party granted the exemption, the location of the property for which it is
authorized, the date(s) and time(s) for which it is effective and the dB(A)
level(s) authorized.
   (D)   A temporary exemption may be granted only for the period of time that
is reasonably necessary to conduct the activity, which in no case may exceed 30
days.
§ 130.058 VARIANCES.
   Persons wishing to continue activities which commenced prior to this
subchapter and which create noise in excess of the permitted levels may seek a
variance from the Building Board of Appeals. A variance may be granted if the
Board finds that strict application of this subchapter would cause a hardship
and that there is no reasonable and prudent alternative method of engaging in
the activity.
§ 130.059 LIABILITY OF OWNER, LESSEE, OR OCCUPANT.
   If the person responsible for an activity which violates this subchapter
cannot be determined, the owner, lessee or occupant of the property on which
the activity is located shall be deemed responsible for the violation. A person
found responsible under this section shall be guilty of a civil infraction
punishable by a fine of $50 to $500 plus costs. For a second offense within a
two-year period, the fine shall be $100 to $500 plus costs. For third and
subsequent offenses within a two-year period, the fine shall be $200 to $500
plus costs.
FIRES
§ 130.075 FALSE ALARM OF FIRE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to knowingly and wilfully
raise a false alarm of fire at any gathering or in any public place, or to ring
any bell or operate any public or private mechanical, electrical apparatus or
any type or device of communication, or combination thereof for the purpose of
creating a false alarm, or to raise a false alarm of fire orally, by telephone
or any type or device of communication.
(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944; Am. Ord. 289, passed 3-17-1964) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.076 OBSTRUCTING AND DISOBEYING FIRE DEPARTMENT MEMBERS IN LINE OF DUTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly and
wilfully hinder, obstruct or interfere with any Fire Department officers in the
performance of his or her duties, or who shall, while in the vicinity of any
fire, wilfully disobey any reasonable order, rule or regulation of the officer
commanding any Fire Department at a fire, under penalty of not to exceed $500
fine or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both a fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944) Penalty, see §
130.999
TELEPHONE HARASSMENT
§ 130.090 REPEATED CALLING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to telephone any other person
repeatedly or curse any person to be telephoned repeatedly for the sole purpose
of harassing or molesting the other person or his or her family, whether or not
conversation ensues, except for telephone calls made for legitimate business
purposes.
(Ord. 288, passed 3-3-1964) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.091 THREATENING, VULGAR OR INSULTING LANGUAGE OVER TELEPHONE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to use any threatening,
vulgar, indecent, obscene, immoral or insulting language over any telephone.
(Ord. 288, passed 3-3-1964) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.
   (B)   Nuisances. Except as otherwise specifically provided, violations of
any provision of §§
130.025 through
130.033 shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500. If the penalty for
§§
130.031 is not paid within 45 days, it may be assessed against the parcel.
   (C)   Noise control. Except as provided in §
130.059, an activity which violates §§
130.050 through
130.059 shall be punishable by a fine of $50 to $500 plus costs. For a second
offense within a two-year period, the fine shall be $100 to $500 plus costs.
For third and subsequent offenses within a two-year period, the penalty shall
be $200 to $500 plus costs and/or, in the discretion of the court, up to 240
hours community service.
   (D)   Fires. Every person violating the provisions of §
130.075 shall upon conviction be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both a fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court. In addition thereto, the court may in its discretion
require the person so convicted to give bail for good behavior in the sum of
$1,000 with good and sufficient sureties, the bond to run not more than two
years. If any person so ordered to furnish bail fails to do so, he or she shall
be remanded to the Wayne County Jail until further order of the court.
(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944; Am. Ord. 289, passed 3-17-1964)
   (E)   Telephone harassment. Any person or persons violating any of the
provisions of §§
130.090 and
130.091 shall upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than
$100 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both a fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 288, passed 3-3-1964)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
Prostitution and Drug Activity
   
131.001   Title
   
131.002   Definitions
   
131.003   Legislative findings with respect to drug use and prostitution or
soliciting for prostitution
   
131.004   Authority for declaration of a public nuisance
   
131.005   Procedure for declaration of a public nuisance
   
131.006   Declaration of public nuisance by default
   
131.007   Abatement of nuisance and costs
   
131.008   Presumption of public nuisance - drugs or drug paraphernalia
   
131.009   Presumption of public nuisance - prostitution or soliciting for
prostitution
   
131.010   Notification of City Council of violations of drug and prostitution
laws
   
131.011   Notification to the property owner
   
131.012   Posting and listing of public nuisances
   
131.013   Entry into or use of property of which the City Council had ordered
to be vacated and for which the court has prohibited occupancy
Drugs
   
131.030   Definition
   
131.031   Unlawful to possess
   
131.032   Unlawful to deliver, possess with intent to deliver or manufacture
with intent to deliver
   
131.033   Unlawful to promote sale of objects designed or intended for use as
drug paraphernalia
   
131.034   Confiscation by court
Pornography
   
131.050   Definitions
   
131.051   Promoting pornography
   
131.052   Promoting pornography for minors
   
131.053   Affirmative defense
   
131.054   Furnishing obscene material
   
131.055   Transmission of obscene material
   
131.056   Display of obscene material
   
131.057   Possession of obscene material
   
131.058   Presentation of obscene performance
Clubs
   
131.075   Definition
   
131.076   Unlawful to open, maintain or operate on Joseph Campau Avenue
   
131.077   Unlawful to assist opening, maintaining or operating on Joseph Campau
Avenue
   
131.078   Authority of Police Department to inspect
   
131.079   Exemptions
 
   
131.999   Penalty
PROSTITUTION AND DRUG ACTIVITY
§ 131.001 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Public Nuisance Abatement Subchapter
Controlling Illegal Acts of Prostitution.
(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)
§ 131.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council, or a standing or special committee of the
City Council.
   OWNER. Any person who possesses or has legal or equitable interest in a
property. OWNER also means any person who has or exercises any control, custody
or dominion over a property whether or not that person has or claims to have
any legal or equitable interest in the property. OWNER also means any person
having an ownership interest in a property as disclosed by the records referred
to in this subchapter.
   PROPERTY. Any land, structure, house, building, premises or any part
thereof.
   REPEATED AND REPEATEDLY. Two or more times within one year.
(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)
§ 131.003 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS WITH RESPECT TO DRUG USE AND PROSTITUTION OR
SOLICITING FOR PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   The City Council determines that whenever the repeated use, sale,
furnishing, giving or possession of controlled substances or drug paraphernalia
occurs on any property, or whenever property is repeatedly used for violation
of the controlled substance or drug paraphernalia laws or for the purposes of
prostitution or soliciting for prostitution, within the city, a public nuisance
may result.
   (B)   A public nuisance results from the increased criminal activity that
occurs in the neighborhood surrounding the property, increased pedestrian and/
or vehicular traffic in the neighborhood surrounding the property, the fear
engendered in the minds of neighbors and the peace and quiet of residents
living in the neighborhood surrounding the property being disturbed.
(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)
§ 131.004 AUTHORITY FOR DECLARATION OF A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Whenever the illegal use, sale, furnishing, giving or possession of
controlled substances or drug paraphernalia repeatedly occurs on any property
or when any violation of the controlled substances act or drug paraphernalia
laws or any act of prostitution or soliciting for prostitution repeatedly
occurs on any property, the City Council may declare by resolution that the
property is a public nuisance and seek an order from the court that the
nuisance be abated as provided in this subchapter.
(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.005 PROCEDURE FOR DECLARATION OF A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   A declaration of a public nuisance under the authority of this subchapter
shall occur only in accordance with the following procedure:
   (A)   A declaration may occur only after there has been notice given to the
owner of the property and the owner has had an opportunity to be heard at a
public evidentiary hearing before the City Council.
   (B)   Notice of the public evidentiary hearing shall be given to the owner
and shall consist of personal service or the mailing of a certified letter to
the owner at the address indicated by the city assessor’s records, the records
of Register of Deeds of the county and the records of the city’s Building and
Engineering Department. The notice shall state the nature of the alleged
nuisance and the time, date and location of the hearing. If the notice is
served by certified mail, it shall be delivered with a return receipt requested
according to the practices of the post office. Receipt of the return receipt
card by the city indicating the owner’s has received the notice shall be deemed
notice to the owner. The notice to an owner shall occur at least seven calendar
days prior to the date of the public hearing. As used in this subchapter, THE
OWNER, AN OWNER or OWNER shall mean any and all person that the city is aware
of who have or who may have an ownership as defined in this subchapter.
Whenever this subchapter provides for notice to the owner, it shall be
construed to mean that notice shall be given to all persons having a known
ownership interest as so defined.
   (C)   The City Council, sitting as an administrative body, and acting a
quasi-judicial capacity, shall make a determination as to whether a public
nuisance exists under the standards established by this subchapter. The City
Council shall make this determination based solely upon the evidence presented
at the public evidentiary hearing. In conducting the public evidentiary
hearing, the City Council shall afford the owner and the Police Department an
opportunity to present relevant and material evidence and to make arguments as
to factual or legal issues. Cross-examination of opposing witnesses shall be
permitted. The owner may appear in person or be represented by an attorney. Lay
representation is not permitted. In conducting its public evidentiary hearing,
the City Council shall not be bound by rules of evidence and may admit and give
weight to probative evidence of a nature that is commonly relied upon by
reasonably prudent individuals in the conduct of their affairs. Irrelevant,
incompetent and immaterial evidence and unduly repetitious evidence shall be
excluded.
   (D)   The owner may, at any time during the proceedings, enter into a good
neighbor agreement with the City Council, and so long as the good neighbor
agreement remains in effect, no further action may be taken by City Council to
declare the property a nuisance, keeping in mind the purpose of this subchapter
is to rid the community of drug activity, not take or deny an owner of the
casual use of his or her property as a matter of course. However, after a
determination that a nuisance exists, the owner may not enter into a good
neighbor agreement with the City Council.
(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)
§ 131.006 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE BY DEFAULT.
   If an owner, having been properly notified of the alleged nuisance and the
time, date and location of the hearing before City Council, or his or her
attorney, shall fail to appear at the hearing the City Council shall enter a
ruling in default. Failure to appear shall be viewed, in all cases, by the City
Council, as the concession, by the owner, to the relevant evidence in the
action.
(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)
§ 131.007 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE AND COSTS.
   (A)   If the City Council determines by a preponderance of the evidence that
a property is a public nuisance, it may, by resolution, in addition to any
other remedies available to the city at law or in equity, direct the City
Attorney to seek from a court of competent jurisdiction an order of abatement
of the nuisance.
   (B)   The abatement process shall be conducted as follows:
      (1)   If it is determined that all or a portion of the property is to be
ordered vacated, the court shall order the property vacated and declare that
occupancy of all or a portion of the property is prohibited and authorized the
Police Department to prohibit the occupancy of the property by either
padlocking all or a portion of the property or boarding or otherwise securing
all or a portion of the property, as is appropriate, for a period of up to one
year as the court shall determine based upon the evidence;
      (2)   Determine that the owner shall be liable for the full cost of any
materials and personnel (including police and any other city employees or
contractors) involved in the padlocking, boarding or securing of the property
in the first instance and the full cost of any personnel and materials involved
in any subsequent or remedial padlocking, boarding or securing of the property;
      (3)   Determine that the owner shall be liable for the full cost to the
city in bringing the action to abate before the court;
      (4)   Determine that the costs set out herein shall be a personal debt of
the owner and/or assess those costs against the property as a lien as provided
for in the City Charter for property taxes; and
      (5)   Where only a discreet area under the control of a person or persons
other than the owner is involved in the illegal activity, the court shall not
order that any other than the part of used for the illegal activity be vacated.
The court shall not order that any part of the business or other property be
vacated provided the owner or owners of the property take steps, as ordered by
resolution of City Council adopting a good neighbor agreement, to police the
activity taking place near the business or property. These actions include, but
are not limited to, hiring a private security firm to patrol the area, the
installation of cameras and other surveillance equipment, posting of signs on
the building, and cooperation with the Police Department. Failure to comply
with the resolution of City Council shall result in a hearing of a declaration
of public nuisance as provided for in this subchapter. It is the intent of this
provision to protect those truly and completely innocent of any participation
in the act and those not having any notice of, or direct or imputed knowledge
of, the illegal acts from being deprived of the use of their property. By way
of example and limitation, if only a single apartment in a multiple dwelling is
used for illegal purposes as provided for in this subchapter, the court may
vacate only the apartment used for the illegal purposes and shall not vacate
the entire building.
(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)
§ 131.008 PRESUMPTION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE - DRUGS OR DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   The City Council may find and that a public nuisance exists and the court
shall order the abatement if the following conditions are established by the
evidence presented at the public evidentiary hearing and before the court:
   (A)   The property has been searched by the police and illegal controlled
substances or illegal controlled substances or illegal drug paraphernalia have
been found by the police;
   (B)   The property has been the location of a violation of the state
controlled substance law or of the state drug paraphernalia law as evidenced by
conviction of an individual for violation of either at that location, provided
a reasonable person could directly associate the individual and the property
through residence, patronage or by habit;
   (C)   A letter, informing the owner that an illegal controlled substance
and/or illegal drug paraphernalia has been found by the police at the property
or that a drug-related or drug paraphernalia related crime has been committed
on the property, and of the potential consequences if similar activity occurs
at the property, has been personally served on an owner, or sent by certified
mail to an owner as provided for in this subchapter and a return receipt card
has been received by the city; and
   (D)   The same property is searched by police again within one year from the
date of the first search and a controlled substance or drug paraphernalia is
found by police and which directly leads to a conviction even if the conviction
is for a crime which is different than the one originally charged because of a
court approved plea bargain agreement, or, if within one year, a subsequent
violation of the controlled substances act or the drug paraphernalia law occurs
which directly leads to a conviction even if the conviction is for a crime is
lesser than the one originally charged.
(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)
§ 131.009 PRESUMPTION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE - PROSTITUTION OR SOLICITING FOR
PROSTITUTION.
   The City Council may find that a public nuisance exists and the court shall
order an abatement if the following conditions are established by the evidence
presented at the public evidentiary hearing:
   (A)   The property has been the location of an act of prostitution or
soliciting for prostitution as proven by the conviction of an individual for
engaging in an act of prostitution or soliciting for prostitution at that
location;
   (B)   A letter, informing the owner that an act of prostitution or
soliciting for prostitution has occurred on the property and of the potential
consequences if similar activity occurs at the property, has been personally
served on an owner, or sent by certified mail to an owner as provided for in
this subchapter, and a return receipt card has been received by the city;
   (C)   The same property is again proven to be the location of an act of
prostitution or soliciting for prostitution by the conviction of an individual
for engaging, at that location, in any act prohibited by the laws of this city,
or of any act prohibited by the laws of this state relating to prostitution or
soliciting for prostitution; and
   (D)   The same property is the location within one year from the date of the
first offense of an act of prostitution or solicitation for prostitution, which
directly leads to a conviction even if the conviction is for a crime which is
different than the one originally charged because of a court approved plea
bargain agreement.
(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)
§ 131.010 NOTIFICATION OF CITY COUNCIL OF VIOLATIONS OF DRUG AND PROSTITUTION
LAWS.
   The Chief of Police shall issue a report on a quarterly basis to the City
Council containing the nature of the violation(s) of law found, the nature of
the drugs or drug paraphernalia seized, the individuals involved and, with
reasonable specificity, location(s) of the contraband or illegal act. In
addition, the Chief of Police shall include violations of law in this report,
to the best of his or her ability, cited by other law enforcement agencies with
jurisdiction in the city including relevant county, state and federal law
enforcement agencies. If no violation has occurred during that quarter, then
the Chief of Police shall issue a report stating this.
(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)
§ 131.011 NOTIFICATION TO THE PROPERTY OWNER.
   The notification letters sent to the property owner provided for in this
subchapter and the notice of a public evidentiary hearing provided for in this
subchapter shall contain a report of the nature of the violation of law found,
the nature of the drugs or drug paraphernalia seized, the individuals involved
and, with reasonable specificity, the location of the contraband or illegal
act.
(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)
§ 131.012 POSTING AND LISTING OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   (A)   Whenever the court shall have ordered a property to be vacated and
ordered that occupancy is prohibited, the Police Department shall post a notice
so stating at each entrance to any building on the property and at the entrance
to each dwelling unit and other portion of the property ordered vacated and
shall replace any notices that are missing or unreadable.
   (B)   (1)   The City Clerk shall maintain a list of those properties that
have been declared to be public nuisances and of the remedy ordered by the
court.
      (2)   Immediately upon a declaration of public nuisance as provided for
herein, the City Clerk shall add the property to the list.
      (3)   Any resident requesting a list of the properties shall be supplied
one at no charge.
      (4)   The list shall be available for public inspection at the City
Clerk’s office.
   (C)   No person other than an authorized city employee shall tamper with,
damage, alter, destroy or remove any notice posted by the city.
(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)
§ 131.013 ENTRY INTO OR USE OF PROPERTY OF WHICH THE CITY COUNCIL HAD ORDERED
TO BE VACATED AND FOR WHICH THE COURT HAS PROHIBITED OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   No person shall enter into any property that has been declared by the
City Council to be a nuisance and which the Court has ordered to be vacated and
for which occupancy has been prohibited. It shall be an affirmative defense to
a prosecution under this section that written permission to enter the property
was obtained from the Chief of Police.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and the
following minimum criminal penalties which shall be assessed in addition to any
other lawful sentence that the sentencing court may impose:
      (1)   For first violation, a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$250;
      (2)   For a second violation, a fine of not less than $300 nor more than
$500 and imprisonment for not less than ten days nor more than 90 days; and
      (3)   For subsequent violations, a fine of $500 and imprisonment for 90
days.
(Ord. 506, passed 9-21-2004)
DRUGS
§ 131.030 DEFINITION.
   (A)   The term DRUG PARAPHERNALIA as used in this subchapter means all
equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use
or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance.
   (B)   It includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
      (2)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
substances;
      (3)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
      (4)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing
the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;
      (5)   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
      (6)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances;
      (7)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marihuana;
      (8)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
      (9)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances;
      (10)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
      (11)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for
use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body; and
      (12)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
         (a)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls;
         (b)   Water pipes;
         (c)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (d)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (e)   Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning material, such
as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in
the hand;
         (f)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         (g)   Chamber pipes;
         (h)   Carburetor pipes;
         (i)   Electric pipes;
         (j)   Air-driven pipes;
         (k)   Chillums;
         (l)   Bongs; and
         (m)   Ice pipes or chillers.
   (C)   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or
other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant
factors, the following:
      (1)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of
the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
      (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of this subchapter;
      (4)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
      (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows,
or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation
of this subchapter; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, as to a direct violation of this subchapter shall not prevent a finding
that the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
      (7)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use;
      (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
      (9)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
      (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
      (11)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
      (12)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
      (13)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
      (14)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
(Ord. 392, passed 4-15-1980)
§ 131.031 UNLAWFUL TO POSSESS.
   It is unlawful for any person to possess drug paraphernalia.
(Ord. 392, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.032 UNLAWFUL TO DELIVER, POSSESS WITH INTENT TO DELIVER OR MANUFACTURE
WITH INTENT TO DELIVER.
   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver or
manufacture with intent to deliver drug paraphernalia.
(Ord. 392, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.033 UNLAWFUL TO PROMOTE SALE OF OBJECTS DESIGNED OR INTENDED FOR USE AS
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill
or other publication any advertisement, knowing or under circumstances where
one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or
in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug
paraphernalia.
(Ord. 392, passed 4-15-1980) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.034 CONFISCATION BY COURT.
   All drug paraphernalia seized for violation of any provision of this
subchapter shall be confiscated by the court.
(Ord. 392, passed 4-15-1980)
PORNOGRAPHY
§ 131.050 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUDIENCE. One or more persons who are permitted to view a performance:
      (1)   For valuable consideration; or
      (2)   In or from a public place.
   DISPLAY PUBLICLY. The exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting or in any other
fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, material or
performance in a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or
character distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a public place
or vehicle.
   DISSEMINATE. To manufacture, issue, publish, sell, lend, distribute,
transmit, broadcast, exhibit or present material or to offer or agree to do the
same or to have in one’s possession with intent to do the same.
   MATERIAL. Any printed matter, visual representation or sound recording, and
includes but is not limited to books, magazines, motion picture films,
pamphlets, newspapers, pictures, photographs, drawings, three-dimensional
forms, sculptures and phonograph, tape or wire recordings.
   MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.
   NUDITY. Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human
genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male genitals in
a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a female breast is
considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola only are
covered.
   OBSCENE MATERIAL. The material described in divisions (1) and (2) below
shall be deemed to be obscene material if the average person applying
contemporary community standards in the city would find that the material,
taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest in a patently offensive way,
and the material, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political
or scientific value.
      (1)   Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture, film
or other visual representation of the human body or any portion thereof that
depicts nudity, sadomasochistic abuse, sexual conduct or sexual excitement; or
      (2)   Any book, magazine, paperback, pamphlet or other written or printed
material, however reproduced or any sound recordings which contain matter of
the nature described in division (1) above or obscenities or explicit verbal
descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual conduct, sexual excitement or
sadomasochistic abuse depicted or described.
   OBSCENE PERFORMANCE. A play, motion picture, dance, show, act, rendition,
lecture, reading or other presentation, whether pictured, animated or live,
performed before an audience or intended to be performed before an audience and
which in whole or in part depicts or reveals nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement or sadomasochistic abuse or which includes obscenities or explicit
verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, depicted or described, provided that the
average person, applying contemporary community standards in the city, would
find that the performance taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest in
a patently offensive way and lacks serious literary artistic, political or
scientific value.
   OBSCENITIES. Those slang words currently generally rejected for regular use
in mixed society, that are used to refer to genital female breasts, sexual
conduct or excretory functions or products either that have no other meaning or
that in context are clearly used for their bodily, sexual or excretory meaning.
   PANDER. Advertising or propagandizing in connection with the sale of
material, the offering of a service or the presentation or exhibition of a
performance by appealing to the prurient interest of potential customers.
   PERFORMANCE. Any live or reproduced exhibition, including, but not limited
to, any play, motion picture film, dance or appearance presented to or
performed before an audience.
   PORNOGRAPHIC. Relating to pornography.
   PORNOGRAPHY. Any material or performance is PORNOGRAPHY if all of the
following elements are present:
      (1)   Considered as a whole, by the average person, applying the
contemporary community standards of the city, it appeals to the prurient
interest;
      (2)   It depicts, describes or represents in a patently offensive way,
sexual conduct, as hereinafter defined; and
      (3)   It lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
   PORNOGRAPHY FOR MINORS. Any material or performance is PORNOGRAPHY FOR
MINORS if all of the following elements are present:
      (1)   Considered as a whole by the average person applying the
contemporary community standards of the city with respect to what is suitable
for minors, it is presented in a manner as to appeal to the minor’s prurient
interest;
      (2)   It depicts, describes or represents in a patently offensive way,
nudity or sexual conduct as hereinafter defined; and
      (3)   It lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
   PRURIENT INTEREST.
      (1)   Desire or craving for sexual stimulation or gratification.
      (2)   In determining PRURIENT INTEREST, the material or performance shall
be judged with reference to average persons, unless it appears from the
character of the material or performance that it is designed to appeal to the
PRURIENT INTEREST of a particular group of persons, including, but not limited
to, homosexuals or sadomasochists. In that case, it shall be judged with
reference to the particular group for which it was designed.
   PUBLIC PLACE OR VEHICLE. Any of the streets, alleys, parks, boulevards,
schools or other public property in the city or any dance hall, rental hall,
theater, amusement park, liquor establishment, store, depot, place of public
accommodation or other private property generally frequented by the public for
the purposes of education, recreation, amusement, entertainment, sport,
shopping or travel; or any vehicle for public transportation, owned or operated
by government, either directly or through a public corporation or authority or
owned or operated by any non-governmental agency for the use, enjoyment or
transportation of the general public.
   SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is
nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre costume or the
condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the
part of one so clothed.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Human masturbation, sexual intercourse or any touching of
the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female or the
breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite
sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or
gratification.
   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals or the
breast of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation or the sensual
experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conductor nudity.
(Ord. 355, passed 5-7-1974; Am. Ord. 366, passed 5-20-1975)
§ 131.051 PROMOTING PORNOGRAPHY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to promote pornography.
   (B)   A person commits the offense of promoting pornography if, knowing if
its content and character, he or she:
      (1)   Disseminates or causes to be disseminated any pornographic material
in or from a public place or vehicle or for valuable consideration or has in
his or her possession any pornographic material with intent to so disseminate;
or knowingly allows the use of any business, building, vehicle or place owned,
leased, conducted or managed by him or her;
      (2)   Sells an admission ticket or pass to premises where there is being
exhibited or is about to be exhibited material or a performance which is
pornographic;
      (3)   Admits by accepting a ticket or pass, a person to premises where
there is being exhibited or is about to be exhibited material or performance
which is pornographic;
      (4)   Produces, presents, directs or knowingly allows the use of any
business, building, vehicle or place owned, leased, conducted or managed by him
or her to be used for a pornographic performance before an audience;
      (5)   Participates in the portion of a live performance before an
audience which makes it pornographic; or
      (6)   Panders, displays publicly or disseminates door to door any
pornographic material or performance or causes the pandering public display or
door to door dissemination.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, possession of two or more identical
copies of any pornographic material by any person engaged in the business of
disseminating material shall be prima facie evidence of possession with intent
to disseminate for valuable consideration.
(Ord. 355, passed 5-7-1974) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.052 PROMOTING PORNOGRAPHY FOR MINORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to promote pornography for minors.
   (B)   A person commits the offense of promoting pornography to minors if,
knowing its contents and character, he or she:
      (1)   Disseminates or causes to disseminate to a minor material which is
pornography for minors, or knowingly allows the use of any business, building,
vehicle or place owned, leased, conducted or managed by him or her for the
dissemination to a minor of material which is pornography for minors;
      (2)   Exhibits to a minor a motion picture film or other performance
which is pornography for minors;
      (3)   Sells to a minor an admission ticket or pass to any building,
vehicle or place where there is being exhibited a motion picture film or other
performance which is pornography for minors;
      (4)   Admits a minor to any building, vehicle or place where there is
being exhibited or about to be exhibited a motion picture film or other
performance which is pornography for minors;
      (5)   Knowingly produces, presents, directs or allows the use of any
business, building, vehicle or place owned, leased, conducted or managed by him
or her for the presentation or performance which is pornography for minors,
before an audience which includes a minor; or
      (6)   Displays publicly or disseminates door to door any material or
performance which is pornography for minors or causes the public display or
door to door dissemination.
   (C)   Divisions (B) (1) through (5) do not apply to a parent, guardian or
other person in loco parentis to the minor.
(Ord. 355, passed 5-7-1974) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.053 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.
   It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this subchapter if
the pornographic material was disseminated by a person who was acting in his or
her capacity as:
   (A)   A teacher of an accredited course of study related to pornography by a
state approved educational institution;
   (B)   A licensed medical practitioner or psychologist in the treatment of a
patient;
   (C)   A participant in the criminal justice system, such as a legislator,
judge, prosecutor, law enforcement official or other similar or related
position; or
   (D)   A supplier to any person described in divisions (A) through (C) above.
(Ord. 355, passed 5-7-1974)
§ 131.054 FURNISHING OBSCENE MATERIAL.
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell, give, provide, loan,
rent, trade, dispense or otherwise furnish obscene materials to any person
within the city.
(Ord. 366, passed 5-20-1975) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.055 TRANSMISSION OF OBSCENE MATERIAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to send, dispatch, deliver or
otherwise transmit or to arrange for the transmission of obscene materials
whether the delivery thereof is to be made within or outside of the city.
(Ord. 366, passed 5-20-1975) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.056 DISPLAY OF OBSCENE MATERIAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to show, expose, place, post,
exhibit or otherwise display obscene materials to any person or in any place
whether public or private where the materials may be readily seen and their
content or character distinguished by any person in the city.
(Ord. 366, passed 5-20-1975) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.057 POSSESSION OF OBSCENE MATERIAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to possess any obscene
materials for the purpose of furnishing, transmitting or displaying the
materials in the city.
(Ord. 366, passed 5-20-1975) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.058 PRESENTATION OF OBSCENE PERFORMANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to present, sponsor, procure, direct,
act or otherwise participate in or to assist in the presentation of an obscene
performance in the city.
(Ord. 366, passed 5-20-1975) Penalty, see §
131.999
CLUBS
§ 131.075 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLUB or CLUBS.
      (1)   Any profit or nonprofit club or association chartered by the state
and not licensed under the State Liquor Control Act;
      (2)   Any profit or nonprofit club or association not chartered by the
state and not licensed under the State Liquor Control Act;
      (3)   Any person, firm, corporation or association that operates a
pinball machine or pool table and not licensed under the State Liquor Control
Act; or
      (4)   Any person, firm, corporation or association that permits the
playing of any game or contest wherein playing cards or dice are used and not
licensed under the State Liquor Control Act.
(Ord. 395, passed 1-13-1981)
§ 131.076 UNLAWFUL TO OPEN, MAINTAIN OR OPERATE ON JOSEPH CAMPAU AVENUE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to
open, maintain or operate a club on Joseph Campau Avenue within the city.
(Ord. 395, passed 1-13-1981) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.077 UNLAWFUL TO ASSIST OPENING, MAINTAINING OR OPERATING ON JOSEPH CAMPAU
AVENUE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to
assist another in the opening, maintaining or operating of a club on Joseph
Campau Avenue within the city.
(Ord. 395, passed 1-13-1981) Penalty, see §
131.999
§ 131.078 AUTHORITY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT TO INSPECT.
   The members of the City Police Department shall have the authority to
inspect any premises whenever they have evidence constituting reasonable
grounds to believe that any provisions of this subchapter is being violated on
the premises.
(Ord. 395, passed 1-13-1981)
§ 131.079 EXEMPTIONS.
   All clubs open and operating on Joseph Campau Avenue, Hamtramck, Michigan,
on the effective date hereof shall be exempt from the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 395, passed 1-13-1981)
§ 131.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.
   (B)   Drugs. Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
131.030 through
131.034 upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500
or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both a fine and imprisonment, in the
discretion of the court.
(Ord. 392, passed 4-15-1980)
   (C)   Pornography. Conviction of violation of any provision of §§
131.050 through
131.058 shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500, or by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days or by both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion
of the court.
(Ord. 355, passed 5-7-1974; Am. Ord. 366, passed 5-20-1975)
   (D)   Clubs. Any person, firm, corporation, or association violating any
provisions of §§
131.075 through
131.079 shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine not to exceed $500
or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both a fine and imprisonment, in the
discretion of the court.
(Ord. 395, passed 1-13-1981)
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
Larceny
   
132.001   Larceny from the city’s public libraries
   
132.002   Larceny from vacant buildings
   
132.003   Larceny of goods valued up to $100
Breaking and Entering
   
132.015   Breaking and entering outside showcase
   
132.016   Breaking and entering coin box
Graffiti
   
132.030   Prohibition
   
132.031   Posting notices and signs
Trespass
   
132.044   Trespass upon lands or premises of another
   
132.045   With intent to commit crime or damage property
   
132.046   Prohibited where notice posted
Damaging School Property
   
132.060   Damaging
   
132.061   Noise, disturbance or improper diversion
   
132.062   Profane, indecent or immoral language
   
132.063   Immediate departure when directed
   
132.064   Not a regularly enrolled student, teacher, parent or other employee
   
132.065   Borrowing money or valuables from student
Defacing Serial Numbers
   
132.080   Concealment or misrepresentation of identity
   
132.081   Possession not prima facie evidence of violation
Political Campaign Literature
   
132.095   Unlawful to post or distribute near church
   
132.096   Definitions
   
132.097   Prohibition of voting polls
   
132.098   No prohibition against passing out campaign literature near church
Discounting of Scrip
   
132.110   Acceptance at face value
   
132.111   Liable for amount of discount
   
132.112   Return of scrip
   
132.113   Prohibition against higher price due to payment by scrip
Advertising
   
132.125   Generally
   
132.126   Deceptive advertising
   
132.127   Publisher’s duties
   
132.128   Sign to be posted
 
   
132.999   Penalty
LARCENY
§ 132.001 LARCENY FROM THE CITY’S PUBLIC LIBRARIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to procure, or take in
any way from any public library in the city, or from the City Public Library
any book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical,
newspaper, magazine manuscript or exhibit, or any part thereof, with intent to
convert the same to his or her own use and upon conviction hereof violations
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100 or by imprisonment not to exceed
30 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944)
§ 132.002 LARCENY FROM VACANT BUILDINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to steal or unlawfully
remove or in any manner damage any fixture, attachment or other property
belonging to, connected with or used in the construction of any vacant
structure or building, whether built or in the process of construction or to
break into any vacant structure or building with the intention of unlawfully
removing, taking therefrom, or in any manner damaging any fixture, attachment
or other property belonging to, connected with or used in the construction of
the vacant structure of building, whether built or in the process of
construction, and upon conviction violations hereof, shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $500 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the
court.
(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944)
§ 132.003 LARCENY OF GOODS VALUED UP TO $100.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to steal or
unlawfully take any money, goods or property of any other person, firm or
corporation of the value of $100 or less.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, while a store is
open to the public, to knowingly and willfully alter, transfer, remove and
replace, conceal or otherwise misrepresent the price at which property is
offered for sale, with intent not to pay for property or to pay less than the
price at which the property is offered for sale, if the resulting difference in
price is less than $100.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful, while a store is open to the public, with intent
to defraud, obtain or attempt to obtain money or property from the store as a
refund or exchange for property that was not paid for and belongs to the store
with a value of less than $100.
(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944; Am. Ord. 435, passed 10-12-1989) Penalty, see §
132.999
BREAKING AND ENTERING
§ 132.015 BREAKING AND ENTERING OUTSIDE SHOWCASE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to break and enter, or to
attempt to break or enter without breaking at any time any outside showcase or
other outside enclosed counter used for the display of goods, wares or
merchandise with the intent to steal or to commit the crime of larceny therein
and upon conviction violations hereof, shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $200 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days,
or by both a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944)
§ 132.016 BREAKING AND ENTERING COIN BOX.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to maliciously and
wilfully, by and with the aid and use of any key, instruments, devices or
explosives, blow or attempts to blow or forces or attempts to force an entrance
into any coin box, depository box, newspaper coin box or other receptacle
established and maintained for the convenience of the public or of any person
or persons not making payment for any inside of merchandise or service, wherein
is contained any money or thing of value or for any person to extract or obtain
or attempt to extract or obtain therefrom any money or thing of value so
deposited or contained therein, and upon conviction hereof violators shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $200 and costs of prosecution, or by
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or by both a fine and imprisonment within
the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944)
GRAFFITI
§ 132.030 PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person without authorization of the public
authority having supervision of the public property involved, or of the owner
of private property involved, to place or insert or cause to be placed or
inserted in any manner whatsoever any inscription drawing, mark and/or graffiti
on any street, sidewalk, alley, thoroughfare, public or private building,
monument, fence, structure, vehicle and/or real or personal property of any
type.
(Ord. 389, passed 3-11-1980) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.031 POSTING NOTICES AND SIGNS.
   All public authorities having supervision of public property may post
notices and signs to publicize the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 389, passed 3-11-1980)
TRESPASS
§ 132.044 TRESPASS UPON LANDS OR PREMISES OF ANOTHER.
   A person shall not:
   (A)   Enter the lands or premises of another without lawful authority after
having been forbidden to do so by the owner or occupant or the agent of the
owner or occupant.
   (B)   Remain without lawful authority on the land or premises of another
after being notified to depart by the owner or occupant or the agent of the
owner or occupant.
(Ord. 2013-011, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.045 WITH INTENT TO COMMIT CRIME OR DAMAGE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon lands or premises owned by
another or owned by any unit of government without lawful authority, for the
purpose of committing any crime or damaging any property thereon.
(Ord. 370, passed 12-6-1977) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.046 PROHIBITED WHERE NOTICE POSTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon lands or premises owned by
another or owned by any unit of government, without lawful authority where
notice posted by the owner prohibits unauthorized entry thereon.
(Ord. 370, passed 12-6-1977) Penalty, see §
132.999
DAMAGING SCHOOL PROPERTY
§ 132.060 DAMAGING.
   No person shall damage, destroy or deface any public, private or parochial
school building, or any building occupied by any public, private or parochial
school building or the grounds, out-buildings, fences, trees or other
appurtenances or fixtures belonging thereto.
(Ord. 298, passed 3-2-1965) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.061 NOISE, DISTURBANCE OR IMPROPER DIVERSION.
   No person shall wilfully or maliciously make or assist in making any noise,
disturbance or improper diversion, by which the peace, quietude or good order
of any public, private or parochial school is disturbed.
(Ord. 298, passed 3-2-1965) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.062 PROFANE, INDECENT OR IMMORAL LANGUAGE.
   No person shall use profane, indecent or immoral language or indulge in
indecent or immoral conduct in any building or on any property adjacent to any
building in the city occupied as a public, private or parochial school.
(Ord. 298, passed 3-2-1965) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.063 IMMEDIATE DEPARTURE WHEN DIRECTED.
   Any person found to be creating a disturbance in any private, public or
parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds shall leave immediately
when so directed by the principal or by any other person designated by the
principal.
(Ord. 298, passed 3-2-1965) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.064 NOT A REGULARLY ENROLLED STUDENT, TEACHER, PARENT OR OTHER EMPLOYEE.
   No person who is not a regularly enrolled student, teacher, parent or other
employee shall enter and remain in any school building, whether public, private
or parochial, in the city, for any reason whatever unless the person has
received written permission from the principal or other person designated by
the principal, to be in any public, private or parochial school building.
(Ord. 298, passed 3-2-1965) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.065 BORROWING MONEY OR VALUABLES FROM STUDENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to borrow or attempt to borrow any money
or thing of value from any student in any public, private or parochial school
or on any public, private or parochial school property in the city or during
any time when any student is going to or returning from any regularly scheduled
session of any school without first obtaining the written approval of the
principal of the school or other person designated by the principal to issue a
written approval.
(Ord. 298, passed 3-2-1965) Penalty, see §
132.999
DEFACING SERIAL NUMBERS
§ 132.080 CONCEALMENT OR MISREPRESENTATION OF IDENTITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation, to
conceal or misrepresent the identity of any motor, household appliance or
mechanical device by removing or defacing the manufacturer’s serial or motor
number or by altering or replacing any part of the motor, appliance or
mechanical device bearing the serial or motor number with a new or replaced
part upon which the proper serial or motor number has not been stamped or
placed.
(Ord. 219, passed 8-11-1949) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.081 POSSESSION NOT PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF VIOLATION.
   In all prosecutions under this subchapter, possession by any dealer,
distributor, wholesaler or person, firm, partnership or corporation in the
business of buying and selling of any motor, appliance or mechanical device
with the manufacturer’s serial or motor number removed, defaced or altered or
with a part bearing the number replaced by one on which the proper number does
not appear, shall be prima facie evidence of violation of the provision of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 219, passed 8-11-1949) Penalty, see §
132.999
POLITICAL CAMPAIGN LITERATURE
§ 132.095 UNLAWFUL TO POST OR DISTRIBUTE NEAR CHURCH.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership or
association or any group of persons to pass out, hand deliver or in any other
manner to distribute or post, or to induce, persuade or employ other person or
persons to pass out, hand, deliver or in any other manner to distribute or post
in any place in and about any property of any church or other place of regular
religious assembly or within 100 feet from the property located within the city
any printed, typewritten or written leaflet, card, pamphlet, newspaper, poster
or any other printed or written matter or literature or any photostats,
stenciled copies or any other facsimile of same, in furtherance of any
political campaign in favor of or against any candidate for any public office
or in favor of or against any political, public or legislative issue, question
or proposal.
(Ord. 204, passed 1-7-1947) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.096 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHURCH. Any edifice, temple, chapel or building used exclusively for the
preaching of the word of Gospel and religious services according to the
liturgy, rituals or tenets of the religion or faith of the congregation
belonging thereto.
   OTHER PLACE OF REGULAR RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY. Any building which is maintained
regularly and principally for preaching of the word of Gospel and for religious
services and instructions in accordance with the accepted practices of the
congregation or in accordance with the liturgy, rituals or tenets of the
religious sect or denomination of the congregation belonging thereto.
   PROPERTY. Includes any edifice, temple, chapel or building used for the
religious services as defined in the definitions above and all the land
thereunder and next adjacent to it, and all other buildings located on the land
and used in furtherance of the religious purposes of the congregation, whether
the property is owned by or leased, rented or kept by or for the church or
other place of regular religious assembly.
(Ord. 204, passed 1-7-1947)
§ 132.097 PROHIBITION OF VOTING POLLS.
   This subchapter shall not be construed or defined as to prohibit the
establishment of voting polls on the property hereinbefore mentioned in this
subchapter for the purpose of conducting elections for the convenience of the
electors residing in the voting precinct or ward, within which the property is
located, or to post in the voting polls all necessary notices to the election
workers or to the voters as required by the election laws of the state, or to
post any other registration or election notices or notices of the meetings of
the Board of Review or near the property as may be required by the laws of
state or the City Charter of the city.
(Ord. 204, passed 1-7-1947) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.098 NO PROHIBITION AGAINST PASSING OUT CAMPAIGN LITERATURE NEAR CHURCH.
   This subchapter shall not be construed or defined as to prohibit the passing
out, handing, delivering or in any manner distributing in about any property of
any church or any other place of regular religious assembly of any leaflet,
card, pamphlet, newspaper, sign, poster or any other printed or written matter
or literature against any legislative proposal seeking to restrict or interfere
with the religious liberty, as guaranteed by the First Amendment to the
Constitution of the United States and by Article II, Section 3 of the
Constitution of the state.
(Ord. 204, passed 1-7-1947)
DISCOUNTING OF SCRIP
§ 132.110 ACCEPTANCE AT FACE VALUE.
   No person, firm or corporation shall accept any scrip note or certificate in
lien of federal currency in exchange for any commodity or other thing of value
except at the face value of the scrip, note or certificate.
(Ord. 112, passed 5-2-1933) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.111 LIABLE FOR AMOUNT OF DISCOUNT.
   Any person, firm or corporation accepting scrips, note or certificate in
violation of §
132.110 of this subchapter shall be liable to the person from whom the scrip,
note or certificate was accepted at less than face value, for the amount of the
discount placed upon it by the person, firm or corporation, and shall also be
liable to the fine and/or imprisonment hereinafter provided for violation of
the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 112, passed 5-2-1933) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.112 RETURN OF SCRIP.
   Any holder of scrip, note or certificate who accepts any commodity or other
thing of value in exchange for scrip, note or certificate at less than face
value of same shall, upon tender back of the commodity or thing of value so
received, be given back the scrip, note or certificate.
(Ord. 112, passed 5-2-1933)
§ 132.113 PROHIBITION AGAINST HIGHER PRICE DUE TO PAYMENT BY SCRIP.
   No person, firm or corporation shall charge a higher price for any commodity
or other thing of value by reason of the fact that it is paid for in scrip or
other note or certificate issued in lieu of federal currency.
(Ord. 112, passed 5-2-1933) Penalty, see §
132.999
ADVERTISING
§ 132.125 GENERALLY.
   Any person, firm, corporation or association who, with intent to sell or in
any way dispose of merchandise, securities, service or anything offered by a
person, firm, corporation or association, directly or indirectly, to the public
for sale or distribution or with intent to increase the consumption thereof or
to induce the public in any manner to enter into any obligation relating
thereto or any interest therein, makes, publishes, disseminates, circulates or
places before the public or causes directly or indirectly to be made,
published, disseminated, circulated or placed before the public in this city,
in a newspaper or other publication or in the form of a book, notice, handbill,
poster, bill, circular, pamphlet or letter or in any other way an advertisement
of any sort regarding merchandise, securities, service or anything so offered
to the public which advertisement contains any representation or statement
which is untrue, deceptive or misleading or intended to subject any person to
disadvantage or injury through the publication of false or deceptive
statements, shall be guilty of an offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
Provided, however, that the provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to
any owner, publisher, printer, agent or employee of a newspaper or other
publication, periodical or circular, who, in good faith and without knowledge
of the falsity or deceptive character thereof, publishes, causes to be
published or takes part in the publication of the advertisement.
(Ord. 78, passed 9-18-1928)
§ 132.126 DECEPTIVE ADVERTISING.
   It shall be deemed deceptive advertising and a violation of the provisions
of this subchapter for any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business
of buying and selling new or second-hand furs, wearing apparel, jewelry,
furniture, pianos, phonographs, other musical instruments or other similar
commodities or any form of property, real, personal or mixed or in the business
of furnishing any kind of service, to advertise by “liner ads” or otherwise,
the articles, property or service for sale in a manner indicating that the sale
is being made by a private party or householder not engaged in the business.
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in any business shall, in advertising
goods, property or service for sale, either through “liner ads” or otherwise,
affirmatively and unmistakably indicate or state that the seller is a business
concern and not a private party.
(Ord. 78, passed 9-18-1928)
§ 132.127 PUBLISHER’S DUTIES.
   No newspaper or other publication or employee thereof, shall hereafter
accept advertisement for its classified or other columns without, at the time,
obtaining the name and address of the advertiser and making a record of the
same. The record shall be retained by the newspaper or other publication
obtaining the same for a period of two weeks and shall be subject to the
examination of any police officer. No newspaper or other publication or
employee thereof, shall knowingly accept any advertisement from any person,
firm or corporation engaged in any of the businesses mentioned in §
132.126 of this subchapter if the advertisement is made ostensibly by a private
party or does not affirmatively state that the advertiser is a business concern
and is not a private party.
(Ord. 78, passed 9-18-1928)
§ 132.128 SIGN TO BE POSTED.
   Any person, firm or corporation engaged in any of the businesses mentioned
in §
132.126 hereof, whether conducting the business in a store, business block,
residence or other building, shall at all times, keep a conspicuous sign posted
on the outside of his or her establishment and another conspicuous sign in the
salesroom, which sign shall clearly state or indicate that the seller is a
business concern and not a private party or householder, provided that the
exterior sign shall not be required where the seller has no control over the
exterior of the premises where the business is conducted.
(Ord. 78, passed 9-18-1928) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.
   (B)   Larceny. Any person violating any of the provisions of §
132.003 shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than
$500 or imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or both a fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 435, passed 10-12-1989)
   (C)   Graffiti.
      (1)   Any person violating any provision of §§
132.030 and
132.031 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (2)   Any person violating any of the provisions §§
132.030 and
132.031 shall upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to $500
or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both a fine and imprisonment, in the
discretion of the court.
(Ord. 389, passed 3-11-1980)
   (D)   Trespass. Any person convicted violating any of the provisions of §§
132.045 and
132.046 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500, or imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the
court.
(Ord. 370, passed 12-6-1977)
   (E)   Damaging school property. Any person violating any of the provision of
§§
132.060 through
132.065 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $500 or be imprisoned for a period
not exceeding 90 days or be both so fined and imprisoned, in the discretion of
the court.
(Ord. 298, passed 3-2-1965)
   (F)   Defacing serial numbers. Any person, firm, co-partnership or
corporation violating any provision of §§
132.080 and
132.081 shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than
$500 or imprisonment in the Wayne County Jail for a period not exceeding 90
days, or by both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 219, passed 8-11-1949)
   (G)   Political campaign literature. Any person, firm, corporation,
partnership or association violating any provisions of §§
132.095 through
132.098 shall be deemed as guilty of breach of peace and upon conviction
thereof by proper tribunal shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100, and/
or costs of prosecution or imprisonment in the Wayne County Jail for a period
of not more than 90 days or both a fine and imprisonment, in discretion of the
court.
(Ord. 204, passed 1-7-1947)
   (H)   Discounting of scrip. Every person, firm, corporation convicted of
violating any provision of §§
132.110 through
132.113 shall be punished by a fine or not to exceed $500 and costs of
prosecution, and in default of payment of the fine and costs, the court may
make a further sentence that the offender be imprisoned in the Wayne County
Jail or another place of imprisonment as may hereafter be established by the
City Council as a place of confinement until the fine and costs be paid but not
longer than 90 days, or in the discretion of the court having jurisdiction of
the cause, both a fine and imprisonment may be imposed. In the event that there
shall be imposed upon any corporation any fine and costs, or either, or both,
for the violation of any of the provisions of this §§
132.110 through
132.113, then it shall be lawful to collect the fine and costs, or either, or
both, in an action of assumpsit before any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 112, passed 5-2-1933)
   (I)   Advertising. Every person, firm, or corporation convicted of
violating, or failing to comply with the provisions §§
132.125 through
132.128 shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $500 and costs of
prosecution and, in default of the payment of the fine and costs, the court may
make a further sentence that the offender be imprisoned in the Wayne County
Jail, or another place of imprisonment as may be hereafter established by the
City Council as a place of confinement, until the fine and costs be paid, but
not longer then 90 days, or, in the discretion of the court having jurisdiction
of the cause, both a fine and imprisonment may be imposed. In the event that
there shall be imposed upon any corporation any fine and costs, or either, or
both, for the violation of any of the terms of §§
132.125 through
132.128, then it shall be lawful to collect the fine and costs, or either, or
both, in an action of assumpsit before any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 78, passed 9-18-1928)
CHAPTER 133: WEAPONS
Section
General Provisions
   
133.001   Aiming firearms
   
133.002   Aiming and discharging firearm
   
133.003   Injury by discharge of firearm
   
133.004   Possession or control of firearms while intoxicated
   
133.005   Confiscation of firearms
Prohibiting the Possession, Sale and Advertising of Replica and Facsimile
Firearms
   
133.020   Definitions
   
133.021   Possession or transfer prohibited
   
133.022   Display, market for sale or sale prohibited
   
133.023   Advertisement prohibited
   
133.024   Exemptions
   
133.025   Permitted
   
133.026   Drawing, exhibiting or brandishing prohibited
   
133.027   Drawing, exhibiting or brandishing around peace officer, firefighter,
emergency medical technician or paramedic
   
133.028   Seizure and forfeiture
Pistols
   
133.040   Definition
   
133.041   Presentation for safety inspection
Blades
   
133.055   Definition
   
133.056   Concealed
   
133.057   Regarding minors under the age of 18
   
133.058   Knives with blades more than three inches in length
   
133.059   Exceptions
 
   
133.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 133.001 AIMING FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to intentionally,
without malice, point or aim any firearm at or toward any other person.
(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.002 AIMING AND DISCHARGING FIREARM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge, without injury
to another person, any firearm, while intentionally without malice, aiming at
or toward any person.
(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.003 INJURY BY DISCHARGE OF FIREARM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to maim or injure any
other person by the discharge of any firearm pointed or aimed unintentionally,
without malice at any person.
(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.004 POSSESSION OR CONTROL OF FIREARMS WHILE INTOXICATED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, while under the
influence of an alcoholic liquor, controlled substance or any other
exhilarating or stupefying drug, or the combination of alcoholic liquor and a
controlled substance, to carry, have in possession or control, or use in any
manner or discharge any firearms.
(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944; Am. Ord. 2013-010, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see
§
133.999
§ 133.005 CONFISCATION OF FIREARMS.
   All weapons, guns, pistols or firearms carried, possessed or used contrary
to §§
133.001 through
133.004 are hereby declared forfeited to the city.
(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944)
PROHIBITING THE POSSESSION, SALE AND ADVERTISING OF REPLICA AND FACSIMILE
FIREARMS
§ 133.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIREARM. Any weapon from which a dangerous projectile may be propelled by
using explosives, gas or air as a means of propulsion including any shotgun,
rifle, pistol or other device of a similar character.
   REPLICA OR FACSIMILE FIREARMS. Any devices or objects made of plastic, wood,
metal or any other material which are replicas, facsimiles or toy versions of,
or are otherwise recognizable as a pistol, revolver, shotgun, sawed-off
shotgun, rifle, machine gun, rocket launcher, starter pistol, air gun,
inoperative firearm or other firearm. As used in this subchapter, the words
REPLICA OR FACSIMILE FIREARMS shall include, but are not limited to, toy guns,
theatrical production props, hobby models (either in kit form or fully
assembled) or any other devices which might reasonably be perceived to be real
firearms.
(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988)
§ 133.021 POSSESSION OR TRANSFER PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to possess or transfer replica or facsimile
firearms within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.022 DISPLAY, MARKET FOR SALE OR SALE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to display, market for sale or sell replica or
facsimile firearms within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.023 ADVERTISEMENT PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to place an advertisement in any newspaper,
magazine, handbill, sign, poster, other publications or other advertising media
with knowledge that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is
to promote within the corporate limits of the city the possession, transfer or
sale of objects designed and manufactured as replica of facsimile firearms.
(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.024 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to replica or facsimile
firearms which, because of their distinct color, exaggerated size or
permanently affixed international blaze orange markings on the receiver
portions of the product and blaze orange plug recessed no more than six
millimeters from the muzzle end of the barrel, cannot reasonably be perceived
to be real firearms.
(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988)
§ 133.025 PERMITTED.
   (A)   The possession, manufacture, marketing, distribution and sale of
replica or facsimile firearms are permitted if the devices are possessed,
manufactured, distributed or sold:
      (1)   Solely for subsequent transportation in intrastate, interstate or
foreign commerce;
      (2)   Solely for lawful use in theatrical productions including motion
picture, television and stage productions; or
      (3)   Toy guns or firearms.
   (B)   The devices shall not be displayed to the general public or sold for
other uses within the corporate limits of the city regardless of where
manufactured or purchased.
(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988)
§ 133.026 DRAWING, EXHIBITING OR BRANDISHING PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to draw, exhibit or brandish replica or
facsimile firearms or simulate the drawing, exhibiting or brandishing of
replica or facsimile firearms, in a rude, threatening or angry manner with
intent to frighten, vex, harass or annoy any other person.
(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.027 DRAWING, EXHIBITING OR BRANDISHING AROUND PEACE OFFICER, FIREFIGHTER,
EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN OR PARAMEDIC.
   It is unlawful for any person, with knowledge that a peace officer,
firefighter, emergency medical technician or paramedic is engaged in the
performance of his or her duties, to draw, exhibit or brandish replica or
facsimile firearms in their presence.
(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.028 SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE.
   Any replica or facsimile firearms possessed or sold, or displayed with the
intent to sell, or manufactured within the corporate limits of the city with
intent to sell in violation of this subchapter, or used in a rude, threatening
or angry manner, shall be seized and forfeited to the city.
(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988) Penalty, see §
133.999
PISTOLS
§ 133.040 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PISTOL. Any firearm loaded or unloaded 30 inches or less in length or any
firearm loaded or unloaded, which by its construction and appearance conceals
it as a firearm.
(Ord. 330, passed 8-25-1970)
§ 133.041 PRESENTATION FOR SAFETY INSPECTION.
   Any person within the city who owns or comes into possession of a pistol as
defined in §
133.040, shall present the weapon for safety inspection to the Chief of Police
of the city. A certificate of inspection shall thereupon be issued in
triplicate, containing the name, age, address, description and signature of the
person presenting the pistol for inspection together with a full description
thereof, the original of the certificate shall be delivered to the registrant,
the duplicate thereof shall be mailed within 48 hours to the Commissioner of
the State Police and the triplicate shall be retained and filed in the office
of the Chief of Police. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
wholesale or retail dealers in firearms or to collections of pistols kept
solely for the purpose of display, as relics, curios or antiques, not made for
modern ammunition or permanently deactivated.
(Ord. 330, passed 8-25-1970) Penalty, see §
133.999
BLADES
§ 133.055 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DART. A pointed weapon or stick, thrown by hand.
(Ord. 191, passed 9-21-1943; Am. Ord. 287, passed 2-11-1964; Am. Ord. 300,
passed 5-27-1965; Am. Ord., passed 6-23-2020)
§ 133.056 CONCEALED.
   A person shall not carry a dagger, dirk, stiletto, a double-edged non-
folding stabbing instrument of any length, or any other dangerous weapon,
except a hunting knife adapted and carried as such, concealed on or about his
or her person, or whether concealed or otherwise in any vehicle operated or
occupied by the person, except in his or her dwelling house, place of business
or on other land possessed by the person.
(Ord., passed 6-23-2020) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.057 REGARDING MINORS UNDER THE AGE OF 18.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or
loan to any minor under the age of 18 years any dart or knife.
(Ord. 287, passed 2-11-1964; Am. Ord. 300, passed 5-27-1965; Am. Ord., passed
6-23-2020) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.058 KNIVES WITH BLADES MORE THAN THREE INCHES IN LENGTH.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of a knife
with a blade more than three inches in length in any of the streets, alleys,
parks, boulevards or other public property or schools in the city or in any
dance hall, theater, amusement park, liquor establishment, store or other
private property generally frequented by the public for purposes of education,
recreation, amusement, entertainment, sport or shopping.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to any person in possession of any knife
when it is used or carried in good faith as a tool of honest work, trade,
business, sport or recreation when the person in possession of the knife is
actively engaged therein or actively engaged in going to or returning from
honest work, trade, business, sport or recreation.
(Ord. 287, passed 2-11-1964; Am. Ord. 300, passed 5-27-1965; Am. Ord., passed
6-23-2020) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.059 EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to be in
possession of any knife, dart or instrument of any description that could be
used for cutting or stabbing, in any of the streets, alleys, parks, boulevards
or other public property or schools in the city or in any dance hall, theater,
amusement park, liquor establishment, store or other private property generally
frequented by the public for purposes of education, recreation, amusement,
entertainment, sport or shopping; provided, that this section shall not apply
to any person under 18 years of age being in possession of any knife when it is
used or carried in good faith as a tool of honest work, trade, business, sport
or recreation or when used or carried in good faith as equipment related to and
required for any legitimate sport, recreation or youth character building
program (Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts and the like), when actively engaged therein
or actively engaged in going to or returning from honest work, trade, business,
sport, recreation or youth character building program.
(Ord. 287, passed 2-11-1964; Am. Ord. 300, passed 5-27-1965; Am. Ord., passed
6-23-2020)
§ 133.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Firearms.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) below, conviction for
violation of any of the provisions of §§
133.001 through
133.005 shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment of
not more than 90 days or by both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of
the court.
(Ord. 196, passed 8-21-1944)
      (2)   (a)   An individual without a concealed pistol permit who has an
alcohol content of .08 or more grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210
liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine or because of the consumption
of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic
liquor and a controlled substance, the individual’s ability to use a firearm is
visibly impaired is guilty of a misdemeanor subject to punishment of not more
than 90 days imprisonment and a fine of not more than $100 for carrying or
possessing a firearm, or both, and not more than $500 for using or discharging
a firearm, or both.
         (b)   An individual with a concealed pistol permit shall be reported
to the firearm licensing board and subject to the following penalties depending
on his or her blood alcohol level:
            1.   A civil infraction with a fine of up to $100 for a person with
.02 to .079 BAC (blood alcohol level) or deemed to be visibly impaired;
   
            2.   A misdemeanor punishable by up to 90 days imprisonment and a
$100 fine for a person with .08 to .099 BAC;
            3.   A misdemeanor punishable by up to 90 days imprisonment and a
$100 fine for a person with .10 or more BAC.
   (B)   Prohibiting the possession, sale and advertising of replica and
facsimile firearms. Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
133.020 through
133.028 shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine of not more than
$500 or to imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days or to both a fine
and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 428, passed 8-11-1988)
   (C)   Pistols. Any person found guilty of violating §§
133.040 and
133.041 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $100 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days and/or both a fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 330, passed 8-25-1970)
   (D)   Blades. A person who violates §§
133.055 through
133.059 is, pursuant to MCL § 750.227, guilty of a felony, punishable by
imprisonment for not more than five years, or by a fine of not more than
$2,500.
(Ord. 191, passed 9-21-1943; Am. Ord. 287, passed 2-11-1964; Am. Ord. 300,
passed 5-27-1965; Am. Ord. 2013-010, passed 1-22-2013; Am. Ord., passed 6-23-
2020)
CHAPTER 134: MINORS
Section
Youth Tobacco and Marijuana
   
134.001   Title
   
134.002   Purpose
   
134.003   Definitions
   
134.004   Use of tobacco product by minors; prohibition
   
134.005   Noninterference with right of parent or guardian
   
134.006   Enforcement
Curfew
   
134.020   Prohibition
   
134.021   Theaters, moving picture shows, bowling rooms and other places of
amusement
   
134.022   Billiard or pool halls
   
134.023   Child under sixteen enrolled in a day school program
   
134.024   Exceptions
   
134.025   Duty of business owner/operator
   
134.026   Duty of parent, legal guardian or other adult person
   
134.027   Illegal to assist, aid, abet or encourage
Sale of Spray Paint
   
134.040   Definition
   
134.041   Illegal to possess, buy, transfer or receive possession
   
134.042   Illegal for person to assist, aid, abet or encourage possession by
minor
Sale of Liquor
   
134.055   Furnishing alcoholic beverage without prescription to minor
   
134.056   Possession of liquor by minor
   
134.057   Frequenting taverns
   
134.058   Lawful employment not prohibited
   
134.059   Exceptions
Sale of Model Glue
   
134.070   Definition
   
134.071   Prohibition against inhalation
   
134.072   Prohibition against possession, buying, selling transferring or
receiving possession
   
134.073   Exceptions
   
134.074   Written consent
Movie Theaters
   
134.100   Prohibiting children in theaters and other places of amusement
   
134.101   Notice to be posted
   
134.102   Employment of minors
   
134.103   Admission
   
134.104   Duty of manager or owner
Abandoned Ice Boxes and Refrigerators
   
134.115   Unlawful to abandon if it contains an air-tight door or lock which
may not be released for opening from the inside
   
134.116   Removal of air-tight snap lock
Street Trades
   
134.130   Definition
   
134.131   Age limitation
   
134.132   Prohibition during school hours
   
134.133   Unlawful employment
 
   
134.999   Penalty
YOUTH TOBACCO AND MARIJUANA
§ 134.001 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Youth Tobacco and Marijuana
Subchapter.
(Ord. 478, passed 12-18-2001)
§ 134.002 PURPOSE.
   By enacting this subchapter, the city is acting to protect the public
health, safety or general welfare of the residents.
(Ord. 478, passed 12-18-2001)
§ 134.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHEWING TOBACCO. Loose tobacco or a flat, compressed cake of tobacco that is
inserted into the mouth to be chewed or sucked.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any kind that
are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance.
   MARIJUANA. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., growing or not
growing, the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the
plant or its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature stalks of the
plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the
plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber,
oil or cake or the sterilized seed of the plant which in incapable of
germination.
   TOBACCO SNUFF. Shredded, powdered or pulverized tobacco that may be inhaled
through the nostrils, chewed or placed against the gums.
(Ord. 478, passed 12-18-2001)
§ 134.004 USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCT BY MINORS; PROHIBITION.
   A person under 18 years of age shall not possess or smoke cigarettes, cigars
or marijuana or possess or chew, suck or inhale chewing tobacco, tobacco snuff,
tobacco or narcotic paraphernalia; or possess or use tobacco in any other form,
on a public highway, street, alley, park, sidewalk or other land used for
public purposes or in a public place of business, education or amusement.
(Ord. 478, passed 12-18-2001) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.005 NONINTERFERENCE WITH RIGHT OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN.
   This subchapter does not interfere with the right of a parent or legal
guardian in the rearing and management of his or her minor children or wards
within the bounds of his or her own private premises.
(Ord. 478, passed 12-18-2001)
§ 134.006 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any police officer or official of the city designated by the Mayor shall
have full authority to enforce this subchapter.
(Ord. 478, passed 12-18-2001)
CURFEW
§ 134.020 PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful for a minor to be on the public streets, playgrounds,
vacant lots or other unsupervised place if the minor is under 18 years of age,
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except Fridays and Saturdays,
when the time for minors 16 and 17 years of age shall be between 11:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m.
(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.021 THEATERS, MOVING PICTURE SHOWS, BOWLING ROOMS AND OTHER PLACES OF
AMUSEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for a minor to be in a theater, moving picture show,
bowling room or other place of amusement:
   (A)   If the minor is under 12 years of age, between the hours of 7:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.; and
   (B)   If the minor is 12 years of age and under 18 years of age, between the
hours of 9:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; except Fridays and Saturdays when the time
for minors 16 and 17 years of age shall be between 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.022 BILLIARD OR POOL HALLS.
   It shall be unlawful for any minor under 17 years of age to remain in or
play billiards or pool in a billiard or pool hall; provided, that the
provisions of this section do not apply to private residences, private clubs,
schools, churches, duly licensed family hobby and recreation centers, fraternal
organizations or any other civic agency, organization or institution.
(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.023 CHILD UNDER SIXTEEN ENROLLED IN A DAY SCHOOL PROGRAM.
   It shall be unlawful for any child under 16 years of age or enrolled in a
day school program other than a college or university, to remain in any
restaurant, lunchroom, candy store, confectionery, bowling room, ice cream
parlor, in any theater or other public place of entertainment or any other
public place unless it is part of an organized school program, during the
school hours of the child.
(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.024 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to:
   (A)   A minor accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian or other
adult person having the care or custody of the minor; or
   (B)   A minor going to or returning from work; provided that the minor’s
hours of employment do not violate state law; provided further that the minor
possesses a signed statement issued by his or her employer within the previous
90 days setting forth the minor’s hours of employment; and provided further
that the minor shall be exempt from the requirements of this subchapter for not
more than one hour before the minor’s work day begins and for not more than one
hour after the minor’s work day ends.
(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.025 DUTY OF BUSINESS OWNER/OPERATOR.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any theater owner, moving picture operator,
theater licensee, bowling room, poolroom, billiard room, restaurant, lunch
room, candy store, confectionery or ice cream parlor proprietor or the
operator, manager or employee of the establishment to permit a minor to remain
in any establishment contrary to the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the proprietor, manager or employee of any
theater, bowling room, restaurant, lunchroom, candy store, confectionery or ice
cream parlor or any other public place to permit a minor to remain in any
establishment during the respective school hours of the child after due
notification of the school hours of the child by the school authorities, the
police or the parents of the child.
(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.026 DUTY OF PARENT, LEGAL GUARDIAN OR OTHER ADULT PERSON.
   It shall be unlawful for the parent, legal guardian or other adult person
having the care or custody of a minor under 18 years of age to knowingly permit
the minor to violate any provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.027 ILLEGAL TO ASSIST, AID, ABET OR ENCOURAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage any
minor to violate any of the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983) Penalty, see §
134.999
SALE OF SPRAY PAINT
§ 134.040 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SPRAY PAINT. Any adherent pigmented substance dispersed in particles, by
means of an atomizer or applicator.
(Ord. 390, passed 3-25-1980)
§ 134.041 ILLEGAL TO POSSESS, BUY, TRANSFER OR RECEIVE POSSESSION.
   No person under 18 years of age shall possess, buy, transfer possession or
receive possession of spray paint.
(Ord. 390, passed 3-25-1980) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.042 ILLEGAL FOR PERSON TO ASSIST, AID, ABET OR ENCOURAGE POSSESSION BY
MINOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage any
person under 18 years of age to violate §
134.041.
(Ord. 390, passed 3-25-1980) Penalty, see §
134.999
SALE OF LIQUOR
§ 134.055 FURNISHING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE WITHOUT PRESCRIPTION TO MINOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to give or furnish any alcoholic
beverage to a minor except upon authority of and pursuant to a prescription of
a duly licensed physician.
(Ord. 303, passed 8-24-1965) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.056 POSSESSION OF LIQUOR BY MINOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to purchase,
consume or knowingly possess any alcoholic liquor on any public place or on
private property or place or to knowingly possess, transport or have under his
or her control in any motor vehicle any alcoholic liquor, unless the person is
employed by a licensee under the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 and is
possessing, transporting or having the alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle
under his or her control during regular, working hours and in the course of his
or her employment.
(Ord. 303, passed 8-24-1965; Am. Ord. 2013-12, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.057 FREQUENTING TAVERNS.
   No minor person under the age of 21 years shall enter in, frequent or remain
in any tavern, saloon, bar room or other place within the corporate limits of
the city where spiritous or other intoxicating liquors are sold, given away or
furnished for consumption upon the premises and no proprietor, keeper, manager
or other person shall permit any child to enter in, frequent or remain in any
place or shall encourage or induce any minor child to enter in, frequent or
remain therein.
(Ord. 201, passed 7-9-1946) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.058 LAWFUL EMPLOYMENT NOT PROHIBITED.
   This subchapter shall not be construed to prevent the lawful employment of
any minor child pursuant to the provisions of the laws of the state, now, or
which may hereafter become effective.
(Ord. 201, passed 7-9-1946)
§ 134.059 EXCEPTIONS.
   This shall not be construed to include within its purview any restaurant,
hotel or place of amusement, the principal business of lodging or legitimate
forms of amusement and wherein the service of spiritous or intoxicating liquor
is incidental thereto.
(Ord. 201, passed 7-9-1946)
SALE OF MODEL GLUE
§ 134.070 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MODEL GLUE. Any glue or cement of the type commonly used in the building of
model airplanes, boats and automobiles, containing toluene, acetone or other
solvent or chemical having the property of releasing toxic vapors.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-10-1965)
§ 134.071 PROHIBITION AGAINST INHALATION.
   No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication,
euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of the senses or
nervous system, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes from any model glue
provided, however that this section shall not apply to the inhalation of any
anesthesia for medical or dental purpose.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-10-1965) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.072 PROHIBITION AGAINST POSSESSION, BUYING, SELLING TRANSFERRING OR
RECEIVING POSSESSION.
   No person shall, for the purpose of violating or aiding another to violate
any provision of this subchapter, intentionally possess, buy, sell, transfer
possession or receive possession of any model glue.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-10-1965) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.073 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) hereof and §
134.074, no person under 21 years of age shall possess or buy any model glue.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) hereof and §
134.074, no person shall sell or transfer. possession of any model glue to
another person under 21 years of age.
   (C)   Provided, however, a person may sell or transfer possession of model
glue to a person under 21 years of age for model building or other lawful use
where the minor has in his or her possession and exhibits the written consent
of his or her parent or guardian.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-10-1965) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.074 WRITTEN CONSENT.
   A person making a sale or transfer of possession of model glue to a person
under 21 years of age who exhibits the written consent of his or her parent or
guardian, shall record the name, address, sex and age of the minor and the name
and address of the consenting parent or guardian. All data required by this
section shall be kept in a permanent type register available for inspection by
the Police Department for a period of at least six months.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-10-1965) Penalty, see §
134.999
MOVIE THEATERS
§ 134.100 PROHIBITING CHILDREN IN THEATERS AND OTHER PLACES OF AMUSEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any theater owner, moving picture operator,
theater licensee, operator, manager, employee, parent or guardian to permit any
child under the age of 16 years unaccompanied by a parent or guardian or an
adult in whose care or custody the parent or guardian has placed the child, to
remain in any theater, moving picture show or other place of amusement within
the city after the hour of 9:30 p.m.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any theater owner, moving picture operator,
theater license, operator, manager or employee to permit any male minor under
the age of 18 years or any female minor under the age of 21 years, to be
admitted to or to be permitted to remain in any theater, moving picture show or
any other place of amusement within the city between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. and it shall be unlawful for any male minor under the age of 24 years
to apply for admission or to remain in any theater, moving picture show or any
other place of amusement within the city between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:
00 a.m.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any theater owner, moving picture operator,
theater licensee, operator, manager or employee, parent or guardian to permit
any child under the age of 16 years to remain in any theater, moving picture
show or other place of amusement within the city between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 3:00 p.m. except during school vacation periods and on school vacation
days.
(Ord. 168, passed 6-9-1938) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.101 NOTICE TO BE POSTED.
   Notice of the provisions of this subchapter shall be placed or posted in a
conspicuous place in the lobby of each theater.
(Ord. 168, passed 6-9-1938)
§ 134.102 EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS.
   No theater owner, moving picture operator, theater licensee, operator,
manager or employee, by himself, herself or another shall employ, engage or
otherwise permit employment, engagement or use any minor under the age of 16
years, as an employee, entertainer or any other capacity, in or about the
premises, provided, however, that so-called traveling road shows may engage or
employ a minor under the age of 17 years, provided the employment or engagement
is approved by the Department of Labor of the state, and provided that minors
under 17 years pursuing apprenticeship courses as part of their training may be
employed when the employment has the approval of the State Labor Department and
a permit issued by the Board of Education covering the employment in the city.
(Ord. 168, passed 6-9-1938)
§ 134.103 ADMISSION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person other than a parent, guardian or an
adult person in whose care a parent or guardian has placed a child, to purchase
an admission ticket for a child or assist in any way whatsoever any child to
gain admittance into any theater where admittance is unlawful under the terms
of the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 168, passed 6-9-1938) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.104 DUTY OF MANAGER OR OWNER.
   It shall be the duty of the manager or owner of any theater or motion
picture show to make a reasonable effort to see that the provisions of this
subchapter are carried out. By complying with the list of suggestions as given
in this section, any theater owner or manager shall have made his or her
contribution to the effectiveness of this subchapter.
   (A)   The theater schedule should be so arranged that a complete show is
finished before 9:30 p.m.
   (B)   The theater should warn all children who seek to enter after the
feature picture has started that they will have to leave when the show is
completed.
   (C)   The theater should by, flashing a slide or running a trailer notice on
the screen (before lighting the theater) urge all children to leave after the
performance.
   (D)   The theater may be lighted for a period not less than one minute at
the end of the completed show sometime between 9:00 and 9:30 p. m.
   (E)   The theater should have its ushers see that children do not remain in
the theater after 9:30 p.m.
   (F)   The theater shall use reasonable judgment in deciding whether or not a
child is under 16 years of age.
(Ord. 168, passed 6-9-1938) Penalty, see §
134.999
ABANDONED ICE BOXES AND REFRIGERATORS
§ 134.115 UNLAWFUL TO ABANDON IF IT CONTAINS AN AIR-TIGHT DOOR OR LOCK WHICH
MAY NOT BE RELEASED FOR OPENING FROM THE INSIDE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave outside of
a building or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned,
unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or any other container of any
kind, which has an air-tight door or lock which may not be released for opening
from the inside of the ice box, refrigerator or container.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-29-1953) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.116 REMOVAL OF AIR-TIGHT SNAP LOCK.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave outside of
any building or dwelling, in a place accessible to children any abandoned,
unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or any other container of any
kind which has an air-tight snap-lock or other device thereon, without first
removing the snap-lock or doors from the ice box, refrigerator or container.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-29-1953) Penalty, see §
134.999
STREET TRADES
§ 134.130 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the words STREET TRADE shall mean the
business, occupation, undertaking or pursuit of:
   (A)   Peddling;
   (B)   Boot blacking;
   (C)   Delivering goods, wares, merchandise, telegrams, newspapers,
magazines, periodicals, advertising matter or any other printed or written
material;
   (D)   Distributing, selling or offering for sale goods, wares, merchandise,
newspapers, magazines, periodicals, advertising matter or any other printed or
written material;
   (E)   Soliciting subscriptions for newspapers, magazines or periodicals;
   (F)   Offering services for hire or gain when conducted in any street,
alley, park, square or other public place or in the lobby or entrance of any
building frequented by the public or conducted by house to house canvassing; or
   (G)   Soliciting funds for the awarding of prizes by punch boards or
otherwise.
(Ord. 130, passed 1-4-1935)
§ 134.131 AGE LIMITATION.
   No male under 12 years of age and no female under 18 years of age shall
engage in any street trade.
(Ord. 130, passed 1-4-1935) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.132 PROHIBITION DURING SCHOOL HOURS.
   No person under 17 years of age shall engage in any street trade during
school hours, unless legally excused from school, as now and hereafter provided
by law. No person under the age of 17 shall engage in any street trade between
the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., provided that on Saturdays he or she may
so engage until 10:00 p.m. and provided further that any person under the age
of 17 and over the age of 14 may deliver periodicals or newspapers on a
regularly established route to regular customers until 10:00 p.m. No person
under the age of 17 years shall engage in any street trade for a period longer
than eight hours in any one day.
(Ord. 130, passed 1-4-1935) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.133 UNLAWFUL EMPLOYMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, partnership,
corporation or organization to hire or employ or permit to be hired or employed
or suffer to work in any street trade any minor contrary to the terms of this
subchapter. No person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or
organization shall give, sell, deliver or consign any goods, wares or
merchandise including newspapers, magazines, periodicals, advertising matter or
any printed or written material to any minor for the purpose of selling,
distributing or delivering the same in any street trade in violation of the
terms of this subchapter. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or
custodian to suffer, permit, allow or induce any minor to engage in any street
trade contrary to the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 130, passed 1-4-1935) Penalty, see §
134.999
§ 134.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.
   (B)   Use of tobacco product by minors; prohibition. A violation of §
134.004 constitutes a municipal civil infraction, punishable by a fine of $50
for the first offense and $100 for each additional offense within one year.
(Ord. 478, passed 12-18-2001)
   (C)   Curfew.
      (1)   Any person over 17 years of age, any firm or corporation violating
the provisions of §§
134.020 through
134.027 shall upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed the
sum of $500 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both a fine
and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
      (2)   Any minor under 17 years of age, subject to the jurisdiction of the
juvenile division of the probate court, shall be dealt with in the manner
prescribed by the laws of the state.
(Ord. 407, passed 7-26-1983)
   (D)   Sale of spray paint. Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
134.040 through
134.042 upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500
or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both a fine and imprisonment, in the
discretion of the court.
(Ord. 390, passed 3-25-1980)
   (E)   Sale of liquor.
      (1)   Any person who shall be in violation of any of the provisions of §§
134.055 and
134.056 shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine not to exceed $500
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or both a fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 303, passed 8-24-1965)
      (2)   Any minor-child or other person willfully violating the provisions
of §
134.057 hereof shall be guilty of misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished
by a fine not to exceed $100 or by imprisonment in the Wayne County Jail not to
exceed 90 days or both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 201, passed 7-9-1946)
   (F)   Sale of model glue. Any person or minor over the age of 16 violating
any provisions of §§
134.070 through
134.074 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished
by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment in the Wayne County Jail not to
exceed 90 days or both a fine and imprisonment. Each day the violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as that hereunder. Any minor under the age of 17 years of
age violating any of the provisions of §§
134.070 through
134.074 shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court laws and
procedures.
(Ord. 301, passed 8-10-1965)
   (G)   Movie theaters. Any child who shall violate the provisions of §§
134.100 through
134.104 shall be considered as committing a delinquent act. Any person over 17
years of age violating the provisions §§
134.100 through
134.104 shall have committed a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of
not less than $10 nor more than $100 or imprisonment for not less than ten
days, nor more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 168, passed 6-9-1938)
   (H)   Abandoned ice boxes and refrigerators. Any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the provisions of §§
134.115 and
134.116 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be fined not exceeding $100 or by imprisonment for not in excess of 90
days. Each day the violation is committed or permitted to continue, shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as that thereunder.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-29-1953)
   (I)   Street trades. Any person of the age of 17 years or more who violates
any of the provisions of §§
134.130 through
134.133 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days,
or by both a fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Any child
under the age of 17 years who violated any of the provisions of §§
134.130 through
134.133 shall be deemed a delinquent child and shall be dealt with as a
juvenile delinquent.
(Ord. 130, passed 1-4-1935; Am. Ord. 2010-5, passed 5-11-2010)
CHAPTER 135: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
Section
   
135.001   Title
   
135.002   Statement of purpose
   
135.003   Definitions
   
135.004   Parental duties
   
135.005   Notification
 
   
135.999   Penalty
§ 135.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Parental Responsibility
Chapter.”
(Ord. 2010-5, passed 5-11-2010)
§ 135.002 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   By enacting this chapter the city requires a parent of a minor child to
exercise reasonable control over that child to prevent that child from
committing any delinquent act.
(Ord. 2010-5, passed 5-11-2010)
§ 135.003 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any drug, substance or immediate precursor included in
Schedules 1 to 5 of Part 72 of the Michigan Public Health Code, as amended.
   DELINQUENT ACT. An act which violates the laws of the United States, the
laws of the State of Michigan, or an ordinance of the city, or which would
cause a minor to come under the jurisdiction of the Family Division of the
Circuit Court, as defined by M.C.L.A. 712A.2. as amended “Delinquent act” does
not include a traffic violation which is designated as a civil infraction.
   MINOR. Any unemancipated person under the age of 17.
   PARENT. The mother, father, legal guardian and any other person having the
care of custody of a minor, or any person 17 years of age or older with whom
the minor resides, at the time that the delinquent act is alleged to have been
committed by the minor.
(Ord. 2010-5, passed 5-11-2010)
§ 135.004 PARENTAL DUTIES.
   (A)   It is the continuous duty of the parent of any minor to exercise
reasonable control to prevent the minor from committing any delinquent act.
   (B)   No parent of any minor shall fail to exercise reasonable parental
control over the minor. The exercise of reasonable parental control shall
include, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Taking reasonable steps to insure that minors for whom the Parent
has responsibility do not commit delinquent acts.
      (2)   Keeping controlled substances out of the home and out of the
possession of the minor, except those drugs duly prescribed by a licensed
physician or other authorized medical professional.
      (3)    Keeping firearms out of the possession of the minor, except those
used for hunting in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations and
with the knowledge and supervision of a parent.
      (4)   Requiring the minor to observe the curfew ordinance of the city.
      (5)   Requiring the minor to attend regular school sessions and
forbidding the minor to be absent from class without parental or school
permission.
      (6)   Arranging proper supervision for the minor when the parent is
absent.
      (7)   Forbidding the minor from willfully or maliciously destroying
property belonging to another person.
      (8)   Forbidding the minor from knowingly possessing stolen property.
      (9)   Forbidding the minor from possessing alcoholic beverages, and/or
tobacco products.
      (10)   Seeking help from the appropriate governmental authorities or
private agencies in handling or controlling the minor when necessary.
      (11)   Assisting or cooperating with governmental authorities in their
efforts to handle or control the minor, including the production of the minor
for court appointments and hearings.
(Ord. 2010-5, passed 5-11-2010) Penalty, see §
135.999
§ 135.005 NOTIFICATION.
   Whenever a minor is arrested or detained for the commission of any
delinquent act within the city, the Police Department shall immediately attempt
to notify the parent of such arrest or detention, and the parent's
responsibility under this chapter. A record of such notification efforts shall
be kept by the Police Department.
(Ord. 2010-5, passed 5-11-2010)
§ 135.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall be in violation of any of the provisions of §
135.004 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof be subject
to a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days
or both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court; the court may
in its discretion, consider, as an alternative to the levy of the above fine
and imprisonment, disregard sentencing which may include but not necessarily be
limited to, community service, parenting classes and/or any combination of like
penalties.
(Ord. 2010-5, passed 5-11-2010)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION CODE
      
151.   HISTORIC DISTRICT
      
152.   SIDEWALK CAFÉS
      
153.   DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
      
154.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
155.   ZONING
      
156.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 150: HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION CODE
Section
Construction Code
   
150.001   Title
   
150.002   Adoption of Codes
   
150.003   Construction Board of Appeals
   
150.004   Contractor registration
   
150.005   Vehicle identification
   
150.006   Fees
   
150.007   Application of building permit; availability under Freedom of
Information Act; compliance with zoning
   
150.008   Certificate of use and occupancy
International Property Maintenance Code
   
150.010   Adoption; incorporation
   
150.011   Additions; insertions; amendments
Minimum Property Standards for One and Two Living Units
   
150.020   Adoption
Blight
   
150.060   Title
   
150.061   Purpose
   
150.062   Blight prohibited
   
150.063   Rodent control
   
150.064   Enforcement
Exterior Maintenance of Buildings and Accessory Buildings —Misdemeanors
   
150.075   Definitions
   
150.076   Defective conditions
   
150.077   Enforcement
Non-Owner Occupied Residential Property Registration and
Inspection—Misdemeanors
   
150.080   Purpose
   
150.081   Definitions
   
150.082   Registration required
   
150.083   Certificate of compliance required
   
150.084   Registration forms and fees
   
150.085   Business registration and license required
   
150.086   Designation of responsible agent required
   
150.087   Transfer of ownership; certificates non-transferable
   
150.088   Inspection of non-owner occupied units
   
150.089   Posting of certificate of compliance
   
150.090   Additional violations
   
150.091   Compliance with Code of Ordinances
   
150.092   District court actions for rent and/or possession
   
150.093   Affidavit of vacant dwelling, dwelling unit or non-rental
   
150.094   Suspension of certificate of compliance
   
150.095   Dangerous conditions
   
150.096   Disclaimer of liability
Exterior Maintenance of Buildings and Accessory Buildings—Civil Infractions
   
150.175   Definitions
   
150.176   Defective conditions
   
150.177   Enforcement
Non-Owner Occupied Residential Property Registration and Inspection—Civil
Infractions
   
150.180   Purpose
   
150.181   Definitions
   
150.182   Registration required
   
150.183   Certificate of compliance required
   
150.184   Registration forms and fees
   
150.185   Business registration and license required
   
150.186   Designation of responsible agent required
   
150.187   Transfer of ownership; certificates non-transferable
   
150.188   Inspection of non-owner occupied units
   
150.189   Posting of certificate of compliance
   
150.190   Additional violations
   
150.191   Compliance with Code of Ordinances
   
150.192   District court actions for rent and/or possession
   
150.193   Affidavit of vacant dwelling, dwelling unit or non-rental
   
150.194   Suspension of certificate of compliance
   
150.195   Dangerous conditions
   
150.196   Disclaimer of liability
Inspection of Select Residential Dwellings Prior to Sale or Transfer
   
150.201   Definitions
   
150.202   Certificate of approval required for properties with NEZ certificate
   
150.203   Voluntary inspection for properties without NEZ certificate
   
150.204   Issuance of a certificate of approval
   
150.205   Disclaimer of liability by the city
   
150.206   Dangerous conditions
   
150.207   Registration and fees
   
150.208   Assumption of violations
   
150.209   Inspections
 
   
150.999   Penalty
CONSTRUCTION CODE
§ 150.001 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be called the Construction Code Subchapter.
(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000)
§ 150.002 ADOPTION OF CODES.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of the State Building, Electrical,
Mechanical and Plumbing Codes, in accordance with Public Act 230 of 1972, § 8
(b)(6), being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 through 125.1531, the Building, Electrical,
Mechanical and Plumbing Code official of the city is hereby designated as the
enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the city under Public Act
230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 through 125.1531, State of Michigan.
   (B)   The city assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement
of the Act throughout its corporate limits.
(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000; Am. Ord. 477, passed 10-5-2001)
§ 150.003 CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Right of appeal; jurisdiction. Pursuant to the provisions and
requirements or the codes adopted in §
150.002 above, the City Construction Board or Appeals is hereby created and
shall hear all appeals taken from the Building, Mechanical, Plumbing and
Electrical Codes, as provided in the codes and other requirements of the State
Construction Code Act of 1972, Public Act 230 of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.1501 through 125.1531.
   (B)   Construction Board of Appeals; appointment; term of office;
qualifications. The Construction Board of Appeals shall consist of five regular
members and two alternate members who shall serve for a term of five years
pursuant to the adopted codes. Members of the Construction Board of Appeals
shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be qualified by experience and
training to perform the duties of the Construction Board of Appeals and, where
required, registered in accordance with state law. A clerical person appointed
by the Civil Service Commission shall serve as the secretary to the
Construction Board of Appeals and shall file a detailed record of all
proceedings and decisions in the office of the City Clerk, and provide to the
appellant a copy of the procedures, under which the hearing will be conducted,
and a copy of the decision of the Construction Board of Appeals.
   (C)   Open Meetings Act; Freedom of Information Act. The business of the
Construction Board of Appeals shall be conducted at public meetings held in
compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 15.261 through 15.275. Public notice of the time, date and place of the
meeting shall be given in the manner required by the Open Meetings Act. A
record of decisions made by the Construction Board of Appeals, properly indexed
and any other writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained
by the Construction Board of Appeals in the performance of an official function
shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of
Information Act, Public Act 422 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 et seq.
   (D)   Fees. The appellant shall pay a mandatory nonwaivable fee at the time
of filing an appeal to the City Treasurer before any appeal is considered. The
fee shall be established as provided in §
150.006. Unless the applicant provides written notice of his or her intent to
withdraw his or her appeal at least 72 hours prior to the public meeting
scheduled for that purpose, the fee is nonrefundable.
   (E)   Compensation. The City Council shall fix, by an annual resolution, the
amount of any per diem compensation provided to members of the Construction
Board of Appeals. The members shall request in writing to the code official
reimbursement for any actual and necessary expenses incurred in connection with
their duties as a member of the Construction Board of Appeals. If the code
official shall approve, he or she shall forward the request to the City
Controller.
(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.004 CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Registration. Residential builders, maintenance and alteration
contractors, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, alarm, awning or sign
contractors who are lawfully licensed by the state shall be permitted to do
work for which they are licensed in the city upon registering as a contractor
in the city limits upon payment of a fee provided by resolution or ordinance of
the City Council. A license holder must make the application.
   (B)   Term and issuance of registration. All contractor registrations issued
by the city shall expire as provided by state law and in accordance with
division (A) above, which includes presentation of the license and payment of
the required fee.
(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000; Am. Ord. 482, passed 4-8-2002; Am. Ord. 484,
passed 5-30-2002)
§ 150.005 VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Identification required. No person engaged in any construction or work
regulated under this section and subchapter shall operate a truck or commercial
vehicle upon the streets and highways of the city unless the name and address
of the person or business operating the vehicle is displayed conspicuously on
the outside of the commercial vehicle.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. All motor vehicles used for the transportation of
employees, goods, services and ware including vehicles designed to tow other
vehicles. Vehicles belonging to employees of contractors and used only for
personal transportation to a job site, shall not be included.
(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.006 FEES.
   (A)   Schedule of fees. The City Council, shall by resolution or ordinance,
establish reasonable fees to be charged by the city for acts and services
performed by the code official or his or her duly authorized representative,
the Construction Board of Appeals, the Plan Commission and the Zoning Board of
Appeals. The fees shall be intended to bear a reasonable relation to the cost,
including overhead, to the city for the acts and services, including, without
limitation in case of the city, issuance of building permits, examination of
plans and specifications, inspection of construction undertaken pursuant to a
building permit and the issuance of certificate of use and occupancy, and in
the case of the Construction and Zoning Boards of Appeals, hearing appeals in
accordance with law and ordinances of this city.
   (B)   Fees; effective. Fees authorized by resolution or ordinance, unless
specifically set forth in a dollar amount within the resolution or ordinance,
shall be effective upon publication in a newspaper having general circulation
in the city.
(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000)
§ 150.007 APPLICATION OF BUILDING PERMIT; AVAILABILITY UNDER FREEDOM OF
INFORMATION ACT; COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING.
   (A)   Application; form; contents. Except as otherwise provided by ordinance
adopting a nationally recognized code pursuant to Public Act 230 of 1972, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 through 125.1531, before commencing any construction of,
or in, a building or structure, the owner or owner’s agent, shall submit an
application in writing to the Division for a building permit. A site plan
showing the dimensions, and the location of the proposed building or structure
and other buildings or structures on the same premises, shall be submitted with
the application. The application shall contain the full name and complete
address, by street and number, of the owner(s) in fee of the premises on which
the building or structure will be used. If construction is proposed to be
undertaken by a person other than the owner, the statement shall also contain
the full name and complete address, by street and number, of the person
proposing the construction. The owner, or the owner’s attorney, agent,
engineer, architect or builder may make the application. A person shall not be
recognized as the agent, attorney, engineer, architect or builder of another
person unless the person files with the Division a written instrument, which
could be an architectural, engineering or construction contract, power of
attorney or a notarized letter of authorization signed by the owner designating
the person as the agent, attorney, architect, engineer or builder and, in case
of a builder, setting forth the builder’s state license number.
   (B)   Freedom of Information Act. The application for a building permit
shall be filed with the Division and the application and any other writing
prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the city in the
performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in
compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 422 of 1976, being
M.C. L.A. §§ 15.231 et seq. An application shall not be removed from the
custody of the city after a building permit has been issued.
   (C)   Zoning and other ordinances. Before the issuance of a building permit,
the applicant shall comply with the provisions of the zoning regulations of the
city, as amended, and any other relevant ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000)
§ 150.008 CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Certificate required. A building or structure shall not be used or
occupied in whole or in part until the Division has issued a certificate of use
and occupancy, hereinafter “certificate.” The certificate shall certify that
the building or structure has been constructed in accordance with the building
permit and/or site plan, this subchapter, and other applicable laws and
ordinances. A building or structure altered in whole or in part shall not be
used or occupied until a certificate has been issued, except that use or
occupancy in an already existing building or structure that was not
discontinued during its alteration may be continued for a maximum of 30 days
after completion of the alteration before the issuance of a certificate is
required. A certificate shall be issued by the code official when the work
covered by a building permit and/or site plan has been completed in accordance
with the permit, this subchapter, and other applicable laws and ordinances. On
request of a holder of a building permit, the Division may issue a temporary
certificate for a building or structure, or part hereof, before the entire work
covered by the building permit has been completed, if the parts of the building
or structure to be covered by the certificate may be occupied before completion
of all work in accordance with the permit, this chapter, and other applicable
laws and ordinances, without endangering the health or safety of the occupants
or users. The Division shall issue a certificate within five business days for
single-family residential and ten business days for all other uses after
approval of the final building inspections and receipt of a written application
therefore on a form to be prescribed by the Division, which shall signify that
a building or structure has received final or temporary approval.
(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000)
INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 150.010 ADOPTION; INCORPORATION.
   There is hereby adopted by reference the 2015 International Property
Maintenance Code, as promulgated, published and approved by the International
Code Council, Inc., together with all amendments, references and supplements
herein is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of
Hamtramck; provided, that any provisions thereof are not in conflict of any
provisions of this Code of Ordinances. The Building Official is designated as
the enforcing agent to discharge the responsibilities and enforce the
provisions of this code.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-04, passed 9-6-2016; Am. Ord., passed 11-
22-2022)
§ 150.011 ADDITIONS; INSERTIONS; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Section 101.1 Title. Insert: “the City of Hamtramck.”
   (B)   Section 103.5 Fees. Insert: “In accordance with the fee schedule
established by resolution of the City Council.”
   (C)   Section 106.4 is amended to read: “106.4 Violation Penalties. The
violation of any provision of International Property Maintenance Code as
adopted by reference and incorporated into the Hamtramck Code of Ordinances by
any person shall be punishable by the fines set forth in the Hamtramck City
Code, Section 10.999.”
   (D)   Section 107.2 is amended to read: “107.2 Form. Such notice prescribed
in Section 107.1 shall be in accordance with all the following:
      (1)   Be in writing.
      (2)   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification.
      (3)   Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the
notice is being sent.
      (4)   Include a corrective action date allowing for reasonable time to
make repairs and Improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure
into compliance.”
   (E)   Section 107.3 shall be stricken in its entirety.
   (F)   Section 109.6 shall be stricken in its entirety.
   (G)   Section 111 shall be stricken in its entirety, being Sections 111.1
through 111.8.
   (H)   Section 112.4 is amended to read: “112.4 Failure to Comply. Any person
who shall continue any work after having been issued a stop work order, except
such work as that person has been directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall by guilty of a civil infraction.”
   (I)   Section 302.4 Weeds. Insert: “Seven (7) inches.”
   (J)   Section 304.14 Insect screens. Insert: “April 15th” and “October
15th.”
   (K)   Section 602.3 Heat supply. Insert: “September 15th” and “May 15th.”
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-04, passed 9-6-2016; Am. Ord. 2017-06,
passed 8-29-2017; Am. Ord., passed 11-22-2022) Penalty, see §
150.999
MINIMUM PROPERTY STANDARDS FOR ONE AND TWO LIVING UNITS
§ 150.020 ADOPTION.
   The Minimum Property Standards For One and Two Living Units, as approved by
the Federal Housing Administration of the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development, designated by it as FHA No. 300, is hereby adopted as an
ordinance for the city and its provisions shall be effective in the city. From
the effective date of this subchapter, the provisions of the Minimum Property
Standards for One and Two Living Units shall be controlling within the limits
of the city.
(Ord. 325, passed 11-12-1969)
BLIGHT
§ 150.060 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Blight Subchapter.
(Ord. 473, passed 3-9-2000)
§ 150.061 PURPOSE.
   By enacting this subchapter, the city will enhance the health, safety or
welfare of its residents.
(Ord. 473, passed 3-9-2000)
§ 150.062 BLIGHT PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Blight. It is hereby determined that the following structures, uses
and activities are causes of or factors encouraging blight which, if allowed to
exist, will tend to result in blighted and undesirable neighborhoods.
   (B)   Blighting factors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person(s)
to maintain or permit to be maintained any of the following causes of blight
upon any property in the city owned, leased, rented or occupied by these person
(s):
      (1)   General zoning. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or
permit to be maintained in any zoned area:
         (a)   More than three single-faced cords of stacked firewood, stacked
less than six inches above the existing grade or more than five feet in height;
         (b)   The existence of any structure or part of any structure, which
because of fire, wind or other natural disaster or physical deterioration is no
longer habitable as a dwelling, nor useful for any other purpose for which it
may have been intended; and/or
         (c)   The existence of any partially completed structure unless the
structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid building
permit issued by the city.
      (2)   Residential zoning. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain
or permit to be maintained in any area zoned for residential purposes:
         (a)   The repair of any motor vehicle or part thereof, unless the
motor vehicle or part thereof is owned by the person residing on the premises,
or members of his or her family regularly using the motor vehicle, the repairs
to be conducted in a manner so as not to create a nuisance to the neighborhood
and the repairs to be completed within a period not to exceed 14 days from the
start of the repair. Continuous repair of the motor vehicles or vehicles at any
one residence may and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and thereby
subject to the penalties of this subchapter;
         (b)   Park or store any unlicensed and/or inoperable motor vehicle,
mobile home, boat, camper, trailer or parts thereof; on a residential driveway,
rear yard, side yard or front yard of any the property for more than 48 hours,
unless the same is in a garage;
         (c)   Park or store any licensed motor vehicle, mobile home, camper,
boat or trailer or parts thereof in a rear yard, side yard or front yard unless
same is on a concrete slab that prevents weeds and grass from growing
underneath the vehicle, provided that no portion of the vehicle is stored in a
residential driveway beyond the front wall of either of the two residential
structures immediately adjacent to the driveway on which the vehicle is stored
or parked;
         (d)   Building materials, unless there is in force a valid building
permit issued by the city for construction upon the property and the materials
are intended for use in conjunction with the construction which shall be
completed within a reasonable time as determined by the Building Code Official;
and
         (e)   Junk, trash, rubbish or refuse or any kind, except domestic
refuse stored in a manner as not to create a nuisance for a period not to
exceed seven days.
      (3)   Zoned business, commercial or industrial. It shall be unlawful for
any person to maintain or permit to be maintained in any area zoned for
business, commercial or industrial purposes, junk, trash, rubbish or refuse of
any kind, except that to be disposed of weekly and vehicles and trailers not
directly connected with the operation of the business, unless stored in a
manner that will not create a nuisance.
      (4)   Zoned residential, business, office, commercial or industrial. It
shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit to be maintained in any
area zoned for residential, business, office, commercial or industrial
purposes, any vacant dwelling, garage or other outbuilding unless the building
is kept securely locked, windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up and otherwise
protected to prevent entrance thereto by vandals.
      (5)   Public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
         (a)   Park any automobile, truck, trailer or any vehicle or part
thereof on any public property unless the vehicle has proper license plates
attached and displayed;
         (b)   Park for a period exceeding 24 hours any automobile, truck,
trailer or any vehicle or parts thereof, on any public street or other city
property at any time, if the vehicle is incapable of movement under its own
power;
         (c)   Park any automobile, city-owned and/or operated vehicles and/or
emergency vehicles excluded, on any off-street city property; and/or
         (d)   Park any automobile, truck, trailer or any vehicle or parts
thereof, on any public street or property of the city for purposes of repairing
same unless the repair be of an emergency nature and the emergency repairs to
be completed within a period of time not to exceed two hours.
   (C)   (1)   If not in an approved garage, the storing, housing or wintering
of any commercial vehicle(s) in an area zoned residential on a residential
street, residential driveway, side yard, rear yard or front yard is prohibited
unless it is in conjunction with a valid building permit or the delivery of
products or services.
      (2)   There is an exception to allow residents with a valid peddler's
license to obtain a permit to park his or her licensed commercial vehicle on
their residential street or rear lot in compliance with the zoning ordinance
from April 1 through November 30. A permit may only be issued to residents with
off- street parking for their personal vehicle. The commercial vehicle may not
be connected to a generator or other source of power at any time while parked
within the city.
(Ord. 473, passed 3-9-2000; Am. Ord. 2009-6, passed 12-8-2009; Am. Ord. 2012-2,
passed 5-22-2012 ) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.063 RODENT CONTROL.
   (A)   Pesticide to be applied. The owner, proprietor, tenant or any person
having charge of any property or structure in any area zoned for business,
commercial, industrial or residential purposes shall be responsible for
applying pesticide for the purpose of exterminating insects, rats, vermin or
other pests and their harborage places, in the interior and exterior of the
premises.
   (B)   Exterminator. If the problem is not remedied with pesticide, then
extermination shall be done by a licensed professional exterminator, as
evidenced by the presentation of a paid receipt of the services to the official
designated by the Mayor after extermination work has taken place. The owner,
proprietor, tenant or any person having charge of any property shall also
remove or make inaccessible materials that may serve as food for insects, rats,
vermin, unwanted animals or other pests.
(Ord. 473, passed 3-9-2000) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.064 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any official of the city designated by the Mayor shall have full authority
to enforce this subchapter.
(Ord. 473, passed 3-9-2000)
EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE OF BUILDINGS AND ACCESSORY BUILDINGS—MISDEMEANORS
§ 150.075 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. Any garage, shed or storage structure accessory to the
principal building or dwelling.
   DEFECT. Any condition of a principal or accessory building set forth §
150.076.
   DWELLING. Any building used or intended to be used wholly or in part for
living or sleeping by human occupants.
   EYESORE. A principal and/or accessory building containing one or more
defects.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. Any structure of building housing the primary use
existing on the premises, including commercial, industrial or residential.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING includes a dwelling.
(Ord. 456, passed 9-21-1995)
§ 150.076 DEFECTIVE CONDITIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other entity with
an ownership interest in property, whether legal or equitable (including land
contract vendees’ interests) or for a tenant obligated by lease to maintain the
premises, to permit any principal or accessory building to lapse into a
defective state so as to become an eyesore, nuisance or a threat to the health
and safety of the occupants or others.
   (B)   The existence of any of the following prohibited conditions shall
constitute a defect and shall be, per se, a violation of this subchapter.
      (1)   Bushes, trees and other landscaping shall be trimmed in accordance
with reasonable landscaping practices. Landscaping shall not interfere with
pedestrian traffic and shall be maintained to allow clear vision for
pedestrians and motorists at driveways, intersections and alleys. Trees shall
be kept trimmed away from neighboring structures and fences to prevent damage.
Front yards shall be maintained with cultivated ground cover or similar
decorative material and maintained in good condition.
      (2)   The hanging of clothes or laundry on front porches, front railings
or front fences is prohibited, except in the case of those flea market/yard
sales that possess the required permit.
      (3)   The placing or use of any furniture, other than furniture specified
for outdoor use, is prohibited on outdoor porches or in yards. This includes
but is not limited to, any furniture that is made of porous materials (i.e.,
leather or cloth stuffed couches and chairs, auto seats, interior coffee tables
and the like).
(Ord. 456, passed 9-21-1995; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-9-2017) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.077 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Director of Housing or any authorized person designated by the city
shall notify the owner and, if possible and applicable, the occupant in writing
to correct the defective condition. The notice will specify a number of days,
length depending on severity of defective violation and discretion of
authorized person.
(Ord. 456, passed 9-21-1995)
NON-OWNER OCCUPIED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION AND
INSPECTION—MISDEMEANORS
§ 150.080 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the subchapter is to ensure that all non-owner occupied
dwellings and units within the city maintain minimum maintenance standards for
the public health, safety and welfare. This subchapter will set safeguard
controls for one and two family dwelling units, multiple family dwelling units,
apartment units, accessory dwelling units, boarding and rooming houses, group
homes, hotels, motels, and flats.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016; Am. Ord., passed 11-
22-2022; Am. Ord. —, passed 12-12-2023)
§ 150.081 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows, terms not herein defined shall have the meanings
customarily assigned to them:
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certificate issued by the city which certifies
compliance with the codes and ordinances of non-owner occupied dwellings and
units in the city.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The official, who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article, or any duly authorized agent.
   DWELLING OR RENTAL UNIT. See NON-OWNER OCCUPIED.
   EXCEPTION. An additional dwelling, in a building occupied by its owner,
which is occupied by an immediate family member, shall be required to be
registered but shall be exempt from inspections and fees. Verification of the
relationship and occupancy shall be provided upon request.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER. As defined by the Michigan Housing Code, a spouse,
parent, child, or sibling of the building owner.
   LANDLORD. Means the owner, lessor, or sublessor of a non-owner occupied
unit, or the property which it is a part of and, in addition, means a person
authorized to exercise any aspect of the management of the premises, whether
for any form of compensation or not, including a person who, directly or
indirectly, acts as a rental agent, receives rent, other than as a bona fide
purchaser, and who has no obligation to deliver the receipts to another person.
   NON-OWNER OCCUPIED. Means any non-owner occupied structure, or part of a
structure in the case of multiple-family structures, containing one or more
rooms including a kitchen and designed as a unit for occupancy by one family
for the purpose of cooking, living and sleeping, which is used as a home or
residence by a person or household unit, or any grounds, or other facilities or
area promised for the use of a residential tenant, whether for any form of
compensation or not, including without limitation, apartment units and one and
two-family dwellings. A non-owner occupied unit that is rented or leased with
an option to purchase is considered a rental agreement until the lessee fully
exercises the option to purchase as evidenced by a recorded deed or land
contract.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A notice issued to the owner or responsible local agent
stating that there has been a violation of a provision of the subchapter or any
other applicable codes, ordinances, rules or regulations concerning the
premises.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable
interest in the premises.
   RENEWAL DATE. The expiration date of a previous or current certificate for
the same owner and the same property.
   RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT. The responsible local agent shall be an individual
person, and shall be either the property owner, representative of a
corporation, partnership, firm, joint venture, trust, association,
organization, or other entity having a legal or equitable interest in the
property, or designated by the owner as responsible for operating the premises
in compliance with all the provisions of the city codes and ordinances. All
official notices and violations may be issued to the responsible local agent,
and any notice so issued shall be deemed to have been issued upon the owner of
record.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)
§ 150.082 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   The owner of any non-owner occupied dwelling or unit shall register with the
city and shall designate a person as the responsible local agent who shall be
legally responsible for operating the premises in compliance with all the
provisions of the city codes and ordinances, and shall also be responsible for
providing access to the premises for making the inspections necessary to ensure
compliance with the terms of all applicable codes and ordinances adopted by the
city. Each responsible local agent shall maintain a current list of the number
of occupants of each non-owner occupied unit for which they are responsible. A
certificate of compliance shall not be issued if the registration provisions
are not complied with.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.083 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall rent, lease, advertise or offer for rent or lease, or
occupy any non-owner occupied dwelling or rental unit unless there is a valid
certificate of compliance issued by the city in the name of the owner/
responsible local agent and issued for each specific dwelling and unit.
Certificates are not transferable between landlords, dwellings or units.
Application for a non-owner occupied certificate is an admission of fact by the
applicant that the applicant is conducting a rental dwelling operation as
defined by this chapter. It shall be the duty of all landlords to apply for the
non-owner occupied certificate, and certificate renewals, as required by this
chapter and obtain all required inspections, repairs and approvals prior to the
occupancy date, or the expiration date of any current certificate, whichever
occurs first.
   (B)   Occupancy of any dwelling by a person other than the owner shall be
presumed to require a certificate of compliance. This presumption may be
rebutted by evidence that the occupant has ownership equity in the dwelling as
evidenced by a recorded deed, a recorded land contract, or a recorded
memorandum of land contract. A dwelling that is occupied, rented or leased with
an option to purchase is considered as non-owner occupied under the terms of
this chapter until the lessee fully exercises the option to purchase as
evidenced by recorded documentation.
   (C)   A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the city if the
applicant meets the following requirements:
      (1)   A completed registration form is submitted pursuant to the
provisions of §
150.084;
      (2)   The inspection(s) have been performed at the premises sought to be
certified and all violations disclosed have been corrected;
      (3)   All re-inspections have been approved to confirm the correction of
violations;
      (4)   All registration, inspection and late fees are paid;
      (5)   No certificate of compliance will be issued until all of the
following fees and debts to the city have been paid in full;
      (6)   All previously billed property taxes;
      (7)   All current or past due special assessments;
      (8)   Water or sewer bills outstanding;
      (9)   All charges against the property for mowing, cleanup, debris
removal or similar charges by the city; and
      (10)   Any fees, fines, penalties, or debts of any sort arising from
provisions of property maintenance, including blight violations.
   (D)   The term of the certificate shall be two years for the initial
registration period and three years for each subsequent registration of the
same address. The non-owner occupied certificate is valid for the established
period from the date of application for a new certificate, or the expiration
date of the previous certificate for a renewal, unless suspended or revoked for
cause by the city. Licensees shall apply for certificate renewal 60 days prior
to the expiration date of the current certificate. Sale of the subject premises
results in immediate termination of the certificate. Failure to obtain or renew
a certificate or failure to pay any inspection fee is a violation of this
chapter.
   (E)   Failure to register a non-owner occupied dwelling or dwelling unit(s),
complete the required inspection or re-inspection, obtain a certificate of
compliance or renew a certificate of compliance prior to the expiration date,
or failure to pay any fee is a violation of this chapter and may result in
additional fees and penalties including court action.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.084 REGISTRATION FORMS AND FEES.
   (A)   Applications for registration will be available at the City of
Hamtramck City Hall and shall include at least the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, telephone number, driver's license or state I.D.
card number and date of birth of applicant. No post office boxes shall be
accepted as legal address;
      (2)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of the
dwelling or units;
      (3)   The name, address, telephone number, driver's license or state I.D.
card number and date of birth of the responsible local agent. No post office
boxes shall be accepted as legal address;
      (4)   The authorization appointing a responsible local agent signed by
both the owner and the responsible local agent; and
      (5)   The number of units in each building, if multiple units exist.
   (B)   A one-time registration fee is required for each property owner or
entity and shall be paid at the time of registration. No post office boxes will
be accepted as legal address.
   (C)   An inspection fee for each unit shall be paid at the time of
registration for a new certificate, or renewal of an existing certificate. This
inspection fee shall include an initial inspection, and one re-inspection as
needed. Third and subsequent inspections that are required shall be charged an
additional fee, per inspection. If an owner or registered agent fails to
provide access for an inspection, or the inspector cannot gain access to any
non-owner occupied dwelling or unit, this shall be considered as a ‘lock out’
and be subject to an additional inspection fee.
   (D)   Registration fees, inspection fees, late fees as well as any other
charges in connection with non-owner occupied registration and compliance shall
be established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.085 BUSINESS REGISTRATION AND LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person, agent, firm or corporation that meets one or more of the
following conditions will be considered to be operating a business in the City
of Hamtramck and will be required to obtain a business license from the City
Clerk. The business license is in addition to the required certificate of
compliance:
      (1)   Any non-owner occupied dwelling or unit(s) that are registered in
the name of a corporation, incorporation, limited liability company, or other
business entity, and evidenced by deed, land contract, property transfer
affidavit or other documentation showing legal interest and ownership.
      (2)   Any person, agent, firm or corporation, identified by name,
corporation, incorporation, limited liability company or any combination
thereof, having ownership in three or more non-owner occupied dwelling units.
   (B)   Any entity that is required under this subsection to obtain a business
license must include with application a list of all properties owned in the
city, and provide proof that said properties have been registered with the City
Assessors’ Office, the Department of Community and Economic Development and the
Department of Public Services.
   (C)   Any entity that is required under this division to obtain a business
license and has properties registered under two or more names, need only obtain
one business license, but must include with application a list of all
properties owned, the name under which each property is registered, and provide
proof that said properties have been registered with the City Assessors’
Office, the Department of Community and Economic Development and the Department
of Public Services.
   (D)   Business licenses for non-owner occupied properties are non-
transferrable. Upon changes in ownership, the new owner, if required by this
section, must submit application for a new business license.
   (E)   Fees for non-owner occupied dwellings business licenses shall be
established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.086 DESIGNATION OF RESPONSIBLE AGENT REQUIRED.
   The owner of any non-owner occupied dwelling and dwelling units shall
designate an individual person as the responsible local agent who shall be
responsible for operating the dwelling or dwelling units and who shall provide
access for inspection by the code official for compliance with the applicable
ordinance requirements. The owner may act as the responsible local agent. The
responsible local agent shall reside within a 50 mile radius of the city.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.087 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP; CERTIFICATES NON-TRANSFERABLE.
   (A)   Non-owner occupied certificates shall not be transferrable as to
person or place. Upon a transfer of ownership of any dwelling or dwelling
units, the new owner shall apply for a new certificate no later than 30 days
after the transfer of ownership.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any non-owner occupied dwelling
or unit(s) who has received a notice of violation to transfer, convey, lease or
sell (including by land contract) his or her ownership and/or interest in any
way to another, unless the owner shall have first furnished to the grantee,
lessee or vendee or transferee a true copy of any notice of violation and shall
have furnished to the building official a signed and notarized statement from
the grantee, vendee or lessee, or transferee acknowledging the receipt of the
notice of violation.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.088 INSPECTION OF NON-OWNER OCCUPIED UNITS.
   (A)   Access of code official. The code official shall be granted access by
the owner, agent, or occupant of the non-owner occupied dwelling or dwelling
unit(s), at the date and time schedule for the inspection(s), for the purpose
of conducting a compliance inspection. If any owner or occupant refuses to
provide access to the premises for a compliance inspection, or fails to show up
for the inspection, the inspection shall be recorded as a lock-out and re-
inspection fees assessed. All non-owner occupied dwellings and dwelling units
shall comply with the minimum standards set forth in the International Property
Maintenance Code as adopted by reference in §
150.010 of this chapter.
   (B)   Inspection required. All non-owner occupied dwellings and dwelling
unit(s) shall have an inspection to ensure compliance with all the requirements
of the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by reference in §
150.010 of this chapter.
   (C)   Re-inspection required. Re-inspection shall be required when
violations are found to exist during a prior inspection. Before a certificate
of compliance is issued, all violations must be corrected and approved. The
violations shall be corrected and a re-inspection completed within 30 days
after the initial inspection or by the renewal date, whichever occurs first,
except in dangerous conditions which must be remedied immediately.
   (D)   Additional inspections. In addition to regular or renewal inspections,
inspections may be scheduled on one or more of the following bases:
      (1)   Upon a tenant complaint to the city. Complaints of violations from
tenants residing in the dwelling unit will be inspected within a reasonable
time if they allege sufficient facts that would give reasonable cause to
believe a violation of this chapter exists.
      (2)   Whenever a code official has a reasonable cause to believe that
there is a violation of this chapter or other conditions which make the
structure or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.089 POSTING OF CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   No non-owner occupied dwelling or dwelling unit may be occupied unless a
copy of the current certificate of compliance is displayed in an eight and one-
half by 11 inch frame securely affixed to the interior wall adjacent to the
primary entrance door to the dwelling or unit. A multiple-family dwelling or
apartment complex shall display the license in the same manner at the primary
entrance of each building or unit.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.090 ADDITIONAL VIOLATIONS.
   The following are additional violations subject to enforcement:
   (A)   No person shall occupy for sleeping purposes, and no owner or
responsible local agent shall allow a person to occupy for sleeping purposes, a
basement without compliant emergency egress or any non-habitable spaces of a
dwelling or unit;
   (B)   No person shall harass, stalk, threaten, hinder, assault, or otherwise
interfere with a code official or city inspector during the performance of his
or her duties;
   (C)   No person shall knowingly make any false statement or provide any
false information on a non-owner occupied certificate registration application
or any other information to any employee of the City of Hamtramck or other
authorized person in relation to any investigation of a violation of this
chapter;
   (D)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit and the yard connected therewith
shall remain clean and kept free from any accumulation of dirt, filth, rubbish,
or garbage; and
   (E)   Each day upon which a violation of this chapter occurs shall be
considered a separate offense.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.091 COMPLIANCE WITH CODE OF ORDINANCES.
   All non-owner occupied dwellings and dwelling units shall comply with all
provisions of this chapter, the International Property Maintenance Code as
adopted in §
150.010, and all other applicable ordinance requirements. After inspection, all
non-owner occupied dwellings and dwelling units in compliance with applicable
ordinances shall receive a certificate of compliance consistent with the
provisions of §
150.083. Those non-owner occupied dwellings and dwelling units that are not in
compliance with applicable ordinances shall be brought into compliance within
30 days of the date of notice of the violations or by the renewal date,
whichever occurs first, and a subsequent inspection scheduled to verify
compliance. Upon request and submission of proof of extenuating circumstances,
the code official may grant an extension to make the non-emergency repairs
necessary to bring the property into compliance.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.092 DISTRICT COURT ACTIONS FOR RENT AND/OR POSSESSION.
   (A)   When information is requested from court of any action for rent or
possession filed on an unregistered or uncertified property, the court shall be
notified of any violation of this chapter.
   (B)   When so instructed by the court the owner or responsible agent shall
register the property as a non-owner occupied dwelling or unit.
   (C)   If previously unregistered, or registered but not certified, the owner
or responsible agent shall pay for and schedule inspections no later than ten
days after the completion of proceedings by the court with the exception of one
of the following:
      (1)    An affidavit of non-rental is filed by the owner.
      (2)   The owner provides proof of primary residence within ten days of
the date of notification from the court.
      (3)   The owner provides proof that court action for possession has not
been completed after 30 days, at which time an extension shall be granted for
an additional 30 days.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.093 AFFIDAVIT OF VACANT DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT OR NON-RENTAL.
   (A)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit that is to remain unoccupied shall have
an affidavit of vacant dwelling or unit completed by the owner and kept on file
with the City of Hamtramck.
   (B)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit that is to remain unoccupied that does
not have at least one owner occupied unit is subject to vacant property
registration and fees.
   (C)   At such time the vacant dwelling or dwelling unit is to be occupied as
a non-owner occupied dwelling, it shall be the owner's responsibility to notify
the city to remove the affidavit or vacant property registration and to
register the property as a non-owner occupied dwelling or unit.
   (D)   Any property that has such an affidavit filed that is found to be
occupied by any person other than the property owner listed on the affidavit
shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties herein.
   (E)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit, which has had an affidavit filed, is
subject to inspection by a code official to insure vacancy of the dwelling or
unit. No schedule is needed for the inspections which can take place at any
time.
   (F)   The owner of any dwelling unit that has a valid certificate and
becomes owner occupied shall file an affidavit of non-rental with the city
within 15 days of the change in occupancy.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.094 SUSPENSION OF CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   A certificate of compliance issued by the city may be suspended by the
code official for any of the following conditions:
      (1)   A condition exists contrary to the public health, morals, safety,
or welfare.
      (2)   Unauthorized use or beyond the scope of the certificate(s) issued.
      (3)   Any condition forbidden by the provisions of this section or any
other established city ordinance or other regulation.
      (4)   Violation of any criminal law.
      (5)   A verified complaint of violations to this subchapter.
   (B)   Upon suspension, the owner or agent shall be notified in writing of
the suspension and violations, corrective action, and the time allotted for the
violations to be corrected.
   (C)   If a certificate has been suspended, either by complaint or otherwise,
the owner or agent shall schedule a re-inspection to insure all violations have
been corrected.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.095 DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.
   Should the code official, upon inspection, determine that there are
conditions which constitute an imminent danger to health and safety, it may
order the conditions to be remedied and may limit or prohibit occupancy where
appropriate.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.096 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   A certificate of compliance is not a warranty or guarantee that there
are no defects in the dwelling or dwelling unit(s) and the city shall not be
held responsible for defects not noted in the inspection report.
   (B)   This inspection of the land use, exterior posture and interior
accessories of the structure is limited to visual inspection only. The city
does not guarantee or approve by inference any latent, structural or mechanical
defects thereto or other items that are not apparent by a visual inspection.
   (C)   The city shall not assume any liability to any person by reason of the
inspections required by the subchapter or the code adopted herein or the
issuance of a certificate of compliance or a certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)
EXTERIOR MAINTENANCE OF BUILDINGS AND ACCESSORY BUILDINGS—CIVIL INFRACTIONS
§ 150.175 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. Any garage, shed, storage, or dwelling structure
accessory to the principal building or dwelling.
   DEFECT. Any condition of a principal or accessory building set forth §
150.176.
   DWELLING. Any building used or intended to be used wholly or in part for
living or sleeping by human occupants.
   EYESORE. A principal and/or accessory building containing one or more
defects.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. Any structure of building housing the primary use
existing on the premises, including commercial, industrial or residential.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING includes a dwelling.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. —, passed 12-12-2023) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.176 DEFECTIVE CONDITIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other entity with
an ownership interest in property, whether legal or equitable (including land
contract vendees’ interests) or for a tenant obligated by lease to maintain the
premises, to permits any principal or accessory building to lapse into a
defective state so as to become an eyesore, nuisance or a threat to the health
and safety of the occupants or others.
   (B)   The existence of any of the following prohibited conditions shall
constitute a defect and shall be, per se, a violation of this subchapter:
      (1)   Bushes, trees, and other landscaping shall be trimmed in accordance
with reasonable landscaping practices. Landscaping shall not interfere with
pedestrian traffic and shall be maintained to allow clear vision for
pedestrians and motorists at driveways, intersections and alleys. Trees shall
be kept trimmed away from neighboring structures and fences to prevent damage.
Front yards shall bne maintained with cultivated ground cover or similar
decorative material and maintained in good condition.
      (2)   The hanging of clothes or laundry on front porches, front railings
or front fences is prohibited, except in the case of those flea market/yard
sales that possess the required permit.
      (3)   The placing or use of any furniture, other than furniture specified
for outdoor use, is prohibited on outdoor porches or in yards. This includes
but is not limited to, any furniture that is made of porous materials (i.e.,
leather or cloth stuffed couches, and chairs, auto seats, interior coffee
tables and the like).
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2017-03, passed 5-9-2017) Penalty see §
150.999
§ 150.177 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Director of Housing or any authorized person designated by the city
shall notify the owner and, if possible and applicable, the occupant in writing
to correct the defective condition. The notice will specify a number of days,
length depending on severity of defective violation and discretion of
authorized person.
(Ord., passed - -2013) Penalty, see §
150.999
NON-OWNER OCCUPIED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION—CIVIL
INFRACTIONS
§ 150.180 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the subchapter is to ensure that all non-owner occupied
dwellings and units within the city maintain minimum maintenance standards for
the public health, safety and welfare. This subchapter will set safeguard
controls for one and two family dwelling units, multiple family dwelling units,
apartment units, boarding and rooming houses, group homes, hotels, motels, and
flats.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)
§ 150.181 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certificate issued by the City of Hamtramck
which certifies compliance with the codes and ordinances of non-owner occupied
dwellings and units in the city.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The official, who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this subchapter, or any duly authorized agent.
   DWELLING OR RENTAL UNIT. See NON-OWNER OCCUPIED.
   EXCEPTION. An additional dwelling, in a building occupied by its owner,
which is occupied by an immediate family member, shall be required to be
registered but shall be exempt from inspections and fees. Verification of the
relationship and occupancy shall be provided upon request.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER. As defined by the Michigan Housing Code, a spouse,
parent, child, or sibling of the building owner.
   LANDLORD. The owner, lessor, or sublessor of a non-owner occupied unit, or
the property which it is a part of and, in addition, means a person authorized
to exercise any aspect of the management of the premises, whether for any form
of compensation or not, including a person who, directly or indirectly, acts as
a rental agent, receives rent, other than as a bona fide purchaser, and who has
no obligation to deliver the receipts to another person.
   NON-OWNER OCCUPIED. Any non-owner occupied structure, or part of a structure
in the case of multiple-family structures, containing one or more rooms
including a kitchen and designed as a unit for occupancy by one family for the
purpose of cooking, living and sleeping, which is used as a home or residence
by a person or household unit, or any grounds, or other facilities or area
promised for the use of a residential tenant, whether for any form of
compensation or not, including without limitation, apartment units and one and
two-family dwellings. A non-owner occupied unit that is rented or leased with
an option to purchase is considered a rental agreement until the lessee fully
exercises the option to purchase as evidenced by a recorded deed or land
contract.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A notice issued to the owner or responsible local agent
stating that there has been a violation of a provision of the subchapter or any
other applicable codes, ordinances, rules or regulations concerning the
premises.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable
interest in the premises.
   RENEWAL DATE. The expiration date of a previous or current certificate for
the same owner and the same property.
   RESPONSIBLE LOCAL AGENT. The responsible local agent shall be an individual
person, and shall be either the property owner, representative of a
corporation, partnership, firm, joint venture, trust, association,
organization, or other entity having a legal or equitable interest in the
property, or designated by the owner as responsible for operating the premises
in compliance with all the provisions of the city codes and ordinances. All
official notices and violations may be issued to the responsible local agent,
and any notice so issued shall be deemed to have been issued upon the owner of
record.
   TERMS. Not herein defined shall have the meanings customarily assigned to
them.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)
§ 150.182 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   The owner of any non-owner occupied dwelling or unit shall register with the
city and shall designate a person as the responsible local agent who shall be
legally responsible for operating the premises in compliance with all the
provisions of the city codes and ordinances, and shall also be responsible for
providing access to the premises for making the inspections necessary to ensure
compliance with the terms of all applicable codes and ordinances adopted by the
city. Each responsible local agent shall maintain a current list of the number
of occupants of each non-owner occupied unit for which they are responsible. A
certificate of compliance shall not be issued if the registration provisions
are not complied with.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.183 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall rent, lease, advertise or offer for rent or lease, or
occupy any non-owner occupied dwelling or rental unit unless there is a valid
certificate of compliance issued by the city in the name of the owner/
responsible local agent and issued for each specific dwelling and unit.
Certificates are not transferable between landlords, dwellings or units.
Application for a non-owner occupied certificate is an admission of fact by the
applicant that the applicant is conducting a rental dwelling operation as
defined by this section. It shall be the duty of all landlords to apply for the
non-owner occupied certificate, and certificate renewals, as required by this
subchapter and obtain all required inspections, repairs and approvals prior to
the occupancy date, or the expiration date of any current certificate,
whichever occurs first.
   (B)   Occupancy of any dwelling by a person other than the owner shall be
presumed to require a certificate of compliance. This presumption may be
rebutted by evidence that the occupant has ownership equity in the dwelling as
evidenced by a recorded deed, a recorded land contract, or a recorded
memorandum of land contract. A dwelling that is occupied, rented or leased with
an option to purchase is considered as non-owner occupied under the terms of
this subchapter until the lessee fully exercises the option to purchase as
evidenced by recorded documentation.
   (C)   A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the city if the
applicant meets the following requirements:
      (1)   A completed registration form is submitted pursuant to the
provisions of §
150.084.
      (2)   The inspection(s) have been performed at the premises sought to be
certified and all violations disclosed have been corrected.
      (3)   All re-inspections have been approved to confirm the correction of
violations.
      (4)   All registration, inspection and late fees are paid.
      (5)    No certificate of compliance will be issued until all of the
following fees and debts to the city have been paid in full:
         (a)   All previously billed property taxes;
         (b)   All current or past due special assessments;
         (c)   Water or sewer bills outstanding;
         (d)   All charges against the property for mowing, cleanup, debris
removal or similar charges by the city; and
         (e)   Any fees, fines, penalties, or debts of any sort arising from
provisions of property maintenance, including blight violations.
   (D)   The term of the certificate shall be two years for the initial
registration period and three years for each subsequent registration of the
same address. The non-owner occupied certificate is valid for the established
period the date of application for a new certificate, or the expiration date of
the previous certificate for a renewal, unless suspended or revoked for cause
by the city. Licensees shall apply for certificate renewal 60 days prior to the
expiration date of the current certificate. Sale of the subject premises
results in immediate termination of the certificate. Failure to obtain or renew
a certificate or failure to pay any inspection fee is a violation of this
chapter.
   (E)   Failure to register a non-owner occupied dwelling or dwelling unit(s),
complete the required inspection or re-inspection, obtain a certificate of
compliance or renew a certificate of compliance prior to the expiration date,
or failure to pay any fee is a violation of this subchapter and may result in
additional fees and penalties including court action.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016; Am. Ord., passed 11-
22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.184 REGISTRATION FORMS AND FEES.
   (A)   Applications for registration will be available at the City of
Hamtramck City Hall and shall include at least the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, telephone number, driver's license or state I.D.
card number and date of birth of applicant. No post office boxes shall be
accepted as legal address;
      (2)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of the
dwelling or units;
      (3)   The name, address, telephone number, driver's license or state I.D.
card number and date of birth of the responsible local agent. No post office
boxes shall be accepted as legal address;
      (4)   The authorization appointing a responsible local agent signed by
both the owner and the responsible local agent; and
      (5)   The number of units in each building, if multiple units exist.
   (B)   A one-time registration fee is required for property owner or entity
registered and shall be paid at the time of registration. No post office boxes
will be accepted as legal address.
   (C)   An inspection fee for the each unit shall be paid at the time of
registration for a new certificate, or renewal of an existing certificate. This
inspection fee shall include an initial inspection, and one re-inspection as
needed. Third and subsequent inspections that are required shall be charged an
additional fee, per inspection. If an owner or registered agent fails to
provide access for an inspection, or the inspector cannot gain access to any
non-owner occupied dwelling or unit, this shall be considered as a ‘lock out’
and be subject to an additional inspection fee.
   (D)   Registration fees, inspection fees, late fees as well as any other
charges in connection with non-owner occupied registration and compliance shall
be established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.185 BUSINESS REGISTRATION AND LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person, agent, firm or corporation that meets one or more of the
following conditions will be considered to be operating a business in the City
of Hamtramck and will be required to obtain a business license from the City
Clerk. The business license is in addition to the required a certificate of
compliance:
      (1)   Any non-owner occupied dwelling or unit(s) that are registered in
the name of a corporation, incorporation, limited liability company, or other
business entity, and evidenced by deed, land contract, property transfer
affidavit or other documentation showing legal interest and ownership.
      (2)   Any person, agent, firm or corporation, identified by name,
corporation, incorporation, limited liability company or any combination
thereof, having ownership in three or more non-owner occupied dwelling units.
   (B)   Any entity that is required under this section to obtain a business
license must include with application a list of all properties owned in the
City of Hamtramck, and provide proof that said properties have been registered
with the City of Hamtramck Assessors’ Office, the Department of Community and
Economic Development and the Department of Public Services.
   (C)   Any entity that is required under this section to obtain a business
license and has properties registered under two or more names, need only obtain
one business license, but must include with application a list of all
properties owned, the name under which each property is registered, and provide
proof that said properties have been registered with the City of Hamtramck
Assessors’ Office, the Department of Community and Economic Development and the
Department of Public Services.
   (D)   Business licenses for non-owner occupied properties are non-
transferrable. Upon changes in ownership, the new owner, if required by this
section, must submit application for a new business license.
   (E)   Fees for non-owner occupied dwellings business licenses shall be
established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.186 DESIGNATION OF RESPONSIBLE AGENT REQUIRED.
   The owner of any non-owner occupied dwelling and dwelling units shall
designate an individual person as the responsible local agent who shall be
responsible for operating the dwelling or dwelling units and who shall provide
access for inspection by the code official for compliance with the applicable
ordinance requirements. The owner may act as the responsible local agent. The
responsible local agent shall reside within a 50 mile radius of the City of
Hamtramck.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.187 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP; CERTIFICATES NON-TRANSFERABLE.
   (A)   Non-owner occupied certificates shall not be transferrable as to
person or place. Upon a transfer of ownership of any dwelling or dwelling
units, the new owner shall apply for a new certificate no later than 30 days
after the transfer of ownership.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any non-owner occupied dwelling
or unit(s) who has received a notice of violation to transfer, convey, lease or
sell (including by land contract) his or her ownership and/or interest in any
way to another, unless the owner shall have first furnished to the grantee,
lessee or vendee or transferee a true copy of any notice of violation and shall
have furnished to the building official a signed and notarized statement from
the grantee, vendee or lessee, or transferee acknowledging the receipt of the
notice of violation.
(Ord., passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed 11-
22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.188 INSPECTION OF NON-OWNER OCCUPIED UNITS.
   (A)   Access of code official. The code official shall be granted access by
the owner, agent, or occupant of the non- owner occupied dwelling or dwelling
unit(s), at the date and time schedule for the inspection(s), for the purpose
of conducting a compliance inspection. If any owner or occupant refuses to
provide access to the premises for a compliance inspection, or fails to show up
for the inspection, the inspection shall be recorded as a lock-out and re-
inspection fees assessed. All non-owner occupied dwellings and dwelling units
shall comply with the minimum standards set forth in the International Property
Maintenance Code as adopted by reference in §
150.010 of this chapter.
   (B)   Inspection required. All non-owner occupied dwellings and dwelling
unit(s) shall have an inspection to ensure compliance with all the requirements
of the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by reference in §
150.010 of this chapter.
   (C)   Re-inspection required. Re-inspection shall be required when
violations are found to exist during a prior inspection. Before a certificate
of compliance is issued, all violations must be corrected and approved. The
violations shall be corrected and a re-inspection completed within 30 days
after the initial inspection or by the renewal date, whichever occurs first,
except in dangerous conditions which must be remedied immediately.
   (D)   Additional inspections. In addition to regular or renewal inspections,
inspections may be scheduled on one or more of the following bases:
      (1)   Upon a tenant complaint to the City of Hamtramck. Complaints of
violations from tenants residing in the dwelling unit will be inspected within
a reasonable time if they allege sufficient facts that would give reasonable
cause to believe a violation of this subchapter exists.
      (2)   Whenever a code official has a reasonable cause to believe that
there is a violation of this subchapter or other conditions which make the
structure or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.189 POSTING OF CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   No non-owner occupied dwelling or dwelling unit may be occupied unless a
copy of the current certificate of compliance is displayed in an eight and one-
half by 11 inch frame securely affixed to the interior wall adjacent to the
primary entrance door to the dwelling or unit. A multiple-family dwelling or
apartment complex shall display the license in the same manner at the primary
entrance of each building or unit.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.190 ADDITIONAL VIOLATIONS.
   The following are additional violations subject to enforcement:
   (A)   No person shall occupy for sleeping purposes, and no owner or
responsible local agent shall allow a person to occupy for sleeping purposes, a
basement without compliant emergency egress or any non-habitable spaces of a
dwelling or unit;
   (B)   No person shall harass, stalk, threaten, hinder, assault, or otherwise
interfere with a code official or city inspector during the performance of his
or her duties;
   (C)   No person shall knowingly make any false statement or provide any
false information on a non-owner occupied certificate registration application
or any other information to any employee of the city or other authorized person
in relation to any investigation of a violation of this subchapter;
   (D)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit and the yard connected therewith
shall remain clean and kept free from any accumulation of dirt, filth, rubbish,
or garbage; and
   (E)   Each day upon which a violation of this section occurs shall be
considered a separate offense.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.191 COMPLIANCE WITH CODE OF ORDINANCES.
   All non-owner occupied dwellings and dwelling units shall comply with all
provisions of this section, the International Property Maintenance Code as
adopted in §
150.010, and all other applicable ordinance requirements. After inspection, all
non-owner occupied dwellings and dwelling units in compliance with applicable
ordinances shall receive a certificate of compliance consistent with the
provisions of §
150.083. Those non-owner occupied dwellings and dwelling units that are not in
compliance with applicable ordinances shall be brought into compliance within
30 days of the date of notice of the violations or by the renewal date,
whichever occurs first, and a subsequent inspection scheduled to verify
compliance. Upon request and submission of proof of extenuating circumstances,
the code official may grant an extension to make the non-emergency repairs
necessary to bring the property into compliance.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.192 DISTRICT COURT ACTIONS FOR RENT AND/OR POSSESSION.
   (A)   When information is requested from court of any action for rent or
possession filed on an unregistered or uncertified property, the court shall be
notified of any violation of this chapter.
   (B)   When so instructed by the court the owner or responsible agent shall
register the property as a non-owner occupied dwelling or unit.
   (C)   If previously unregistered, or registered but not certified, the owner
or responsible agent shall pay for and schedule inspections no later than ten
days after the completion of proceedings by the court with the exception of one
of the following:
      (1)   An affidavit of non-rental is filed by the owner.
      (2)   The owner provides proof of primary residence within ten days of
the date of notification from the court.
      (3)   The owner provides proof that court action for possession has not
been completed after 30 days, at which time an extension shall be granted for
an additional 30 days.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.193 AFFIDAVIT OF VACANT DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT OR NON-RENTAL.
   (A)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit that is to remain unoccupied shall have
an affidavit of vacant dwelling or unit completed by the owner and kept on file
with the city.
   (B)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit that is to remain unoccupied that does
not have at least one owner occupied unit is subject to vacant property
registration and fees.
   (C)   At such time the vacant dwelling or dwelling unit is to be occupied as
a non-owner occupied dwelling, it shall be the owner's responsibility to notify
the city to remove the vacant property registration and to register the
property as a non-owner occupied dwelling or unit.
   (D)   Any property that has such an affidavit filed that is found to be
occupied by any person other than the property owner listed on the affidavit
shall be in violation of this subchapter and subject to the penalties herein.
   (E)   Any dwelling or dwelling unit, which has had an affidavit filed, is
subject to inspection by a code official to insure vacancy of the dwelling or
unit. No schedule is needed for the inspections which can take place at any
time.
   (F)   The owner of any dwelling unit that has a valid certificate and
becomes owner occupied shall file an affidavit of non-rental with the city
within 15 days of the change in occupancy.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.194 SUSPENSION OF CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   A certificate of compliance issued by the City of Hamtramck may be
suspended by the code official for any of the following conditions:
      (1)   A condition exists contrary to the public health, morals, safety,
or welfare.
      (2)   Unauthorized use or beyond the scope of the certificate(s) issued.
      (3)   Any condition forbidden by the provisions of this section or any
other established city ordinance or other regulation.
      (4)   Violation of any criminal law.
      (5)   A verified complaint of violations to this subchapter.
   (B)   Upon suspension, the owner or agent shall be notified in writing of
the suspension and violations, corrective action, and the time allotted for the
violations to be corrected.
   (C)   If a certificate has been suspended, either by complaint or otherwise,
the owner or agent shall schedule a re-inspection to insure all violations have
been corrected.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.195 DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.
   Should the code official, upon inspection, determine that there are
conditions which constitute an imminent danger to health and safety, it may
order the conditions to be remedied and may limit or prohibit occupancy where
appropriate.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)  Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.196 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   A certificate of compliance is not a warranty or guarantee that there
are no defects in the dwelling or dwelling unit(s) and the city shall not be
held responsible for defects not noted in the inspection report.
   (B)   This inspection of the land use, exterior posture and interior
accessories of the structure is limited to visual inspection only. The city
does not guarantee or approve by inference any latent, structural or mechanical
defects thereto or other items that are not apparent by a visual inspection.
   (C)   The city shall not assume any liability to any person by reason of the
inspections required by the subchapter or the code adopted herein or the
issuance of a certificate of compliance or a certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 2016-06, passed 9-6-2016 ; Am. Ord., passed
11-22-2022)
INSPECTION OF SELECT RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS
PRIOR TO SALE OR TRANSFER
§ 150.201 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE.  Garage, shed, pools, gazebo, pigeon coop, doghouses,
playhouses, or similar uses subordinate to the principal residential structure.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL. A certificate issued by the Building Official which
certifies compliance with the provisions of the codes and ordinances of the
City of Hamtramck for residential dwellings.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.  A certificate issued by the Building Department
in accordance with the provisions of the Hamtramck Zoning Ordinance for an
approved use or occupancy.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The official, who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this subchapter or any duly authorized agent.
   DWELLING.  A residential structure and accessory uses located in the City of
Hamtramck.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
   NEZ CERTIFICATE. A State Tax Commission-issued certificate granting a
property within an approved Neighborhood Enterprise Zone granting tax
incentives for a period of six to 15 years if it is determined that the
property complies with NEZ program requirements. Copies of the certificate will
be held by the applicant, the assessor's office, and each affected taxing unit.
   NOTARIZED AFFIDAVIT. Agreement between the City of Hamtramck and a purchaser
of a dwelling; an affidavit of responsibility for repairs.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity.
   TRANSFER. The sale or conveyance of title to another for consideration, or
the execution of a land contract, or the exercise of an option to purchase a
dwelling. A conveyance by lease, gift, devise, or lien foreclosure are not
included in this definition.
(Res. 2024-136b, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 150.202 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR PROPERTIES WITH NEZ CERTIFICATE.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property for which an NEZ
certificate is in effect to transfer a dwelling or for any person to act as a
broker for the transfer of a dwelling which does not have a current certificate
of approval issued for said dwelling except as otherwise allowed by this
section. A property transfer affidavit for a property for which an NEZ
certificate is in effect shall not be accepted by the City of Hamtramck without
proof of a certificate of approval; or the buyer may execute a notarized
affidavit, provided by the Building Department, stating their intent to assume
the responsibility of correcting violations identified in the inspection
completely within six months of the date of the affidavit.
(Res. 2024-136b, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 150.203 VOLUNTARY INSPECTION FOR PROPERTIES WITHOUT NEZ CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   The owner of a property for which an NEZ Certificate is not in effect
may submit an application to the City of Hamtramck to conduct a voluntary
inspection of a property prior to the sale or transfer of such property.
   (B)   Once an application for a voluntary inspection has been submitted, the
property owner cannot withdraw from the inspection process. Any noted
violations identified during the inspection must be addressed as a condition of
obtaining a certificate of approval, regardless of whether the inspection was
initially voluntary.
   (C)   If, during the inspection or at any time, the Building Official
identifies that a property shows signs of serious neglect, deterioration, or
potential hazards, they may require a mandatory inspection and compliance with
the code, regardless of the property's NEZ status. This requirement aims to
protect public health, safety, and welfare by ensuring that properties in
serious disrepair are brought up to code.
(Res. 2024-136b, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 150.204 ISSUANCE OF A CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   The Code Official shall issue a certificate of approval only after it
has inspected the dwelling and finds that the dwelling meets the requirements
of all of the applicable codes and ordinances of the City of Hamtramck. An
inspection report shall be completed by the inspector after completing the
inspection of the property. The report shall note all violations found in the
dwelling. Before a certificate of approval is issued all violations must be
corrected and approved. The inspection report shall be valid for one year from
the date of inspection. Upon re-inspection and approval of the correction of
all violations, a certificate of approval will be issued and remain valid for a
one year period at which time a new inspection and certificate of approval will
be required for the subsequent sale or transfer of the property. The one year
period shall commence no later than the expiration date of the inspection
report or six months from the date of the affidavit assuming correction of the
violations, whichever is later.
   (B)   New dwellings. For newly constructed dwellings with an NEZ certificate
that have not yet been occupied, a certificate of approval shall be issued upon
final inspection of the new construction. This certificate shall be valid for
one year following its issuance.
   (C)   Formerly non-owner occupied dwellings. For formerly non-owner occupied
structures with an NEZ certificate, a certificate of approval will be issued
upon transfer if a valid certificate of compliance was issued within 90 days
prior to the transfer date.
   (D)   Vacant properties. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
section, a new inspection and a new certificate of approval shall be required
for any transfer or sale if the property for which an NEZ certificate is in
effect becomes vacant, or is the subject of foreclosure proceedings, or is the
subject of a police report regarding vandalism, breaking and entering or open
structure, or is determined to be a dangerous building by the Code Official in
accordance with the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Hamtramck.
(Res. 2024-136b, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 150.205 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY BY THE CITY.
   (A)   A certificate of approval is not a warranty or guarantee against
defects in the dwelling. The City of Hamtramck disclaims liability for any
defects not noted in the inspection report.
   (B)   The inspection covers visible and accessible elements of the land use,
exterior condition, and interior accessories. The city oes not guarantee or
implicitly approve hidden, latent, structural, or mechanical defects, nor items
that are not apparent by visual inspection. Elements such as mold, asbestos, or
other hazardous materials are not included unless specifically noted in the
inspection report.
   (C)   The city assumes no liability to any person based on the inspection
results or the issuance of a certificate of approval or compliance.
Responsibility for property condition, ongoing maintenance, and safety rests
with the property owner or buyer.
(Res. 2024-136b, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 150.206 DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.
   (A)   If, upon inspection, the Building Department determines that any
conditions constitute an imminent danger to health or safety, the Building
Official may order immediate remediation. Occupancy may be limited or
prohibited if deemed necessary to protect occupants or the public until
conditions are resolved.
   (B)   Property owners shall have a designated timeframe for remedying
dangerous conditions, determined by the Building Official based on the severity
and nature of the issues. Temporary measures, such as securing hazardous areas,
may be allowed where full remediation is extensive or requires additional time
to complete.
(Res. 2024-136b, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 150.207 REGISTRATION AND FEES.
   Before the sale or transfer of a dwelling with an NEZ certificate, the
seller or broker must register with the Building Department to arrange an
inspection for obtaining a certificate of approval. Registration and inspection
fees shall be set annually by the City Council.
(Res. 2024-136b, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 150.208 ASSUMPTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   A buyer may assume responsibility for correcting violations listed on
the inspection checklist by executing a notarized affidavit provided by the
Building Department. The affidavit must clearly state the buyer's intent to
address all violations within six months of the affidavit's date or by the
inspection report expiration date, whichever is later.
   (B)   If violations are not corrected and approved within the specified
timeframe, the Building Department may prohibit occupancy. An extension may be
granted by the Code Official if weather or other uncontrollable conditions
delay compliance.
   (C)   If the buyer is unable to complete all required corrections within the
specified period, an extension may be requested by submitting a written request
to the Building Department before the compliance deadline. The Building
Official may grant an extension at their discretion, taking into consideration
any reasonable factors presented by the buyer, including, but not limited to,
weather conditions, financial hardship, contractor availability, or other
personal or logistical challenges affecting the completion of repairs. The
extension request must outline the progress made on corrections to date and
provide an anticipated timeline for completing the remaining items. The
Building Official will review the request based on the good faith efforts
demonstrated and may grant an extension if deemed appropriate.
(Res. 2024-136b, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 150.209 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Inspectors are authorized to enter any premises for inspection during
normal business hours. In emergency situations or where public safety is at
risk, entry may be permitted outside of these hours.
   (B)   Property owners, agents, operators, and occupants must provide access
to all parts of the premises within their control to the Code Official or
authorized designee. The refusal to grant access may result in enforcement
actions or penalties as deemed appropriate by the Building Department.
(Res. 2024-136b, passed 11-12-2024)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999.
   (B)   Construction Code. A violation of §§
150.001 through
150.008 shall constitute a civil infraction subjecting the violator to civil
fines and court costs as permitted by law. Each day that the violation
continues after due notice shall be deemed a separate offense. The fine shall
be set in accordance with a structure adopted by resolution or ordinance of the
City Council (authority Public Act 292 of 1989, being M.C.L.A. §§ 124.651
through 124.729). Payment of a fine shall not exempt the offender from
compliance with the provisions of that subchapter.
(Ord. 474, passed 4-20-2000)
   (C)   Registration and obtaining a certificate of compliance for all rental
dwellings and rental units.
      (1)   (a)   Any owner of a rental dwelling or rental unit who shall fail
to register his or her rental dwelling and rental units or who shall fail to
obtain a certificate of compliance for each of his or her rental dwellings and
rental units shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any owner who fails to comply
with any of the requirements of §§
150.035 through
150.095 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
         (b)   Upon conviction under this division (C)(1), the owner shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 90
days or by both the fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Each violation for each rental dwelling and
rental unit shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 444, passed 8-19-1993)
      (2)   A violation of §§
150.180 through
150.196 shall constitute a civil infraction subjecting the violator to civil
fines and court costs as permitted by law. Each day that the violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The fine shall be set in
accordance with a structure adopted by resolution or ordinance of the City
Council (authority Public Act 292 of 1989, being M.C.L.A. §§ 124.651 through
124.729). Payment of a fine shall not exempt the offender from compliance with
the provisions of that subchapter.
   (D)   Blight. A violation of §§
150.060 through
150.064 shall constitute a civil infraction subjecting the violator to civil
fines and court costs as permitted by law. Each day that the violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The fine shall be set in
accordance with a structure adopted by resolution or ordinance of the City
Council (authority Public Act 292 of 1989, being M.C.L.A. §§ 124.651 through
124.729). Payment of a fine shall not exempt the offender from compliance with
the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 473, passed 3-9-2000)
   (E)   Exterior maintenance of buildings and accessory buildings. Any person,
corporation or other entity who violates any of the provisions of §§
150.075 through
150.077 shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine of not more than
$500 or to imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days or to both fine
and imprisonment at the discretion of the court.
   (F)   Housing code. A violation of §§
150.175 through
150.177 shall constitute a civil infraction subjecting the violator to civil
fines and court costs as permitted by law. Each day that the violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The fine shall be set in
accordance with a structure adopted by resolution or ordinance of the City
Council (authority Public Act 292 of 1989, being M.C.L.A. §§ 124.651 through
124.729). Payment of a fine shall not exempt the offender from compliance with
the provisions of that subchapter.
(Ord. 456, passed 9-21-1995; Am. Ord. , passed - -2013; Am. Ord., passed 11-22-
2022)
CHAPTER 151: HISTORIC DISTRICT
Section
   
151.001   Short title
   
151.002   Statement of purpose
   
151.003   Definitions
   
151.004   Historic District Study Committee and the Study Committee report
   
151.005   Establishing additional, modifying or eliminating districts
   
151.006   Historic District Commission
   
151.007   Historic District Commission meetings, recordkeeping and rules of
procedure
   
151.008   Delegation of minor classes of work
   
151.009   Ordinary maintenance
   
151.010   Review by the Commission
   
151.011   Design review standards and guidelines
   
151.012   Permit applications
   
151.013   Denials
   
151.014   Notice to proceed
   
151.015   Appeal of a Commission decision
   
151.016   Work without a permit
   
151.017   Demolition by neglect
   
151.018   Review of work in proposed districts
   
151.019   Emergency moratorium
   
151.020   Acceptance of gifts or grants
   
151.021   Acquisition of historic resources
 
   
151.999   Penalty
§ 151.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Historic District Chapter of the city.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.002 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   (A)   Historic preservation is hereby declared to be a public purpose and
the City Council may hereby regulate the construction, addition, alteration,
repair, moving, excavation and demolition of resources in Historic Districts
within the city limits.
   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to:
      (1)   Safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving districts, which
reflect elements of its history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or
culture;
      (2)   Stabilize and improve property values in each district and
surrounding areas;
      (3)   Foster civic beauty;
      (4)   Strengthen the local economy; and
      (5)   Promote the use of Historic Districts for the education, pleasure
and welfare of the citizens of the city and of the state.
   (C)   The city may by ordinance establish one or more Historic Districts.
The Historic District(s) shall be administered by the Historic District
Commission and pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERATION. Work that changes the detail of a resource but does not change
its basic size or shape.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. The written approval of a permit application
for work that is appropriate and does not adversely affect a resource.
   COMMISSION. The Historic District Commission of the city.
   DEMOLITION. The razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a
resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect.
   DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT. Neglect in maintaining, repairing or securing a
resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource
or the loss of structural integrity of the resource.
   DENIAL. The written rejection of a permit application for work that is
inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area, or group of areas, not necessarily having
contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources that
are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture.
   HISTORIC PRESERVATION. The identification, evaluation, establishment and
protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering or culture.
   HISTORIC RESOURCE. A publicly or privately owned building, structure, site,
object, feature or open space that is significant in the history, architecture,
archaeology, engineering or culture of the city, state or the United States.
   NOTICE TO PROCEED. The written permission to issue a permit for work that is
inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to a finding
under Public Act 169 of 1970, being M.C.L.A. § 399.205(6), as amended.
   OPEN SPACE. Undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area or a formal or
man-made landscaped area that provides a connective link or buffer between
other resources.
   ORDINARY MAINTENANCE. Keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition
through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its
exterior condition. ORDINARY MAINTENANCE does not change the external
appearance of the resource except through the elimination of the usual and
expected effects of weathering. ORDINARY MAINTENANCE does not constitute work
for the purposes of this chapter.
   PROPOSED HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area or group of areas not necessarily having
contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and that is under review
by a committee or a standing committee for the purpose of making a
recommendation as to whether it should be established as a Historic District or
added to an established Historic District.
   REPAIR. To restore a decayed or damaged resource to good or sound condition
by any process. A REPAIR that changes the external appearance of a resource
constitutes work for the purposes of this chapter.
   RESOURCE. One or more publicly or privately owned historic or non-historic
buildings, structures, sites, objects, features or open spaces located within a
Historic District.
   WORK. Construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation or
demolition.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.004 HISTORIC DISTRICT STUDY COMMITTEE AND THE STUDY COMMITTEE REPORT.
   (A)   Before establishing a Historic District(s), the City Council shall
appoint a Historic District Study Committee. A majority of the persons
appointed to the Study Committee shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in
or knowledge of historic preservation. The Study Committee shall contain
representation of at least one member appointed from one or more duly organized
local historic preservation organizations.
   (B)   The Study Committee shall do all of the following:
      (1)   Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed
Historic District following procedures established by the State Historic
Preservation Office of the State Historical Center;
      (2)   Conduct basic research of each proposed Historic District and
historic resources located within that district;
      (3)   Determine the total number of historic and non-historic resources
within a proposed Historic District and the percentage of historic resources of
that total. In evaluating the significance of historic resources, the Committee
shall be guided by the selection criteria for evaluation issued by the United
States Secretary of the Interior for inclusion of resources in the National
Register of Historic Places, as set forth in 36 C.F.R. Part 60 and criteria
established or approved by the State Historic Preservation Office of the State
Historical Center.
      (4)   Prepare a preliminary Historic District Study Committee report that
addresses at a minimum all of the following:
         (a)   The charge of the Committee;
         (b)   The composition of Committee membership;
         (c)   The Historic District(s) studied;
         (d)   The boundaries of each proposed Historic District in writing and
on maps;
         (e)   The history of each proposed Historic District;
         (f)   The significance of each district as a whole, as well as a
sufficient number of its individual resources to fully represent the variety of
resources found within the district, relative to the evaluation criteria;
         (g)   Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and
recommendations to the local planning body, the State Historic Preservation
Office of the State Historical Center, the State Historical Commission and the
State Historic Preservation Review Board; and
         (h)   Make copies of the preliminary report available to the public
pursuant to Public Act 169 of 1970, being M.C.L.A. § 399.203(4), as amended;
      (5)   Not less than 60 calendar days after the transmittal of the
preliminary report, the Historic District Study Committee shall hold a public
hearing in compliance with Public Act 267 of 1976, as amended, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 15.261 through 15.275. Public notice of the time, date and place of the
hearing shall be given in the manner required by Public Act 267 of 1976, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275. Written notice shall be
mailed by first class mail not less than 14 calendar days prior to the hearing
to the owners of properties within the proposed Historic District, as listed on
the most current tax rolls. The report shall be made available to the public in
compliance with Public Act 442 of 1976, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231
through 15.246;
      (6)   After the date of the public hearing, the Committee and the City
Council have not more than one year, unless otherwise authorized by the City
Council, to take the following actions:
         (a)   The Committee shall prepare and submit a final report with its
recommendations and the recommendations, if any, of the local planning body to
the City Council as to the establishment of a Historic District(s). If the
recommendation is to establish a Historic District(s), the final report shall
include a draft of the proposed ordinance(s); and
         (b)   After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment
of a Historic District(s), the City Council, at its discretion, may introduce
and pass or reject an ordinance(s). If the City Council passes an ordinance(s)
establishing one or more Historic Districts, the city shall file a copy of the
ordinance(s), including a legal description of the property or properties
located within the Historic District(s) with the Register of Deeds. The City
Council shall not pass an ordinance establishing a contiguous Historic District
less than 60 days after a majority of the property owners within the proposed
Historic District, as listed on the tax rolls of the local unit, have approved
the establishment of the Historic District pursuant to a written petition.
   (C)   A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by
a committee in the performance of an official function of the Historic District
Commission should be made available to the public in compliance with Public Act
442 of 1976, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 through 15.246.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.005 ESTABLISHING ADDITIONAL, MODIFYING OR ELIMINATING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The City Council may at any time establish by ordinance additional
Historic Districts, including proposed districts previously considered and
rejected, may modify boundaries of an existing Historic District or may
eliminate an existing Historic District. Before establishing, modifying or
eliminating a Historic District, a Historic District Study Committee appointed
by the City Council shall follow the procedures as stated in Public Act 169 of
1970, being M.C.L.A. § 399.203(1 through 3), as amended.
   (B)   To conduct these activities, the City Council may retain the initial
committee, establish a standing committee or establish a committee to consider
only specific proposed districts and then be dissolved. The Committee shall
consider any previously written committee reports pertinent to the proposed
action.
   (C)   In considering elimination of a Historic District, a committee shall
follow the procedures set forth in Public Act 169 of 1970, being M.C.L.A. §
399.203(1 through 3), as amended, for the issuance of a preliminary report,
holding a public hearing, and issuing a final report but with the intent of
showing one or more of the following:
      (1)   The Historic District has lost those physical characteristics that
enabled the establishment of the district;
      (2)   The Historic District was not significant in the way previously
defined; and
      (3)   The Historic District was established pursuant to defective
procedures.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.006 HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION.
   (A)   The City Council hereby does create a commission to be called a
Historic District Commission. Each member of the Commission shall reside within
the city limits. The Commission shall consist of seven members. Members shall
be appointed by the City Council. A majority of the members shall have a
clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. Members
shall be appointed for a term of three years, except the initial appointments
of three members for a term of two years and two members for a term of one
year. Subsequent appointments shall be for three-year terms. Members shall be
eligible for reappointment. In the event of a vacancy on the Commission,
interim appointments shall be made by the City Council within 60 calendar days
to complete the unexpired term of the position. Two members shall be appointed
from a list submitted by duly organized local historic preservation
organizations. If a person is available for appointment, one member shall be an
architect who has two years of architectural experience or who is duly
registered in the state.
   (B)   The City Council may prescribe powers and duties of the Commission, in
addition to those prescribed in this chapter, that foster historic preservation
activities, projects and programs in the local unit.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.007 HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION MEETINGS, RECORDKEEPING AND RULES OF
PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Historic District Commission shall meet at least monthly or more
frequently at the call of the Commission.
   (B)   The business that the Commission may perform shall be conducted at a
public meeting held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of
1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275, as amended. Public notice of the
date, time and place of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by
Public Act 267 of 1976, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275. A
meeting agenda shall be part of the notice and shall include a listing of each
permit application to be reviewed or considered by the Commission.
   (C)   The Commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings and
actions. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of or retained by
the Commission in the performance of an official function shall be made
available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information, Public
Act 442 of 1976, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 through 15.246.
   (D)   The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall adopt
design review standards and guidelines to carry out its duties under this act.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.008 DELEGATION OF MINOR CLASSES OF WORK.
   The Commission may delegate the issuance of certificates of appropriateness
for specified minor classes of work to its staff or to another delegated
authority. The Commission shall provide to its delegated authority specific
written standards for issuing certificates of appropriateness under this
section. The Commission shall review the certificates of appropriateness issued
by the delegate on at least a quarterly basis to determine whether or not the
delegated responsibilities should be continued.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.009 ORDINARY MAINTENANCE.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance
or repair of a resource within a Historic District or to prevent work on any
resource under a permit issued by the inspector of buildings or other duly
delegated authority before the chapter was enacted.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.010 REVIEW BY THE COMMISSION.
   The Commission shall review and act upon only exterior features of a
resource and shall not review and act upon interior arrangements unless
specifically authorized to do so by the City Council or unless interior work
will cause visible change to the exterior of the resource. The Commission shall
not disapprove an application due to considerations not prescribed in Public
Act 169 of 1970, being M.C.L.A. § 399.205(3), as amended.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.011 DESIGN REVIEW STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES.
   (A)   In reviewing plans, the Commission shall follow the United States
Secretary of Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and guidelines for
rehabilitating historic buildings as set forth in 36 C.F.R. Part 67. Design
review standards and guidelines that address special design characteristics of
Historic Districts administered by the Commission may be followed if they are
equivalent in guidance to the Secretary of Interior’s Standards and guidelines
and are established or approved by the State Historic Preservation Office of
the State Historical Center.
   (B)   In reviewing plans, the Commission shall also consider all of the
following:
      (1)   The historic or architectural value and significance of the
resource and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area;
      (2)   The relationship of any architectural features of the resource to
the rest of the resource and to the surrounding area;
      (3)   The general compatibility of the design, arrangement, texture and
materials proposed to be used; and
      (4)   Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the Commission finds
relevant.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.012 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   A permit shall be obtained before any work affecting the exterior
appearance of a resource is performed within a Historic District. The person,
individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution or agency
of government proposing to do that work shall file an application for a permit
with the inspector of buildings. Upon receipt of a complete application, the
inspector of buildings shall immediately refer the application, along with all
required supporting materials that make the application complete, to the
Commission. A permit shall not be issued and proposed work shall not proceed
until the Commission has acted on the application by issuing a certificate of
appropriateness or a notice to proceed as prescribed in this chapter.
   (B)   The Commission shall file certificates of appropriateness, notices to
proceed and denials of applications for permits with the inspector of
buildings. A permit shall not be issued until the Commission has acted as
prescribed by this chapter.
   (C)   If an application is for work that will adversely affect the exterior
of a resource the Commission considers valuable to the city, the state or the
nation, and the Commission determines that the alteration or loss of that
resource will adversely affect the public purpose of the city, state or nation,
the Commission shall attempt to establish with the owner of the resource an
economically feasible plan for the preservation of the resource.
   (D)   The failure of the Commission to act on an application within 60
calendar days after the date a complete application is filed with the
Commission, unless an extension is agreed upon in writing by the applicant and
the Commission, shall be considered to constitute approval.
   (E)   The Commission may charge a reasonable fee to process a permit
application.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.013 DENIALS.
   (A)   If a permit application is denied, the decision shall be binding on
the inspector or other authority.
   (B)   A denial shall be accompanied by a written explanation by the
Commission of the reasons for denial and, if appropriate, a notice that an
application may be re-submitted for Commission review when the suggested
changes have been made.
   (C)   The denial shall also include the notification of the applicant’s
right to appeal to the State Historic Preservation Review Board and to the
circuit court.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.014 NOTICE TO PROCEED.
   Work within a Historic District shall be permitted through the issuance of a
notice to proceed by the Commission if any of the following conditions prevail,
and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by a finding of the Commission to
be necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the following
conditions:
   (A)   The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to
the structure’s occupants;
   (B)   The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will
be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work
has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals, financing and
environmental clearances;
   (C)   Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the
owner when a governmental action, an act of God or other events beyond the
owner’s control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to
eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for
sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within
the Historic District, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner; or
   (D)   Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the
community.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.015 APPEAL OF A COMMISSION DECISION.
   (A)   An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Commission concerning a
permit application may file an appeal with the State Historic Preservation
Review Board. The appeal shall be filed within 60 calendar days after the
decision is furnished to the applicant. The appellant may submit all or part of
the appellant’s evidence and arguments in written form. The State Historic
Preservation Review Board shall consider an appeal at its first regularly
scheduled meeting after receiving the appeal. A permit applicant aggrieved by
the decision of the State Historic Preservation Review Board may appeal the
decision to the circuit court having jurisdiction over the Historic District
Commission whose decision was appealed to the State Historic Preservation
Review Board.
   (B)   Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation organization in
the city, as well as resource property owners, jointly or severally aggrieved
by a decision of the Historic District Commission may appeal the decision to
the circuit court, except that a permit applicant aggrieved by a decision
rendered under this chapter may not appeal to the court without first
exhausting the right to appeal to the State Historic Preservation Review Board.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.016 WORK WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   When work has been done upon a resource without a permit, and the Commission
finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of appropriateness, the
Commission may require an owner to restore the resource to the condition that
the resource was in before the inappropriate work or to modify the work so that
it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply
with the restoration or modification requirement within a reasonable time, the
Commission may seek an order from the Circuit Court to require the owner to
restore the resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that it
qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply or
cannot comply with the order of the court, the Commission or its agents may
enter the property and conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its
former condition or modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of
appropriateness in accordance with the court’s order. The costs of the work
done shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the city as a special
assessment against the property. When acting pursuant to an order of the
Circuit Court, the Commission or its agents may enter a property for purposes
of this section.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.017 DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT.
   Upon a finding by the Commission that a historic resource within a Historic
District or a proposed Historic District, subject to its review and approval,
is threatened with demolition by neglect, the Commission may do either of the
following:
   (A)   Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions
contributing to demolition by neglect; or
   (B)   If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time, the
Commission or its agents may enter the property and make the repairs as
necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall be
charged to the owner, and may be levied by the city as a special assessment
against the property. The Commission or its agents may enter the property for
purposes of this section upon obtaining an order from the Circuit Court.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.018 REVIEW OF WORK IN PROPOSED DISTRICTS.
   Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic,
architectural, archaeological, engineering or cultural significance of a
proposed Historic District, the City Council may, at its discretion, adopt a
resolution requiring that all applications for permits within the proposed
Historic District be referred to the Historic District Commission as prescribed
in §
151.012. The Historic District Commission shall review permit applications with
the same powers that would apply if the proposed Historic District was an
established Historic District. The review may continue in the proposed Historic
District for not more than one year or until the time as the City Council
approves or rejects the establishment of the Historic District by ordinance,
whichever occurs first.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.019 EMERGENCY MORATORIUM.
   If the City Council determines that pending work will cause irreparable harm
to resources located within an established or proposed Historic District, the
City Council may by resolution declare an emergency moratorium on all work for
a period not to exceed six months. The City Council may extend the emergency
moratorium for an additional period not to exceed six months, upon finding that
the threat of irreparable harm to resources is still present. Any pending
permit application concerning a resource subject to an emergency moratorium may
be summarily denied.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.020 ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS OR GRANTS.
   (A)   The City Council may accept state or federal grants for historic
preservation purposes, may participate in state and federal programs that
benefit historic preservation, and may accept public or private gifts for
historic preservation purposes.
   (B)   The City Council may appoint the Historic District Commission to
accept and administer grants, gifts and program responsibilities.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.021 ACQUISITION OF HISTORIC RESOURCES.
   If all efforts by the Commission to preserve a resource fail or if it is
determined by the City Council that public ownership is most suitable, the City
Council, if considered to be in the public interest, may acquire the resource
using public funds, public or private gifts, grants or proceeds from the
issuance of revenue bonds. The acquisition shall be based upon the
recommendation of the Commission. The Commission is responsible for maintaining
publicly owned resources using its own funds, if not specifically designated
for other purposes or public funds committed for that use by the City Council.
Upon recommendation of the Commission, the city may sell resources acquired
under this section with protective easements included in the property transfer
documents, if appropriate.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization,
institution or agency of government that violates this act is responsible for a
civil violation and may be fined not more than $5,000.
   (B)   A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization,
institution or agency of government that violates this chapter may be ordered
by the court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource unlawfully
constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated or demolished.
(Ord. 501, passed 3-2-2004)
CHAPTER 152: SIDEWALK CAFÉS
Section
   
152.001   Title
   
152.002   Definitions
   
152.003   Licensing procedures
   
152.004   Operating restrictions
   
152.005   Revocation of license
 
   
152.999   Penalty
§ 152.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Sidewalk Café Chapter.
(Ord. 520, passed 5-9-2006)
§ 152.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MAJOR SIDEWALK CAFÉ. A sidewalk café operation serving alcoholic and
nonalcoholic beverages. Businesses operating a MAJOR SIDEWALK CAFÉ are required
to hold a city issued, City Council approved license that conforms to the
procedures and regulations of this chapter.
   MINOR SIDEWALK CAFÉ. A sidewalk café operation serving only nonalcoholic
beverages. Businesses operating a MINOR SIDEWALK CAFÉ are required to hold a
city issued, City Council approved license that conforms to the procedures and
regulations of this chapter.
   SIDEWALK CAFÉ. An outdoor dining area located on a public sidewalk that is
public through dedication or easement or public right-of-way; that provides
wait staff service or counter service; that contains readily removable tables,
chairs and railings; and that may contain planters. It is otherwise unenclosed
by fixed walls and is open to the air, except that it may have awnings,
umbrellas or other non-permanent covers.
(Ord. 520, passed 5-9-2006)
§ 152.003 LICENSING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The city is authorized to issue a revocable, seasonal license to
operate a sidewalk café on public property, provided that the applicant has
complied with the standards set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Minor sidewalk café licenses for establishments serving non-alcoholic
beverages on public sidewalk areas shall be reviewed by city staff.
   (C)   Major sidewalk café licenses for establishments serving alcoholic and
nonalcoholic beverages on public sidewalk areas shall be reviewed by city
staff.
   (D)   The applicant must hold a valid business license at the time of
applying for a sidewalk café license.
   (E)   The seasonal license shall permit the operation of a sidewalk café
from April 1 up to and including October 31 of any calendar year. A license may
also be issued for less than a full season or for a stipulated number of
operating days.
   (F)   The fees for the license under this provision shall be those fees
which have been approved by the City Council.
   (G)   No license shall be issued by the city unless the fees required by
this section are paid.
   (H)   Insurance requirement; the requirements and conditions of any
insurance shall be those that have been approved by the City Council.
   (I)   Site development plan approval.
      (1)   No outdoor service of food and/or beverages in the form of a
sidewalk café shall be established on public property, except in conformance
with a site development plan approved by the city staff.
      (2)   A license application available from the city for site development
plan approval shall be submitted to the city. The application shall include the
following:
         (a)   Name of the individual and business;
         (b)   Individual and business address;
         (c)   Address of the sidewalk occupancy;
         (d)   Property owner if other than applicant (when the applicant is
not the owner of the affected property, written authorization from the property
owner shall be required to submit the application);
         (e)   Name of the planner, engineer, architect or agent;
         (f)   Dates of occupancy;
         (g)   Hours of occupancy;
         (h)   Capacity of the existing establishment;
         (i)   Areas of occupancy (dimensions) in square feet;
         (j)   Use of musical instruments or sound reproduction system;
         (k)   If alcoholic beverages will be served at outdoor café; and
         (l)   If application is a new application or renewal.
      (3)   The site development plan and the accompanying application shall
show the following:
         (a)   The applicant’s entire property and adjacent properties on a
location map with streets within a distance of at least 60 feet, at a scale of
one inch equals ten feet or other scale showing adequate detail. The site plan
shall be submitted on an eight and one-half inch by 11-inch sheet;
         (b)   A detailed plan showing the design, relevant details and
location of all temporary structures such as awnings, planters, landscaping,
railings, tables, chairs and other equipment, as well as lighting and
electrical outlet locations;
         (c)   All exterior lighting, including its type and location. Exterior
lighting shall have the shading as will prevent the source of light from being
seen from any adjacent residential property or roadway; and
         (d)   If the use of musical instruments and/or a sound reproduction
system is planned, the number and types of instruments and/or the type of sound
reproduction system. In any event, the use shall be governed by the city’s
noise ordinance which regulates and prohibits unnecessary and annoying noise.
      (4)   Copies of the site development plan shall be distributed to the
Chief of Police, Fire Chief and the City Manager for review and comments in
relation to compliance with this and all other city ordinances.
   (J)   Sidewalk café licenses may be renewed for additional seasons, subject
only to the city staff review and submission of the appropriate licenses.
   (K)   Major sidewalk cafés are limited to Conant, Joseph Campau, Holbrook,
Caniff and Carpenter.
(Ord. 520, passed 5-9-2006; Am. Ord. 528, passed 10-24-2006) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.004 OPERATING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   All sidewalk cafés shall cease sales or service by 1:00 a.m. each
night, and all areas shall be vacated by 2:00 a.m.
   (B)   All alcoholic beverages to be served at sidewalk cafés shall be
prepared within the existing restaurant, and alcoholic drinks shall only be
served to patrons seated at tables. A member of the public who is within the
confines of the sidewalk café area while a patron at a sidewalk café and
therefore on public property shall not be construed as violating any ordinance
controlling open containers in a public area. The operator of the sidewalk café
shall take whatever steps are necessary to procure the appropriate license from
the MLCC if the operator intends to serve alcoholic beverages in the sidewalk
café area. The operator shall also comply with all other laws and regulations
in the state concerning the serving of alcoholic beverages.
   (C)   The license evidencing the licensing of the sidewalk café in accord
with this chapter shall be prominently displayed.
   (D)   The restaurant shall not serve food or beverage to a patron at a
sidewalk café area unless that patron is seated at a table.
   (E)   Sidewalk cafés and the public property on which they are located shall
be kept neat and clean at all times and free from any substance that may cause
damage to the sidewalk or cause pedestrian injury.
(Ord. 520, passed 5-9-2006) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.005 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The licensee agrees that any license granted under the provisions of
this chapter may be revoked without just cause or explanation by the city or
its designee upon the recommendation of any of the city departments that
participated in the license review process.
   (B)   Upon revocation of a license, the licensee shall immediately cease
operation or any use of the encroachment upon written or oral notice from the
city. All furnishings and fixtures shall be removed from public property within
24 hours of the notice and the licensee shall restore the sidewalk to its
original condition.
(Ord. 520, passed 5-9-2006)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who operates a sidewalk café without a license or who violates
any of the standards or operating provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
a municipal civil infraction, punishable by a fine of $200, payable to the city
within five days notice of noncompliance. Failure to pay the $200 fine shall
result in immediate termination of the sidewalk café license. A second act of
noncompliance within the license period shall result in immediate termination
of the license agreement upon notice of the second act of noncompliance. The
licensee may petition the City Council for reinstatement of the license
agreement.
(Ord. 520, passed 5-9-2006)
CHAPTER 153: DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
Section
Downtown Development Authority
   
153.001   Title
   
153.002   Definitions
   
153.003   Determination of necessity
   
153.004   Creation of authority
   
153.005   Description of Downtown District
   
153.006   Board of Directors
   
153.007   Powers of authority
   
153.008   Executive director; bond of executive director
   
153.009   Fiscal year; adoption of budget
   
153.010   Purchasing and contracts
   
153.011   Borrowing and incurring debt
   
153.012   Development plan
Downtown Development Authority Plan
   
153.025   City Council findings
   
153.026   City Council determinations
   
153.027   Approval by City Council
Cross-reference:
   Standing rules for boards and commissions, see
Ch. 30
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
§ 153.001 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be called the Downtown Development
Authority Subchapter.
(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 153.002 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The terms used in this subchapter shall have the same meaning as given
to them in Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 through 125.4230,
or as hereinafter provided in this section unless the context clearly indicates
to the contrary.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT 57. Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 through 125.4230
as now in effect or hereafter amended.
   AUTHORITY. The Downtown Development Authority of the city created by this
subchapter.
   BOARD or BOARD OF DIRECTORS. The Board of Directors of the Authority, the
governing body of the Authority.
   CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER. The Mayor of the city.
   CITY. The City of Hamtramck, Michigan.
   COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Hamtramck.
   DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A plan developed by the Downtown Development Authority
pursuant to Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 through 125.4230.
   DOWNTOWN DISTRICT. Generally the Joseph Campau corridor from Carpenter
Street south to Denton Street.
(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 153.003 DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY.
   The City Council hereby determines that it is necessary and in the best
interest of the city to halt property value deterioration and increase property
tax valuation where possible in the Downtown Business District and to eliminate
the causes of deterioration and promote economic growth by establishing a
Downtown Development Authority pursuant to Public Act 57 of 2018, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 through 125.4230.
(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 153.004 CREATION OF AUTHORITY.
   There is hereby created, pursuant to Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 125.4201 through 125.4230, a Downtown Development Authority for the city.
The Authority shall be a corporate public body and shall be known and exercise
its powers under the title of the Hamtramck Downtown Development Authority. The
Authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this state, and
shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its
incorporation as provided by this subchapter and Public Act 57 of 2018, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 through 125.4230. The enumeration of a power in this
subchapter or in Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 through
125.4230 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the
Authority.
(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 153.005 DESCRIPTION OF DOWNTOWN DISTRICT.
   The Downtown District in which the Authority shall exercise its powers as
provided by Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 through 125.4230,
shall consist of the territory in the city described in Appendix A, subject to
changes as may hereinafter be made pursuant to this subchapter and Public Act
57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 through 125.4230.
(Appendix LA: See legal description contained in the plan adopted on December
13, 2005.)
(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 153.006 BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
   (A)   The Authority shall be under the supervision and control of a Board of
Directors consisting of the Mayor of the city and not less than eight nor more
than 12 members appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the City
Council. Not less than a majority of the members shall be persons having an
interest in property in the Downtown District. At least one Director shall be a
resident of the Downtown District, if the Downtown District has 100 or more
persons residing within it.
   (B)   The terms of the Directors shall be four years with terms beginning
January 1 and ending December 31 or upon the appointment of a successor. When a
vacancy occurs, the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council, shall
make an appointment to fill the remainder of the term.
   (C)   The members of the Board shall elect the chairperson and any other
officers of the Board.
(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 153.007 POWERS OF AUTHORITY.
   Except as specifically otherwise provided by this subchapter, the authority
shall have all powers provided by Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.4201 through 125.4230, subject to limitations imposed by law.
(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 153.008 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR; BOND OF EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.
   If an Executive Director is employed as authorized by Public Act 57 of 2018,
§ 205, being M.C.L.A. § 125.4205, the Director shall post bond in the sum of
$5,000 as required by the section of the statute unless covered by a blanket
bond covering city employees. The premium of the bond shall be deemed an
operating expense of the Authority, payable from funds available to the
Authority for operating expenses.
(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 153.009 FISCAL YEAR; ADOPTION OF BUDGET.
   (A)   The fiscal year of the Authority shall begin on July 1 of each year
and end on June 30 of the following year, or any other fiscal year as may
hereafter be adopted by the city.
   (B)   The Board shall annually prepare a budget and submit it to the City
Manager for submission to the City Council by April 1 of each year. The Board
shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the City Council has
approved the budget. The Board may, however, temporarily adopt a budget
concerning the operation of any improvements which have been financed by
revenue bonds where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing the revenue
bonds.
   (C)   The city will maintain the financial records for the Authority which
shall be submitted to the City Council at the same time and on the same basis
as departments of the city are required to submit reports. The Authority shall
be audited annually by the same independent auditors auditing the city, and
copies of the audit report shall be filed with the City Council.
(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 153.010 PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS.
   (A)   All purchases shall follow the procedures established by city
ordinance for city purchasing.
   (B)   All contracts shall require approval of the City Council.
(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 153.011 BORROWING AND INCURRING DEBT.
   The Authority may, with the approval of the local governing body, borrow
money and issue revenue bonds or notes to finance all or part of the costs of
acquiring or constructing property in connection with the implementation of a
development plan in the Downtown District or to refund or advance bonds or
notes issued pursuant to Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201
through 125.4230.
(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
§ 153.012 DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   The Board may create a development plan for the area encompassed by the
Downtown Development Authority, and the plan, when approved by the Board and
the City Council, shall be implemented as set forth in the development plan and
as required by Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4201 through
125.4230.
(Ord. 519, passed 5-23-2006; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2021)
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY PLAN
§ 153.025 CITY COUNCIL FINDINGS.
   The City Council, in reviewing the plan has found:
   (A)   The amended development plan meets the requirements set forth in
Public Act 197 of 1975, § 17(2), being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through 125.1681,
and the amended tax increment financing plan meets the requirements set forth
in Public Act 197 of 1975, § 14(2), being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1664;
   (B)   The proposed method of financing the amended development plan is
feasible, and the authority has the ability to arrange the financing;
   (C)   The amount of captured assessed value estimated to result from
adoption of the amended development plan is reasonable;
   (D)   The property included in the development area that could be acquired
pursuant to the development plan is reasonable and necessary to carry out the
purposes of the amended development plan and the purposes of the act in an
efficient and economically satisfactory manner;
   (E)   The development plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of
the city;
   (F)   Public services such as police protection, fire and utilities are, or
will be, required to service the development area; and
   (H)   Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and utilities
(to the extent required by the plan) are reasonably necessary.
(Ord. 516, passed 12-13-2005; Am. Ord. 531, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 153.026 CITY COUNCIL DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   The City Council hereby determines that the amended tax increment
financing plan and development plan constitute a public purpose.
   (B)   The City Council hereby determines that it is in the best interests of
the public to proceed with the amended tax increment financing plan and
development plan and that the joint plan will halt property value
deterioration, increase property tax valuation, eliminate the cause of property
value deterioration and promote economic growth in the development area.
(Ord. 516, passed 12-13-2005; Am. Ord. 531, passed 5-22-2007)
§ 153.027 APPROVAL BY CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council hereby approves the amended Hamtramck Tax Increment
Financing Plan and Development Plan to be dated May 22, 2007.
(Ord. 516, passed 12-13-2005; Am. Ord. 531, passed 5-22-2007)
CHAPTER 154: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
154.001   New building construction
§ 154.001 NEW BUILDING CONSTRUCTION.
   There shall be no new building constructed on any park land which is located
within the boundaries of the city, and which is owned by the city or by any
agency of the city, except if the building is approved by a three-fifths vote
of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election.
(Ord. 458, passed 11-5-1996) Penalty, see §
10.999
CHAPTER 155: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Short title
   
155.002   Purpose
   
155.003   Scope
   
155.004   Conflicting sections
   
155.005   Conflicting ordinances
   
155.006   Public benefit
   
155.007   Definitions
   
155.008   Severability
Administration
   
155.020   Powers and duties of the code official
   
155.021   Permits and approvals
   
155.022   Performance guarantee
   
155.023   Plan Commission
   
155.024   Zoning Board of Appeals
Zoning Districts and Map
   
155.035   General
   
155.036   Conformity to ordinance regulations
Residential Zones
   
155.050   Residential District (R)
   
155.051   Multiple Family Residential District (RM)
Commercial Zones
   
155.065   Multi-Use District (C2)
   
155.066   Central Business District
Industrial Zones
   
155.080   Industrial District (I)
Nonconforming Uses, Buildings and Structures
   
155.090   General
   
155.091   Nonconforming uses of land
   
155.092   Nonconforming structures
   
155.093   Nonconforming uses of structures and land
   
155.094   Uses subject to special land use
   
155.095   Change of nonconforming use
   
155.096   Expansion of nonconforming uses and structures
   
155.097   Repairs and maintenance to nonconformities
   
155.098   Change of tenancy or ownership
   
155.099   Nonconforming lots of record
   
155.100   City acquisition of nonconformities
General Regulations
   
155.110   Existing buildings and uses
   
155.111   Accessory buildings
   
155.112   Allowable projections into yards
   
155.113   Passageways
   
155.114   Off-street parking
   
155.115   Loading spaces
   
155.116   General screening and lighting requirements
   
155.117   Dumpsters
   
155.118   Landscaping requirements
   
155.119   Grading and excavation regulations
   
155.120   Home occupations
   
155.121   Adult uses
Fences
   
155.135   General
   
155.136   Permits
   
155.137   Specific standards
   
155.138   Appeals and variances
Sign Regulations
   
155.150   Findings and purpose
   
155.151   Definitions
   
155.152   Sign regulations by type
   
155.153   Permits
   
155.154   General provisions
   
155.155   Prohibited signs
Site Plan Review Requirements and Procedure
   
155.165   General
   
155.166   Site plan review process
   
155.167   Site plan review criteria
   
155.168   Combining preliminary and final site plans
   
155.169   Phasing of development
   
155.170   Inspection
   
155.171   Violations
Special Land Use Review Requirements and Procedures
   
155.185   General
   
155.186   Submission requirements
   
155.187   Standards
   
155.188   Powers and duties of the Commission
Zoning Changes and Amendments
   
155.200   Code official to process
   
155.201   Plan Commission to review
   
155.202   Public hearing procedure
   
155.203   Effect of protest to proposed amendment
 
   
155.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Official Zoning Map
   
Appendix B:   Table of Parking Requirements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 SHORT TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Hamtramck", hereinafter referred to as "this Ordinance."
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.002 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard the public health, safety, and
welfare by controlling the design, location, use, or occupancy of all buildings
and structures within the City of Hamtramck through the regulated and orderly
development of land and land uses and to promote economic stability and
aesthetic design in as much as it safeguards the public health, safety, and
welfare.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.003 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the construction, addition,
alteration, moving, repair, and use of any building, structure, parcel of land,
sign, or fence within the City of Hamtramck, except work located primarily in a
public way, on public utility towers and poles, and public utilities unless
specifically mentioned in this chapter.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.004 CONFLICTING SECTIONS.
   If, in any specific case, different sections of this chapter specify
different requirements, the more restrictive shall govern. If there is conflict
between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific
requirement shall be applicable.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.005 CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
   If the provisions of this chapter impose regulations for lower heights of
buildings, or a less percentage of lot that may be occupied, or require wider
or larger courts or deeper yards than are imposed or required by existing
provisions of law or ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
If, however, the provisions of the state housing code or other ordinances or
regulations of this city impose requirements for lower heights of buildings or
less percentage of lot that may be occupied, or require wider or larger courts
or deeper yards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of the state
housing code or other ordinance shall govern.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.006 PUBLIC BENEFIT.
   In fulfilling these purposes, this chapter is intended to benefit the public
as a whole and not any specific person or class of persons. Although, through
implementation, administration, and enforcement of this chapter, benefits and
detriments shall be enjoyed or suffered by specific individuals, such is merely
a byproduct of the overall benefit to the whole community. Therefore,
unintentional breaches of the obligations of administration and enforcement
imposed by the City of Hamtramck shall not be enforceable in tort.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.007 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and
terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings as shown in
this section. The particular shall control the general. The text shall control
if any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter
and any caption or illustration occurs. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and the word "may" is permissive.
   (B)   Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular, unless the
context clearly indicates the contrary.
   (C)   Terms defined in other codes. If terms are not defined in this chapter
and are defined in other legally adopted codes, such terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
   (D)   Terms not defined. If terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings
such as the context implies.
   (E)   Terms defined. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words
and terms shall, for the purposes of this subchapter, have the meanings as
shown in this section.
      ABANDONED SIGN. See §
155.151.
      ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building customarily incidental to and
located on the same lot occupied by the principal use or main building, such as
a detached garage.
      ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. An accessory building, or portion thereof,
located on the same lot as a principal dwelling, for use as a separate,
independent dwelling, containing all components to render such structure as
habitable according to the applicable building code.
      ACCESSORY USE. A use conducted on the same lot as the primary use of the
structure to which it is related; a use that is clearly incidental to and
customarily found in connection with, such primary use.
      AGRICULTURE. The tilling of soil, raising of crops, farm animals,
livestock, horticulture, gardening, beekeeping, and aquaculture.
      ALLEY. Any public way or thoroughfare greater than ten feet but less than
16 feet in width, which has been dedicated to the public for public use.
      ALTERATION. Any change, addition, or modification in construction,
occupancy, or use.
      AMUSEMENT CENTER. An establishment within an enclosed building offering
five or more amusement devices, including, but not limited to, coin-operated
electronic games, electronic dart boards, juke boxes, shooting galleries, table
games, and similar recreational diversions. Vending machines shall not be
included in the count of coin-operated machines for purposes of this
definition.
      ANIMATED SIGN. See §
155.151.
         ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED. See §
155.151.
         ENVIRONMENTALLY ACTIVATED. See §
155.151.
         MECHANICALLY ACTIVATED. See §
155.151.
      APARTMENT HOUSE. A residential building designed or used for three or
more dwelling units. All apartment houses are subject to any general business
license and rental inspection ordinances of the city.
      AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. An establishment primarily engaged in the
repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers, and similar large mechanical
equipment, including paint, body, fender, and major engine and engine part
overhaul, which is conducted in a completely enclosed building.
      AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. An establishment primarily engaged in the
repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers, and similar large mechanical
equipment, including brake, muffler, upholstery work, tire repair and change,
lubrication, tune ups, and transmission work, which is conducted in a
completely enclosed building.
      AUTOMOTIVE SELF-SERVICE STATION. That portion of property where flammable
or combustible liquids or gases used as fuel are stored and dispensed from
fixed equipment into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles by persons other than a
service station attendant. Such an establishment shall be permitted to offer
for sale at retail other convenience items as a clearly secondary activity and
shall be permitted to also include a freestanding automatic car wash.
      AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. That portion of property where flammable or
combustible liquids or gases used as fuel are stored and dispensed from fixed
equipment into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles. Accessory activities shall be
permitted to include minor automotive repair and maintenance, car wash service,
and food sales.
      BAR. Any business establishment that is licensed by the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission to serve alcohol and does not provide a full-service dining
menu.
      BASEMENT. Any floor level below the first story in a building, except
that a floor level in a building having only one floor level, shall be
classified as a basement unless such floor level qualifies as a first story as
defined herein.
      BIOSWALE. A long, channeled depression or trench that receives rainwater
runoff (such as from a parking lot) and has vegetation (such as grasses,
flowering herbs, and shrubs) and organic matter (such as mulch) to slow water
infiltration and filter out pollutants.
      BOARD. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the city as created in this
chapter.
      BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling containing a single dwelling unit and not more
than ten guest rooms or suites of rooms, where lodging is provided with or
without meals, for compensation for more than one week and less than 12 weeks.
All boarding houses are subject to any general business license and rental
inspection ordinances of the city.
      BREWERY. An establishment that produces barrels of ale or beer for on-
site consumption and wholesale distribution, as allowed by the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission.
      BREWPUB. An establishment that not less than 25% of the gross sales of
the restaurant during the one-year licensure period are derived from the sale
of food and nonalcoholic beverages prepared for consumption on the premises and
the brewpub license is issued in conjunction with a class C, tavern, B-Hotel,
or A-Hotel license that authorizes the licensee to brew up to 18,000 barrels of
beer per calendar year for sale on the premises.
      BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
      BUILDING CODE. The Michigan Building Code promulgated by the State of
Michigan, as adopted by the city.
      BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL. A person registered with the State of Michigan
under the Building Officials and Inspectors Registration Act, Act No. 54 of the
Public Acts of 1986, being M.C.L.A. §§ 338.2301 through 338.2313, and duly
authorized by the city to perform inspections within the city.
      BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the established
grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs; to the deck line
of mansard roofs; and to the highest midpoint between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
      BUILDING INSPECTOR. A person registered with the State of Michigan under
Building Officials and Inspectors Registration Act, Act No. 54 of the Public
Acts of 1986, beings M.C.L.A. §§ 338.2301 through 338.2313, and duly authorized
by the city to perform inspections within the city.
      BUILDING LINE. The perimeter of that portion of a building or structure
nearest a property line, but excluding open steps, terraces, cornices, and
other ornamental features projecting from the walls of the building or
structure. Roof eaves and overhangs exceeding one foot shall be counted as part
of the building line.
      BUILDING, MAIN. A building in which the principle use of the site is
conducted.
      BUILDING, TEMPORARY. A building used temporarily for the storage of
construction materials and equipment incidental and necessary to on-site
permitted construction of utilities, or other community facilities, or used
temporarily in conjunction with the sale of property within a subdivision under
construction. This definition shall include, but not be limited to, tents,
booths, and other canvass-like structures.
      BUSINESS OR FINANCIAL SERVICES. An establishment intended for the
conduct, service, or administration by a commercial enterprise, or offices for
the conduct of professional or business service.
      CANOPY. A roofed structure constructed of fabric or other material
supported by the building or by support extending to the ground directly under
the canopy placed so as to extend outward from the building providing a
protective shield for doors, windows, and other openings.
      CITY. The City of Hamtramck, Wayne County, Michigan.
      CODE OFFICIAL. The person appointed by the chief executive officer of the
city who is charged with the enforcement of this chapter.
      COMMERCIAL CENTER, COMMUNITY. A completely planned and designed
commercial development of 100,000 to 300,000 square feet that usually contains
one junior department store, a variety store or discount department store, a
supermarket, and specialty stores. A community commercial center generally has
between twenty and seventy retail tenants and the market support of more than
5,000 households.
      COMMERCIAL CENTER, CONVENIENCE. A completely planned and designed
commercial development providing for the sale of general merchandise and daily
necessities. A convenience store located in a convenience commercial center
shall not exceed 5,000 square feet.
      COMMERCIAL CENTER, NEIGHBORHOOD. A completely planned and designed
commercial development with a gross leasable area of less than 100,000 square
feet. Typical anchors include supermarkets and pharmacies. Neighborhood
commercial centers offer convenience goods and personal services, and usually
depend on the market support of more than 1,000 households.
      COMMERCIAL CENTER, REGIONAL. A completely planned and designed commercial
development having between 400,000 and 750,000 square feet of gross leasable
area. A regional commercial center offers a variety of general merchandise,
apparel, furniture, home furnishings, services, and recreational facilities and
is built around one or more full department stores of not less than 100,000
square feet each.
      COMMERCIAL, HEAVY. An establishment or business that generally uses open
sales yards, outside equipment storage or outside activities that generate
noise or other impacts considered incompatible with less-intense uses. Typical
businesses in this definition are lumberyards, construction specialty services,
heavy equipment suppliers, or building contractors.
      COMMERCIAL, LIGHT. An establishment or business that generally has office
uses, or services, which do not generate noise or other impacts considered
incompatible with less-intense uses. Typical businesses in this definition are
offices, coworking office space, financial services, medical and dental
clinics, and artisan and art studio space.
      COMMERCIAL RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE. Stores selling, leasing or renting
consumer, home and business goods or providing commercial services to the
public. Examples include banks, barber/beauty shops, fitness clubs and print
stores; also included are retail establishments engaged in the sale of art,
furniture, electronics and general merchandise.
      COMMERCIAL RETAIL SALES, FOOD. Any establishment selling food or
beverages for consumption off-premises either immediately or with further
preparation. Such establishments may include, but not be limited to,
supermarkets, grocery stores, bakeries, candy stores, butchers, delicatessens,
convenience stores, and similar establishments.
      COMMISSION. The City Plan Commission as created by this chapter.
      COMMON COUNCIL. The legislative body of the City of Hamtramck as created
by the City Charter.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The declaration of purposes, policies, and programs
for the development of the city; also known as the Master Plan.
      CONDOMINIUM. A single-dwelling unit in a multi-unit dwelling or structure
that is separately owned and may be combined with an undivided interest in the
common areas and facilities of the property.
      CONFLICT OF INTEREST. When a member of the Plan Commission or Zoning
Board of Appeals, who is asked to make a decision as part of the appropriate
Board or Commission, has a financial interest in the person or corporation
making the request, owns property or resides within 300 feet of the area in
question, or is related to the person making the request within the second-
degree of blood or marriage.
      CONSTRUCTION. The erection, reconstruction, alteration, conversion,
repairing, moving, or equipping of any building.
      CONGREGATE RESIDENCE. Any building or portion thereof that contains
facilities for living, sleeping, and sanitation as required by this chapter,
and may include facilities for eating and cooking for occupancy by other than a
family. A congregate residence shall be permitted to be a shelter, convent,
monastery, dormitory, fraternity, or sorority house, but does not include
jails, hospitals, nursing homes, hotels, or lodging houses.
      COURT. A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above
grade level on a lot and bounded on three or more sides by walls of the same
building.
      CULTURAL SERVICES. A library, museum, or similar use displaying,
preserving, and exhibiting objects or community and cultural interest in one or
more of the arts or sciences.
      DAY CARE, FAMILY. The keeping for part-time care or instruction or both,
whether or not for compensation, of six or fewer children at any one time
within a dwelling, not including members of the family residing on the
premises. All family day care facilities are subject to any general business
license and rental inspection ordinances of the city.
      DAY CARE, GROUP. An establishment for the care or instruction or both,
whether or not for compensation, of seven or more persons at any one time.
Child nurseries, preschools, and adult care facilities are included in this
definition. Such establishment shall be licensed by the state. All group day
care facilities are subject to any general business license and rental
inspection ordinances of the city.
      DENSITY. The number of dwelling units that are allowed on an area of
land, which area of land shall be permitted to include dedicated streets
contained within the development.
      DISTILLERY. An establishment that manufactures spirits, not to exceed
60,000 gallons annually of all brands combined for on-site consumption, for
off-premises consumption, and may sell spirits to the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission who resells spirit products through the spirit distribution system.
      DRIVEWAY. A private access road, the use of that is limited to persons
residing, employed, or otherwise using or visiting the parcel in which it is
located.
      DWELLING. A building that contains one or two dwelling units that is
used, intended, or designed to be used, rented, leased, sublet, or hired out to
be occupied for living purposes.
      DWELLING, MULTIPLE UNIT. A building or portion thereof designed for
occupancy by three or more families living independently in which they may or
may not share common entrances or other spaces or both. Individual dwelling
units may be owned as condominiums, or offered for rent.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached dwelling unit with kitchen and
sleeping facilities designed for occupancy by one family.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED. A group of three or more single-family
dwelling units which are joined consecutively by a common party wall, but not a
common floor-ceiling. Each unit shall have its own outside entrance. For the
purposes of this chapter, dwellings such as semi-detached and rowhouses, shall
be deemed a single-family attached dwelling.
      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A detached dwelling unit with kitchen and sleeping
facilities designed for occupancy by two families.
      DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
      EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future
use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property.
The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on, or above the lot or
lots.
      EVENT HALL. A privately-owned for-profit structure or area of property,
including flexible interior space divided into various -sized spaces, for
public rental for the purpose of private party events, whether family, group,
or corporate in nature, where access by the general public is restricted, and
with or without the sale, serving, or consumption of food and/or alcoholic
beverages. This includes but is not limited to banquet halls, and for-profit
event spaces.
      FACE OF BUILDING, PRIMARY. The wall of a building fronting on a street or
right-of-way, excluding any appurtenances such as projecting fins, columns,
pilasters, canopies, marquees, showcases, or decorations.
      FARM ANIMALS. Animals other than household pets that shall be permitted
to, if permitted, be kept and maintained for commercial production and sale or
family food production, education, or recreation, or all of the above. Farm
animals are identified by these categories: large animals, e.g. horse and
cattle; medium animals, e.g. sheep and goats; or small animals, e.g. rabbits,
chinchillas, chickens, turkeys, pheasants, geese, ducks, and pigeons.
      FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the horizontal areas of the floors of a
building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or, if appropriate,
from the centerline of dividing walls; this includes courts and decks and
porches when covered by a roof.
      FLOOR AREA, NET. The gross floor area exclusive of vents, shafts, courts,
elevators, stairways, exterior walls, and similar facilities.
      FRONTAGE. The width of a lot or parcel abutting a public right-of-way
measured at the front property line.
      GARAGE. A building or portion of a building not more than 576 square feet
in area and not exceeding 15 feet in height at the midway point between the
eaves and the ridge, in which only private or pleasure-type motor vehicles used
by the tenants of the building or buildings on the premises are primarily
stored or kept.
      GRADE (ADJACENT GROUND ELEVATION). The lowest point of elevation of the
existing surface of the ground, within the area between the building and a line
five feet from the building.
      GROUP CARE FACILITY. A facility, required to be licensed by the state,
which provides training, care, supervision, treatment, or rehabilitation to the
aged, disabled, those convicted of crimes, or those suffering the effects of
drugs or alcohol; this does not include day care centers, family day care
homes, foster homes, school, hospitals, jails, or prisons.
      HABITABLE SPACE (ROOM). Space in a structure for living, sleeping,
eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or
utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable space.
      HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material that constitutes a physical or health
hazard.
      HOME OCCUPATION. The partial use of a dwelling unit for commercial or
nonresidential uses by a resident thereof, which is subordinate and incidental
to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes.
      HOSPITAL. An institution designed for the diagnosis, treatment, and care
of human illness or infirmity and providing health services, primarily for
inpatients, and including related facilities, laboratories, outpatient
departments, training facilities, and staff offices.
      HOUSEHOLD PETS. Dogs, cats, rabbits, birds, etc. for family use only
(noncommercial) with cages, pens, etc.
      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any hard-surfaced, man-made area that does not
readily absorb or retain water, including, but not limited to, building roofs,
parking, driveway areas, graveled areas, sidewalks and paved recreation areas.
      IMPROVEMENTS. Those features and actions associated with a project which
are considered necessary by the body or official granting zoning approval to
protect natural resources or the health, safety, and welfare of the residents
of the city, and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project
area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening, and
drainage. IMPROVEMENTS do not include the entire project that is the subject of
zoning approval.
      INDUSTRIAL OR RESEARCH PARK. A tract of land developed according to a
site plan for the use of a family of industries and their related commercial
uses, and that is of sufficient size and physical improvement to protect
surrounding areas and the general community and to ensure a harmonious
integration into the neighborhood.
      JUNK YARD. Any land area including buildings thereon used primarily for
the outdoor abandonment, collection, dismantling, salvaging, and storage of
inoperable vehicles or machinery, waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or other
discarded materials which may or may not be offered for sale in whole or in
part.
      KITCHEN. Any room or portion of a room within a building designed and
intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food.
      LABORATORY.
         (a)   A place devoted to experimental, routine, or basic study such as
testing and analytical operations, and in which manufacturing of products,
except prototypes for test marketing, is not performed.
         (b)   A place devoted to experimental study, such as testing and
analyzing. Manufacturing of products is not permitted within this definition.
      LANDSCAPING. The finishing and adornment of unpaved yard areas,
materials, and treatment that generally includes naturally growing elements
such as grass, trees, shrubs, and flowers. These treatments shall be permitted
also to include the use of logs, rocks, fountains, water features, and
contouring of the earth. Any combination of living plants, such as trees,
shrubs, vines, groundcover, flowers, or grass.
      LIVESTOCK. Includes, but is not limited to, horses, bovine animals,
sheep, goats, swine, reindeer, donkeys, mules, and any other hoofed animals.
      LOADING BERTH. An off-street space on the same lot with a building or
group of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading
or unloading merchandise or materials. Off-street loading space is not to be
included as off-street parking space in computation of required off-street
parking. A loading space is 528 square feet in area.
      LOT. A single parcel of land (N.B. this definition shall require lot
combinations for large projects occurring on contiguous lots owned by the same
person.).
      LOT, CORNER. A lot whose lot lines form an interior angle of less than
135 degrees at the intersection of two street lines. A lot abutting on a curved
street or streets shall be deemed a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at
the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street lines
intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
      LOT COVERAGE. The amount of a lot, stated in terms of percentage, that is
covered by all structures located thereon. This shall be deemed to include all
buildings or structures covered by a permanent roof, including porches,
breezeways, patio roofs, and the like, whether open box-type or lathe roofs or
both, or fully roofed, but shall not be deemed to include fences, walls, or
hedges used as fences.
      LOT DEPTH: The average distance between the front lot line and rear lot
line.
      LOT LINE. A boundary line of a lot.
      LOT LINE, FRONT. The exterior line along the right-of-way of a road on
which a lot fronts or abuts.
      LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line that is parallel or nearly parallel to the
front lot line.
      LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line not a front lot line or rear lot line, that
generally crosses a front lot line or rear lot line.
      LOT OF RECORD. A lot which actually exists in a subdivision plat as shown
on the records of the County Registrar of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described
by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
      LOT WIDTH. The average distance between side lot lines.
      MANUFACTURING, HEAVY. All other types of manufacturing not included in
the definitions of light manufacturing and medium manufacturing.
      MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. The manufacturing, compounding, processing,
assembling, packaging, or testing of goods or equipment, including research
activities, conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, with no outside
storage, serviced by a modest volume of trucks or vans and imposing a
negligible impact on the surrounding environment by noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, or pollutants.
      MANUFACTURING, MEDIUM. The manufacturing, compounding, processing,
assembling, packaging, or testing of goods or equipment, including research
activities, conducted entirely within an enclosed structure or an open yard
that is capable of being screened from neighboring properties, serviced by a
modest volume of trucks or other vehicles.
      MAYOR. The chief executive officer of the city, whether the official
designation of his or her office is Mayor, City Manager, or otherwise.
      MICROBREWERY. A facility for the production and packaging of malt
beverages of low alcoholic content for distribution, retail, or wholesale, on
or off-premise, with a capacity of not more than 18,000 barrels per year. The
development may include other uses such as a standard restaurant, bar, or live
entertainment as otherwise permitted in the zoning district.
      MINING. The physical excavation, filling, and grading of any lot other
than normal maintenance.
      MODULAR HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, not
built on a chassis, constructed according to the Building Code, and designed to
be used as a dwelling unit with a permanent foundation when connected to the
required facilities.
      MORTUARY, FUNERAL HOME. An establishment in which the dead are prepared
for burial or cremation. The facility shall be permitted to include a chapel
for the conduct of funeral services, spaces for funeral services and informal
gatherings, or display of funeral equipment, or all of the above.
      MOTEL, HOTEL. Any building containing six or more guestrooms intended or
designed to be used, or which are used, rented, or hired out to be occupied, or
which guests occupy for sleeping purposes.
      NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot which width, area, or other dimension did not
conform to the regulations when this chapter or subsequent amendment became
effective.
      NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign or sign structure or portion thereof lawfully
existing when this chapter or subsequent amendment became effective, which does
not now conform.
      NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A building or structure or portion thereof
lawfully existing at the effective date of this chapter, or affecting
amendment, which was designed, erected, or structurally altered for a use that
does not conform to the zoning regulations of the zone in which it is located.
      NONCONFORMING USE. See USE, NONCONFORMING.
      NON-K-12 SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL. A school establishment to provide for the
teaching of industrial, clerical, managerial, trade or artistic skills. This
definition applies to schools that are owned and operated privately for profit
and that do not offer a complete educational curriculum.
      OPEN AIR BUSINESS USES. Uses not conducted from a wholly enclosed
building and operated for profit, including the following uses:
         (a)   Bicycle, trailer, motor vehicle, mobile home, boat or home
equipment sale or rental service, including used automobile sales.
         (b)   Outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools, and similar
structures.
         (c)   Retail sales of fresh fruit, vegetables, and other perishable
foods. Permitted agricultural retail sales and temporary produce sales uses are
not classified as open air business uses.
         (d)   Retail sale of trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil,
humus, fertilizer, trellises, lawn furniture, playground equipment and other
home garden supplies and equipment.
         (e)   Tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts,
miniature golf, golf driving ranges, children's amusement park, outdoor
swimming pools and skating rinks or similar recreational use.
      OPEN SPACE. Land areas that are not occupied by building, structure,
parking areas, streets, alleys, or required yards. Open space shall be
permitted to be devoted to landscaping, preservation of natural features,
patios, and recreational areas and facilities.
      PARK. A public or private area of land, with or without buildings,
intended for outdoor active or passive recreational uses.
      PARKING LOT. An open area, other than a street, used for the parking of
automobiles.
      PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE. A space within a building or private or public
parking lot, exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, office, and work areas,
for the parking of an automobile.
      PERSON. Individual natural persons, partnerships, joint adventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, or corporations; or any
officers, agents, employees, factors, or any kind of personal representatives
of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself, or for any other
person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law.
      PERVIOUS SURFACE. Surface that allows infiltration of precipitation into
the soil.
      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A residential or commercial development
guided by a total design plan in which one or more of the zoning or subdivision
regulations, other than use regulations, shall be permitted to be waived or
varied to allow flexibility and creativity in site and building design and
location, under general guidelines. A PUD includes cluster zoning, planned
development, community unit plan, planned residential development, and other
terminology denoting zoning requirements designed to accomplish the objectives
of this chapter through a land development project review process based on the
application of site planning criteria to achieve integration of the proposed
land development project with the characteristics of the project area.
      PLOT PLAN. A plot of a lot, drawn to scale, showing the actual
measurements, the size and location of any existing buildings or building to be
erected, the location of the lot in relation to abutting streets, and other
such information.
      POOLS (SWIMMING), HOT TUBS, AND SPAS.
         ABOVE-GROUND/ON GROUND POOL. See PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL.
         BARRIER. A fence, a wall, a building wall, the wall of an above-ground
swimming pool or a combination thereof, which completely surrounds the swimming
pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool.
         HOT TUB. See PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL.
         IN-GROUND POOL. See PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL.
         POWER SAFETY COVER. A pool cover that is placed over the water area,
and is opened and closed with a motorized mechanism activated by a control
switch.
         PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL. Any structure that contains water over 24
inches in depth and which is used, or intended to be used, for swimming or
recreational bathing in connection with an occupancy in residential zones and
which is available only to the family and guests of the householder. This
includes in-ground, above-ground, and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs, and
spas. Private swimming pool, indoor. Any private swimming pool that is totally
contained within a private structure and surrounded on all four sides by walls
of the structure.
         PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR. Any private swimming pool that is not
an indoor pool.
         PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL. Any swimming pool other than a private swimming
pool.
         SPA. See PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL.
      PORCH. A covered or uncovered entrance to a building or roofed structure
projecting from the exterior wall or walls of a principal structure and
supported by piers, posts or columns and commonly open to weather.
      PREMANUFACTURED UNIT. A structure, transportable of a minimum of two
sections that has a certificate of acceptability issued under the rules set
forth in the Stille-Derossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act, Act No.
230 of the Public Acts of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 through 125.1531 of
the Michigan Compiled Laws.
      PRODUCTION FILMING. All activity attendant to staging or shooting
(videotaping or filming or digital recording) commercial motion pictures,
television shows, programs or commercials, and to the taking of single or
multiple photographs for sale or use for a commercial purpose where the
photographer sets up stationary equipment on private property.
      PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any drainage ditch, storm sewer, or drainage
facility, sanitary sewer, water main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian
way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility
for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for
maintenance and operation, or for which the local government responsibility is
established.
      PUBLIC SERVICES. Uses operated by a unit of government to serve public
needs, such as police (with or without jail), fire service, ambulance, judicial
court, or government offices, but not including public utility stations or
maintenance facilities.
      PUBLIC UTILITY STATION. A structure or facility used by a public or
quasi-public utility agency to store, distribute, generate electricity, gas,
telecommunications, and related equipment, or to pump or chemically treat
water. This does not include storage or treatment of sewage, solid waste, or
hazardous waste.
      PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley, or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated, or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
      QUASI-PUBLIC. Essentially a public use, although under private ownership
or control.
      QUORUM. A majority of the authorized members of a Board or Commission.
      RECREATION, INDOOR. An establishment providing completely enclosed
recreation activities. Accessory uses shall be permitted to include the
preparation and serving of food, or the sale of equipment related to the
enclosed uses, or both. Included in this definition shall be bowling, roller
skating or ice skating, billiards, pool, motion picture theaters, laser tag,
video arcades, dance halls, gymnasiums, indoor sporting centers, and related
amusements.
      RECREATION, OUTDOOR. An area free of buildings, except for restrooms,
dressing rooms, equipment storage, maintenance buildings, open-air pavilions,
and similar structures used primarily for recreational activities.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLES. A vehicle used for recreational activities,
including, but not limited to, boats, wave runners, travel trailers, all-
terrain vehicles, motorcycles, snowmobiles, racecars, dune buggies, campers,
motor homes, and travel trailers.
      RECYCLING FACILITY. Any location whose primary use is where waste or
scrap materials are stored, bought, sold, accumulated, exchanged, packaged,
disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap metals, paper,
rags, tires, and bottles, and other such materials.
      REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL. An architect or engineer registered or
licensed to practice professional architecture or engineering under the
Occupational Code, Act No. 299 of the Public Acts of 1980, being M.C.L.A. §§
339.2001 through 339.2014.
      REHABILITATION CENTER (HALFWAY HOUSE). An establishment whose primary
purpose is the rehabilitation of persons. Such services include drug and
alcohol rehabilitation, assistance to emotionally and mentally disturbed
persons, and halfway houses for prison parolees and juveniles.
      RELIGIOUS, CULTURAL, AND FRATERNAL ACTIVITY. A use or building owned or
maintained by organized religious organizations or nonprofit associations for
social, civil, or philanthropic purposes, or the purpose for which persons
regularly assemble.
      RENOVATION. Interior or exterior remodeling of a structure, other than
ordinary repair.
      REPAIR SERVICES. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of
repair services to individuals and households, rather than businesses, but
excluding automotive and equipment repair use types. Typical uses include
appliance repair shops, shoe repair, watch or jewelry repair shops, or repair
of musical instruments.
      RESTAURANT. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food
or beverages or both to customers in a ready to consume state and whose
principal method of operation includes one of the following characteristics:
         (a)   Customers are normally provided with an individual menu and are
served their food and beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or
counter at which food and beverages are consumed.
         (b)   A cafeteria-type operation where food and beverages are consumed
within the restaurant building.
      RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD. An establishment that sells food or beverages or
both already prepared for consumption within the restaurant building or off-
premises as a carryout order packaged in paper, styrofoam, or similar
materials, and may include drive-in or drive-up facilities for ordering.
      RESTAURANT, TAKE OUT. An establishment that sells food or beverages or
both already prepared for consumption intended to be taken off the premises for
consumption.
      ROAD FRONTAGE. The length of the lot line that borders a public road.
      SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL. A school establishment to provide for the teaching of
industrial, clerical, managerial, or artistic skills. This definition applies
to schools that are owned and operated privately for profit and that do not
offer a complete educational curriculum (e.g. beauty school or modeling
school).
      SETBACK. The minimum required open-space between the property line and
the building line.
      SIGN. An advertising message, announcement, declaration, demonstration,
display, illustration, insignia, surface or space erected or maintained in view
of the observer thereof for identification, advertisement, or promotion of the
interests of any person, entity, product, or service, including the sign
structure, supports, lighting system, and any attachments, ornaments, or other
features used to draw the attention of observers.
      SIGNS, COMMUNITY. Temporary on- or off-premises signs generally made of a
woven material or durable synthetic materials primarily attached to or hung
from light poles or on a building. These signs are solely of a decorative,
festive, or informative nature announcing activities, promotions, or events
with seasonal or traditional themes having broad community interest, and which
are sponsored or supported by a city based nonprofit organization.
      SITE PLAN. A plan that outlines the use and development of any tract of
land.
      SPECIAL LAND USE. A use that would become harmonious or compatible with
neighboring uses through the application and maintenance of qualifying
conditions.
      SOLAR ENERGY. Radiant energy (direct, diffuse and reflected) received
from the sun.
      SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. Any solar collector, other solar energy device or
any structural design feature, mounted on a building or on the ground, whose
primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage and distribution of
solar energy for space heating or cooling, water heating or electricity.
      STATE. The State of Michigan and its various branches and administrative
agencies.
      STATE LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A structure constructed for
residential purposes that is licensed by the state under the adult foster care
facility licensing act, Act No. 218 of the Public Acts of 1979, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 400.701 to 400.737, that provides resident services or care for six or fewer
persons under 24-hour supervision for persons in need of that supervision or
care.
      STORY. That portion of building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost
story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of
the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level
directly above a usable or unused under-floor space is more than six feet above
grade as defined herein for more than 50% of the total perimeter or is more
than 12 feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such usable or unused
under-floor space shall be considered as a story.
      STREET. Any thoroughfare or public way not less than 16 feet in width
which has been dedicated.
      STREET, PRIVATE. A right-of-way or easement in private ownership not
dedicated or maintained as a public street that affords the principal means of
access to two or more sites.
      STRUCTURAL CHANGES. Any construction or renovation to an existing
structure other than repairs. Also, a change in a mechanical system that
involves an extension, addition, or change to the arrangement, type or purpose
of the original installation of the system.
      STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of
any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner.
      SUBDIVISION. The division of a tract, lot, or parcel of land into two or
more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land.
      TEMPORARY BUILDING OR USE. A structure or use permitted by the Building
Code Official to exist during periods of construction of the principal use or
for special events, not to exceed six months. Two extension periods of six
months each are allowed.
      THEATRE. A building used primarily for the presentation of live stage
productions, performances, or motion pictures.
      TOWNHOUSES. A row of three or more attached single-family dwellings, not
more than two and one-half stories in height and for which there is a rear and
front entrance to each dwelling. Townhouse shall not be used as a synonym for
the term "condominium" which refers to how property or space is owned rather
than for a particular housing style.
      UNENCLOSED PORCH. A porch or upper balcony that is not closed in any way
by glass, opaque panel, or any other material, and has no enclosing features
higher than 42 inches above the floor of the porch except the roof, roof
supports, and railing.
      USE. The activity occurring on a lot or parcel for which land or a
building is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which land or a building is
or may be occupied, including all accessory uses.
      USE, CHANGE OF. The change within the classified use of a structure or
premise.
      USE, NONCONFORMING. A use that lawfully occupied a building or land at
the time this chapter became effective, which has been lawfully continued and
which does not now conform with the use regulations.
      USE, PRINCIPAL. A use that fulfills a primary function of a household,
establishment, institution, or other entity.
      USE, TEMPORARY. A use that is authorized by this chapter to be conducted
for a fixed period of time. Temporary uses are characterized by such activities
as the sale of agricultural products, contractor's offices and equipment sheds,
fireworks, carnivals, flea markets, and garage sales.
      VARIANCE. A deviation granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals, as created
in this chapter, from the use and dimensional requirements established by this
code only for reasons established in this chapter.
      WAREHOUSE, WHOLESALE OR STORAGE. A building or premises in which goods,
merchandise, or equipment are stored for eventual distribution.
      YARD. An open, unoccupied space on a lot, other than a court, which is
unobstructed from the ground upward by buildings or structures, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
      YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth
of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a
line parallel thereto.
      YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth
of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a
line parallel thereto.
      YARD, SIDE. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building
and between the building line and the side lot line.
      ZONING APPROVAL. A document signifying compliance with the provisions of
this chapter as to use, height, bulk, setback, parking, and all other
dimensional requirements.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021; Am. Ord. —, passed 3-8-2022; Am.
Ord. —, passed 12-12-2023; Am. Res. 2024-75b, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 155.008 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   Severability. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, or
part of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts of
this chapter.
   (B)   Saving clause.
      (1)   Prosecutions. A prosecution which is pending on the effective date
of this chapter or any subsequent amendment and which arose from a violation of
an ordinance repealed by this chapter, or a prosecution which is started within
one year after the effective date of this chapter or any subsequent amendment
arising from a violation of an ordinance repealed by this chapter and which was
committed before the effective date of this chapter or any subsequent
amendment, shall be tried and determined exactly as if the ordinance had not
been repealed.
      (2)   Preliminary site plan approval. If preliminary site plan approval
granted under Ordinance No. 437 as amended is properly granted before the
effective date of this chapter, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require any change in the planned or designed use of any such building,
structure, or land if a building permit shall be applied for and granted within
one year of the effective date of this chapter and such building shall be
entirely completed for its planned or designed use within two years from the
effective date of this chapter. Final site plan approval shall be granted under
the procedure established by this chapter.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 155.020 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CODE GENERAL.
   (A)   General. This section establishes the duties and responsibilities for
the zoning code official and other officials and agencies, with respect to the
administration of this chapter. The zoning code official or his or her designee
shall be referred to hereafter as "the code official."
   (B)   Appointment. The chief executive officer of the city shall appoint the
code official whom shall be charged with the enforcement of this chapter.
   (C)   Deputies. The code official may appoint such number of technical
officers and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time by the
Common Council. The code official shall be permitted to deputize such employees
as may be necessary to carry out the functions of this chapter.
   (D)   Enforcement. Unless otherwise provided, the code official shall apply
and enforce the provisions of this chapter. An appeal of an application of this
chapter by the code official shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals,
which, unless otherwise provided, may interpret this chapter, and such
interpretation shall be considered final.
   (E)   Administrative reviews and permits.
      (1)   Certificate of compliance. The code official shall receive all
applications for certificates of compliance and coordinate and perform the
necessary inspections.
      (2)   Review of zoning permits. The code official shall be authorized to
undertake reviews, make recommendations, and grant approvals as set forth in
this chapter. All applications for building and zoning permits and amendments
thereto shall be submitted to the code official for review and approved before
permit issuance. Each application shall include a set of plans and all data
necessary to show that the requirements of this chapter are met.
      (3)   Site plan reviews. The code official shall receive all applications
for site plan review and prepare submittals for review by the Common Council.
      (4)   Special land use permits. The code official shall receive all
applications for special land uses as shall be permitted or approved as
required by this chapter and prepare submittals for review by the Plan
Commission.
      (5)   Variance applications. The code official shall receive all
applications for use variances and dimensional variances as required by this
chapter and prepare submittals for review by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (F)   Comprehensive Plan. The code official shall assist the Commission in
the development of the Comprehensive Plan.
   (G)   Cooperation of other officials and officers. The code official shall
be authorized to request, and shall receive so far as is required in the
discharge of the duties described in this chapter, the assistance and
cooperation of other officials and officers of the city.
   (H)   Liability. The code official, acting in good faith and without malice
in the discharge of the duties described in this chapter, shall not be
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a
result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of such
duties. A suit brought against the code official or any employee because such
act or omission performed by the code official or the employee in the
enforcement of any provisions of such codes or other pertinent law or
ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this code or enforced by the
enforcing agency shall be defended by the city until final termination of such
proceedings, and any judgment resulting therefrom shall be assumed by the city.
This subchapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, or controlling any building or
parcel of land for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor
shall the enforcing agent or the city be held as assuming any such liability by
reason of the reviews or permits issued under this chapter.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.021 PERMITS AND APPROVALS.
   (A)   General. All departments, officials, and employees who are charged
with the duty or authority to issue permits or approvals shall not issue any
permit or approval for uses or purposes when the permit or approval would be in
conflict with this chapter. No permit shall be issued to any person who is in
default to the city. By way of illustration, a person in default could owe the
city income tax, property tax, water bill, or a business license fee. If a
written payment plan has been accepted by the chief executive officer, the code
official shall issue a conditional permit if all other provisions of this
chapter are met. Any permit or approval, if issued in conflict with this
chapter, shall be null and void.
   (B)   Permits.
      (1)   Conformance to zoning. No use, building, or structure, whether
publicly or privately owned, shall be constructed or authorized until the
location and extent thereof conform to the approved plan and the code official
has issued the proper permits. Specifically, a zoning permit shall be obtained
before the construction, physical development, or razing of a proposed new or
expanded use, structure, or building; the restoration and structural
improvement of any existing use or structure other than normal repairs and
minor improvement; or a change of one use to any other use. When a building
permit is required, zoning approval shall be an eligibility requirement or
prerequisite for such permit.
      (2)   Expiration or cancellation. Each license, permit, or approval
issued shall expire after 180 days if no work is undertaken or such use or
activity is not established, unless a different time of issuance of the license
or permit is allowed in this chapter, or unless an extension is granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals before expiration. Failure to comply fully with the
terms of any permit, license, or approval shall be permitted to be grounds for
cancellation or revocation. Action to cancel any license, permit, or approval
shall be permitted to be taken on proper grounds by the code official.
Cancellation of a permit or approval by the Commission or Board shall be
permitted to be appealed in the same manner as its original action.
      (3)   Validity of licenses, permits, approvals, and variances. The code
official shall require that the development or use in question before the
Commission or Board proceed only under the terms of such license, permit,
approval, or variance including any requirements or conditions established as a
condition of issuance by the Commission or Board. Except as specifically
provided for in this chapter and conditions of approval, the securing of one
required review or approval shall not exempt the recipient from the necessity
of securing any other required review or approval.
      (4)   Approval for and availability of essential services. All projects
that require the additional use of new facilities or essential services, such
as sewers, storm drains, fire hydrants, potable water, public streets, street
lighting, and similar services, shall obtain such approval as required by the
agency providing such services before project approval and permit issuance.
Nonavailability of essential services shall be permitted to be grounds for
denying permits for additional development until such services are available.
The city is not obligated to extend or supply essential services if capacity is
not available. If capacity is available, the extension of such services shall
be by and at the cost of the developer. All service extensions shall be
designed and installed in full conformance with the city's standards for such
service, and shall be subject to review, permit, and inspection as required by
other policies or ordinances of the city.
   (C)   Certificate of compliance required. A person shall not occupy a new
structure, except an owner-occupied dwelling unit, or lot, or occupy an
existing structure or lot until the code official has issued a certificate of
compliance. If a change in ownership occurs in an established business, a
certificate of compliance shall be required. Before a certificate of compliance
is issued, the code official and other interested city officials and
departments shall perform a thorough inspection intended to insure that both
the structure and the use comply with all zoning requirements and any
conditions previously imposed. After inspection and consultation with other
interested city officials and departments, the code official shall:
      (1)   Issue the certificate of compliance if all requirements of this
chapter are satisfied and all conditions, if any, have been met;
      (2)   Deny the certificate of compliance if all of the requirements of
this chapter are not satisfied and all conditions, if any, have not been met,
with such denial being in writing and clearly identifying the reasons for
denial and imposing a time frame for compliance;
      (3)   Issue a temporary certificate of compliance for no more than 60
days, if in the opinion of the code official the reasons for possible denial
are minor and can be addressed within a reasonable period of time; the
temporary certificate of compliance shall have conditions imposed by the code
official.
   (D)   Fees. A fee for services shall be charged. All fees shall be
established by resolution of the Common Council during the adoption of the
annual budget. Failure to apply for the appropriate zoning permit and paying
the appropriate fee shall result in a municipal civil infraction and a doubling
of the permit fee.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.022 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.
   (A)   Authority. To ensure compliance with this chapter and any conditions
imposed under this chapter, in authorizing any zoning permit, special land use
approval, or variance, the body or official charged with administering, as
designated by this chapter, the respective request may require that a cash
deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond in
an amount authorized by this chapter be deposited with the City Treasurer to
insure faithful completion of the improvements. The performance guarantee shall
be deposited when the permit is issued authorizing the activity or project.
This section shall not be applicable to improvements for which a cash deposit,
certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond has been
deposited under the Land Division Act, Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1967,
as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 to 560.293.
   (B)   Amount of bond. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the Common
Council shall by resolution during adoption of the annual budget establish a
guideline for the amount of bonds that the Common Council deems adequate for
the protection of the city and its inhabitants.
   (C)   Return of performance bond. Upon the satisfactory completion of
specific requirements as attested to by the code official, the City Treasurer
shall be authorized to return any improvement or performance bond without
interest that may pertain to the specific improvement.
   (D)   Withholding and partial withholding of performance bond. When the
project is not satisfactorily completed, the code official may direct the City
Treasurer not to return all or part of any bond; but to apply the bond or part
thereof to the project in question. If any action begin and fail to meet full
completion based on the approve site plan, or if the project area is reduced in
size and action is only partially completed, the code official shall determine
the amount of the bond or bonds to be returned to the applicant, without
interest, and the amount be applied to the improvements.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.023 PLAN COMMISSION.
   (A)   General. This section addresses the duties and responsibilities of the
City Plan Commission, hereafter referred to as "the Commission", and other
officers and agencies, with respect to the administration of this chapter.
   (B)   Establishment of the Commission. The City Plan Commission is hereby
established under the Municipal Planning Act, Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of
1931, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.31 to 125.45. The Commission shall consist of the
Mayor of the city, and one member of the Common Council to be selected by the
Common Council as members ex officio, and seven other persons who shall be
appointed by the Mayor as provided in this chapter. All ex officio members,
appointed under this chapter, shall have full voting rights.
   (C)   Terms of office.
      (1)   Appointment. The terms of the ex officio members shall correspond
to their respective official tenures, except that the term of the
administrative official selected by the Mayor shall terminate with the term of
the Mayor. All Commissioners who are members of the Plan Commission established
by Ordinance No. 194 upon the effective date of this chapter shall serve until
their term expires. The appointing authority shall not make an appointment or
reappointment until the term of the appointed member has expired. The term of
each appointed member shall be three years or until his or her successor takes
office. The terms of office of each appointed member shall thereafter expire on
January 1 in the year of expiration.
      (2)   Removal from office. Upon written charges and after a public
hearing, the Mayor may remove a member, other than the member selected by the
Common Council, for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office.
The Common Council may for like cause remove the member selected by the Common
Council upon written charges and after a public hearing.
      (3)   Vacancies. A vacancy on the Commission occurring otherwise than
through the expiration of term shall be filled within 30 days for the unexpired
term by the Mayor in the case of a member selected or appointed by the Mayor,
and by the Common Council in the case of the member appointed by the Common
Council.
   (D)   Membership requirements. An appointed member shall be a resident of
the city for not less than 30 days before his or her appointment and shall
maintain residency during his or her term; if an appointed member discontinues
his or her residency within the city, the Mayor shall declare the position
vacant and shall appoint another qualified person within thirty days. An
appointed member shall not hold another municipal office except that one
appointed member may be a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals or a member of
a joint fire administrative board.
   (E)   Compensation. An appointed member of the Commission may be compensated
at a rate to be determined by the Common Council during its adoption of the
annual budget and may be reimbursed for pre-approved expenses related to
performing his or her duties.
   (F)   Powers and duties of the Commission.
      (1)   Meetings. All meetings of the Commission shall be conducted under
the Open Meetings Act, Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 15.261 to 15.275. The Commission shall meet annually in the first quarter of
the calendar year for the purpose of electing officers and adopting rules for
transaction of business. The Chairman may call special meetings. The Mayor
shall be empowered to set the date and time of the annual meeting.
      (2)   Quorum and votes required. The Commission shall not conduct
business unless a majority of its members are present. Unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, the concurring vote of a majority of its voting
members shall be required to pass on any decision, approval, or determination
that the Commission may make under this chapter. Any three members of the
Commission shall have the power at any meeting to schedule a public hearing.
      (3)   Records to be public. The City Clerk shall keep a record of the
Commission's resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which
record shall be a public record subject to the Freedom of Information Act, Act
No. 442 of the Public Acts of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 to 15.246.
      (4)   Chairman. The Commission shall elect its Chairman from amongst the
appointed members and create and fill such other offices as the Commission may
determine. The term of the Chairman shall be one year, with eligibility for
reelection.
      (5)   Annual report. By January 31 of each year, the Commission shall
make an annual report of the activities of the Commission of the previous
calendar year and forward recommendations to the Common Council.
      (6)   Comprehensive plan, subdivision of land, and approval or
disapproval of plats. The Commission shall be vested with all powers vested in
a municipal planning commission under the Municipal Planning Act, Act No. 285
of the Public Acts of 1931, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.31 to 125.45, commencing with
§§ 125.36 et seq.
      (7)   Zoning ordinance. The Commission shall develop and recommend to the
Common Council, under the guidelines of the comprehensive plan, a zoning
ordinance and official zoning map establishing zoning districts within the
city. Such an ordinance shall be made in regards to the character of each
district and the most appropriate use of land within the city.
      (8)   Special land use permits. The Commission shall review all requests
for a special land use in accordance with §
155.188. If required by the code official, maps, drawings, or other
documentation in support of the request shall accompany the application. The
granting of a special land use permit shall not exempt the applicant from
compliance with other relevant provisions of related ordinances.
      (9)   Employees, contracts for services, and expenditures. The Commission
may appoint such employees as the Commission may deem necessary for its work,
whose appointment, promotion, demotion, and removal shall be subject to the
same provisions of law that govern other corresponding civil employees of the
city. The Commission may also contract with planners, engineers, architects,
and other consultants for such services as the Commission may require. The
expenditures of the Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts
appropriated for the purpose by the Common Council, which shall provide the
funds, equipment, and accommodations necessary for the Commission's work.
      (10)   Conflict of interest. No member of the Commission may participate
in any decision, approval, or determination with regard to any matter of which
he/she has a direct interest.
   (G)   Appeals and hearings. Any person with standing aggrieved by any
decision of the Commission shall have the right to make such appeals as shall
be permitted to be provided by this chapter or state law. Such appeals shall be
based on the record.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.024 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   General. This section addresses the duties and responsibilities of the
Zoning Board of Appeals, hereafter referred to as "the Board", and other
officers and agencies, with respect to the administration of this chapter.
   (B)   Establishment of the Board. The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby
established under the City and Village Zoning Act, Act No. 207 of the Public
Acts of 1921, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.581 to 125.600. The Board shall consist of
seven members, each to be appointed by the Common Council as provided for in
this chapter, within ten days after the effective date of this chapter. The
Common Council may also appoint not more than two alternate members for the
same term as regular members of the Board. The alternate members may be called
on a rotating basis as specified in this chapter to sit as regular members of
the Board in the absence of a regular member or in the place of a regular
member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular
member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. A member shall
disqualify himself from a vote in which he or she has a conflict of interest.
The alternate member called shall serve in the case until a final decision is
made. The alternate member has the same voting rights as a regular member of
the Board.
   (C)   Terms of office.
      (1)   Appointment. The terms of office for the membership of the Board
shall be three years, expiring on January 1 in the year of expiration.
Appointments of the first members of this Board created under this chapter
shall be for terms of one, two, and three years, respectively, so as nearly as
possible to provide for the subsequent appointment of an equal number of
members each year, except that three members shall be appointed to the one-year
term. After the initial appointments, each member shall hold office for the
full three-year term.
      (2)   Removal from office. The Common Council shall, upon written charges
and after a public hearing, remove members of the Board for nonperformance of
duty or misconduct in office.
      (3)   Vacancies. Within 30 days, the Common Council shall fill a vacancy
on the Board occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term for the
unexpired term.
      (4)   Membership requirements. An appointed member shall be a resident of
the city for not less than thirty days before his or her appointment and shall
maintain residency during his or her term; if an appointed member discontinues
his or her residency within the city, the Common Council shall declare the
position vacant and shall appoint another qualified person within thirty days.
An appointed member shall not hold another municipal office except that one
appointed member may be a member of the Plan Commission.
      (5)   Compensation. Appointed and alternate members of the Board may be
compensated at a rate to be determined by the Common Council during its
adoption of the annual budget and may be reimbursed for pre-approved expenses
related to performing their duties.
   (F)   Powers and duties of the Board.
      (1)   Meetings. All meetings of the Board shall be conducted under the
Open Meetings Act, Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§
15.261 to 15.275. The Board shall meet annually in the first quarter of the
calendar year for the purpose of electing officers and establishing rules and
procedures under this chapter and applicable state laws for transaction of
business. All meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman
under their adopted procedures and at such other times as the Board shall
determine or specify in its rules of procedure. The Mayor shall be empowered to
set the date and time of the annual meeting. The public shall be afforded an
opportunity to speak at any public hearing under the rules of procedure and by-
laws of the Board.
      (2)   Quorum and votes required. The Board shall not conduct business
unless a majority of its members are present. The concurring vote of a majority
of the members of the Board is necessary to reverse an order, requirement,
decision, or determination of and administrative official or body, or to decide
in favor of the applicant a matter upon which the Board shall pass under an
ordinance, or to effect a variation in an ordinance except that a concurring
vote of two-thirds of the members of the Board is necessary to grant a variance
from uses of land permitted in an ordinance.
      (3)   Records to be public. The City Clerk shall keep a record of its
resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be
a public record subject to the Freedom of Information Act, Act No. 442 of the
Public Acts of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§
15.231 to 15.246.
      (4)   Chairman. The Board shall elect its chairman from amongst the
members and create and fill such other offices as the Board may determine. The
term of the Chairman shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection.
      (5)   Board Secretary. The code official shall appoint a secretary to
assist the Board. The secretary shall keep minutes of the Board meetings for
public record and conduct all correspondence, including notification of
decisions. The secretary shall also certify records. The secretary shall
prepare and submit minutes of the Board meetings to the Chairman and to the
Board.
      (6)   General powers. The Board shall hear and decide appeals from and
review any order, requirements, decision, or determination made by the code
official. The Board shall also hear and decide matters referred to the Board or
upon which the Board shall pass under this chapter. For special land use
decisions, an appeal may be taken to the Board.
      (7)   Interpretations. The Board may interpret this chapter and the map
and all matters relating thereto when a question arises in the administration
of this chapter as to the meaning and intent of any provision or part of this
chapter. Any text interpretation shall be narrow and in a manner as to carry
out the intent and purpose of this chapter. Interpretations shall not have the
effect of amending this chapter. Map interpretations shall be based on the
rules of this chapter and any relevant historical information.
      (8)   Screening and lighting controversies. If any controversy as to the
adequacy of any proposed or existing screening or the creation of any nuisance
or annoyance by artificial lighting occurs, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
have the right and is hereby given the authority to interpret and determine the
screening and lighting provisions and the purpose herein sought to be
accomplished.
      (9)   Extension of licenses, permits, or approvals. Upon application, the
Board may grant extensions in the time limits of each license, permit, or
approval issued in accordance with §
155.021.
      (10)   Appeals of administrative decisions. The Board may hear and decide
appeals when the appellant alleges that there is error in any order,
interpretation, requirement, permit, decision, or refusal made by the code
official in enforcing any provision of this chapter.
      (11)   Modification and variance of ordinance requirements.
         (a)   Non-use variance.
            1.   The Board shall be permitted to approve or approve with
conditions by a simple majority vote of the Board a request for a dimensional
or non-use variance provided that the property owner demonstrates practical
difficulty by showing all of the following:
               a.   Strict compliance with the area, setbacks, frontage,
height, bulk, or density requirements of this chapter would unreasonably
prevent the property owner from using property for some lawful permitted
purpose or would render conformity unnecessarily burdensome in the particular
case.
               b.   A variance shall do substantial justice to both the
property owner and neighboring property owners in the district or that a lesser
requirement would give substantial relief and be more consistent with justice
to others.
               c.   The plight of the property owner is due to unique
circumstances of the property.
               d.   The problem of the property owner is not self-created.
            2.   If the property owner demonstrates the above criteria, the
Board may consider the following types of non-use variance requests:
               a.   All matters referred to the Board or upon which the Board
shall hear and decide under this chapter.
               b.   Permit such modification of the height, placement, and area
regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a lot
which is of such shape or so located with relation to surrounding development
or physical characteristics that the lot cannot otherwise be appropriately
improved without such modification.
               c.   Permit the modification of the automobile parking space or
loading space requirements when, in the particular instance, such modifications
shall not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such requirement.
               d.   Permit variances for items such as buffering, screening,
fencing, or landscaping.
         (b)   Use variance. The Board shall be permitted to grant by a two-
thirds vote of the Board a use variance of the literal provisions of this
chapter to a property owner provided that the property owner demonstrates all
of the following:
            1.   Showing of unnecessary hardship on the property owner if this
chapter was strictly enforced. The landowner shall prove that the land cannot
be put to a reasonable use or yield a reasonable return under its existing
zoning classification.
            2.   The hardship shall be unique or peculiar to the particular
parcel and cannot be the result of general neighborhood conditions.
            3.   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applicable to the property involved or to the intended use of the
property that do not apply generally to other properties or uses in the same
zone.
            4.   The variance is necessary to the preservation and enjoyment of
a substantial property right possessed by other property in the same zone and
proximity.
            5.   The variance shall not result in the alteration of the
essential character of the neighborhood by impairing an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, increasing traffic congestion in public
streets, increasing the danger of fire, endangering the public safety, or
unreasonably diminishing or impairing established property values within the
surrounding area.
            6.   The variance is a minimum variance that shall make possible
the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure.
            7.   The variance shall be in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this chapter and shall not be injurious to the neighborhood or
otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
      (12)   Time limitations on a variance. If the Board approves a variance,
the variance shall remain in effect only so long as the facts and circumstances
as presented to the Board and upon which the variance was granted continue to
exist, and that the conditions attached to the approval are satisfied and
maintained. If the variance is not exercised within 12 months from the date the
variance is granted (unless the Board establishes a different time period as a
condition), the variance shall lapse. If the variance has lapsed and the
petitioner desires to proceed with the benefits of the variance, the petitioner
shall reapply for the variance and demonstrate that all of the requirements for
approval of a variance have been met, based upon the facts and circumstances in
existence when the new request was submitted. The Board shall have the right to
deny the variance if the facts and circumstances pertaining to the request have
changed, if the petitioner is not willing to satisfy the conditions attached to
the original approval, or if the petitioner has not demonstrated that all of
the substantive requirements for the granting of a variance have been satisfied
as of the time the new application for variance is filed.
   (G)   Appeals and hearings.
      (1)   Filing, time limit. An appeal under this chapter shall be commenced
by a person filing notice of appeal or petition as described in the rules and
procedures of the Board, within 35 days, and with the appropriate filing fee as
annually determined by the Common Council upon adoption of the budget, with the
code official. The notice of appeal shall specify the specific grounds upon
which the appeal is based and shall be signed by the applicant and property
owner. The appeal shall specify the requirement from which a variance is sought
and the nature and extend of such variance. The appeal shall be accompanied by
a fully completed application along with any other information required by the
Board. The code official shall immediately send to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. No
appeal under this chapter shall be taken if such applicant is in default to the
city and is not eligible to be issued a permit under this chapter.
      (2)   Notification of hearing. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for
the hearing of the appeal and give notice of the appeal to the persons to whom
real property within 300 feet of the premises in question is assessed, and to
the occupants of single and two-family dwellings within 300 feet. The notice
shall be delivered personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners and
tenants at the address given in the last assessment roll. If a tenant's name is
not known, the term "occupant" may be used. A person may appear in person or be
represented by a duly authorized agent at the hearing.
      (3)   Effect of filing. An appeal under this chapter stays all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the officer or
body from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board, after the notice of
appeal is filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would in the opinion of the officer or body cause imminent peril to life or
property. If such a certification is filed, the proceedings shall only be
stayed by a restraining order. A restraining order may be granted by the Board
or by the circuit court, on application, on notice to the officer or body from
whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
      (4)   Board to decide. The Board shall decide the appeal within 75 days.
The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and shall make an order,
requirement, decision, or determination as in the Board's opinion ought to be
made in the premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer
or body from whom the appeal is taken, all subject to limitations identified in
this chapter. If there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in
carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, the Board may in passing upon
appeals grant a variance in any of its rules or provisions relating to the
construction, or structural changes in, equipment, or alteration of buildings
or structures, or the use of land, buildings, or structures, so that the spirit
of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial
justice done.
      (5)   Official record of hearing. The Board shall prepare an official
record for each appeal and shall base its decision on this record. The official
record shall include the relevant administrative record and administrative
orders issued thereon relating to the appeal, the notice of the appeal, and
such documents, exhibits, photographs, or written reports as may be submitted
to the Board for its consideration, and the minutes of the hearing, findings of
fact, and decisions and order of the Board. The record and decision of the
Board shall comply with the constitution and the laws of the state, be based on
proper procedure, be supported by competent material and substantial evidence
on the record, and represent the reasonable exercise of discretion granted by
law to the Board.
      (6)   Appeal to Circuit Court. The decision of the Board is final.
However, a person having an interest affected by this chapter may appeal to the
circuit court. If the court finds the record of the Board inadequate to make
the review required under state law, or that additional material evidence
exists that with good reason was not presented to the Board, the court shall
order further proceedings before the Board on conditions that the court
considers proper. The Board of appeals may modify its findings and decision as
a result of the new proceedings, or may affirm the original decision. The
supplementary decision shall be filed with the court.
   (H)   Limitations on the powers of the Board.
      (1)   Common Council decisions. Nothing contained herein shall empower
the Board to override the decisions of the Common Council with respect to the
approval or denial of any decision authorized to be made by the Common Council.
      (2)   Zoning Map. Nothing contained herein shall empower the Board to
change the terms of this chapter, to effect changes in the Zoning Map, or to
add to the uses permitted in any zoning district, except when specifically
empowered to do so by this chapter.
      (3)   Variance conditions.
         (a)   In authorizing a variance or taking any other action within its
jurisdiction, the Board may attach such conditions as may be deemed necessary
in the furtherance of the purposes of this chapter, provided any conditions are
in compliance with the standards contained herein. The conditions imposed by
the Board may include conditions necessary to ensure that public services and
facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity shall be capable of
accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or
activity, protect the natural environment, conserve natural resources and
energy, ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use
of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed
shall do all the following:
            1.   Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety,
and welfare, as well as the social and economic well-being of those who shall
use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners
immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity and the community as
a whole;
            2.   Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and
purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity;
            3.   Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning
regulations, be related to the standards established in this chapter for the
land use or activity under consideration and be necessary to ensure compliance
with those standards.
         (b)   The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land
use or activity shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and
shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the approving
authority and the property owner. The Board shall maintain a record of changes
granted in conditions. Any changes in the conditions shall be filed with the
Register of Deeds as provided herein.
      (4)   Basis of decisions. Every decision of the Board shall be based upon
findings of fact, and every such finding shall be supported in the record and
proceedings of the Board.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
§ 155.035 GENERAL.
   (A)   Classification. To classify, regulate, and restrict the locations of
uses and locations of buildings designated for specific areas, and to regulate
and determine the areas of yards, courts, and other open spaces within or
surrounding such buildings, the city is hereby divided into zoning districts as
prescribed in this subchapter. To the extent possible, these zoning districts
are established under the city's proposed Master Land Use Plan.
   (B)   Zoning Map.
      (1)   Boundaries. The boundaries of these districts are hereby
established as shown on the City of Hamtramck Official Zoning Map, referred
hereinafter as "the Map", which accompanies this chapter as Appendix A, and
which map, with all notations, references and other information shown thereon,
shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully described herein.
      (2)   Changes to boundaries. Under this chapter, if changes are made in
district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Map, such changes shall be
made on the Map after the amendment has been approved by the City Council,
together with an entry on the Map as follows: amended date, Ordinance No. ().
      (3)   Official copies. Two copies of this chapter and the Map are to be
maintained and kept up-to-date. One copy shall be filed with the code official
and the other shall be filed with the City Clerk, whose copy shall be the final
authority as to the current zoning status of lands, buildings, and other
structures in the city.
      (4)   District boundaries interpreted. If, due to the scale, lack of
details, or illegibility of the Map, there is any uncertainty, contradiction,
or conflict as to the intended location of any zoning district boundaries shown
thereon, interpretation concerning the exact location of district boundary
lines shall be determined by the Board upon written application. The Board, in
arriving at a decision on such matters, shall apply the following standards:
         (a)   The boundaries of zoning districts are intended to follow
centerlines of alleys, streets, or other rights-of-way, or be parallel or
perpendicular thereto, unless such district boundary lines are otherwise
clearly indicated on the Map;
         (b)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they
approximately follow lot of record lines, such lot lines shall be construed to
be boundaries;
         (c)   In unsubdivided property, or where a district boundary divides a
lot of record, the location of such boundary, unless shown by dimensions on the
Map, shall be determined by use of the map scale shown thereon.
      (5)   Zoning status of public, semi-public, and parks/open space
designations. Where the Map indicates public, semi-public, or parks/open space,
such areas shall be considered to be zoned in the area that borders the area in
question on not less than three sides. If a clear distinction cannot be made,
then the zoning shall be considered R, except as otherwise indicated in this
section. For clarification purposes the following commonly known locations
shall be considered to be placed in the following districts:
         (a)   R District, sites of:
            1.   Corinthian Baptist Church;
            2.   Kosciuszko Middle School;
            3.   Hamtramck Fire Department;
            4.   Hamtramck Public Library;
            5.   St. Ladislaus Church properties;
            6.   Immaculate Conception Church properties;
            7.   Hamtramck High School and Community Center;
            8.   Our Lady Queen of Apostles Church properties;
            9.   Pulaski Park;
            10.   St. Florian Church properties;
            11.   St. Peter Zion, A.M.E. Church properties;
            12.   Hamtramck City Hall;
            13.   Dickinson Elementary School;
            14.   St. Joseph Living Center properties;
            15.   Tau Beta;
            16.   Veterans' Memorial Park, Playfair, and Keyworth stadium;
            17.   Holbrook Elementary School; and
            18.   Eastside of Conant, between Oliver and Dorothy.
         (b)   I District, sites of:
            1.   Wayne County Jail; and
            2.   Southeast corner of Conant and Holbrook.
      (6)   Annexed territory. Any territory hereafter annexed shall
automatically, upon such annexation, be classified as "Residential" and shall
be subject to all conditions and regulations applicable to property in such
district.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.036 CONFORMITY TO ORDINANCE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Scope. Zoning effects every structure and use. No structure, building,
or land shall be used, occupied, erected, constructed, moved, or altered,
except in conformity with the regulations specified for that zoning district.
Unless a use is specifically permitted in a particular zoning district, the use
shall be prohibited in that zoning district. If any building, structure, or
land is used, erected, altered, or occupied contrary to law or to the
provisions of this chapter, such building, structure, or use shall be declared
a nuisance and shall be required to be vacated, torn down, or abated by any
legal means and shall not be used or occupied until the building, structure, or
use has been brought into compliance.
   (B)   Area, bulk, and height requirements. Except as otherwise provided,
regulations governing land and building use, minimum lot size, lot area per
dwelling unit, building height, building placement, required yards, and other
pertinent factors are hereby established as stated in the detailed provisions
for each of the zoning districts and shall apply uniformly to each class or
kind of structure, land, or use within the appropriate district.
   (C)   Application of regulations. The regulations set by this chapter shall
be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure, land, or use. All buildings, structures, or land may hereafter be
used, constructed, altered, or occupied only when in conformity with all of the
regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. No
building or other structure shall hereafter be altered to accommodate or house
a greater number of persons or families, or to have narrower or smaller rear
yards, front yards, or other side yards than permitted by the district in which
it is located. No lot existing when this chapter or subsequent amendment became
effective shall be subdivided or reduced in dimension or area below the minimum
requirements of the district in which the lot is located. Lots created after
the effective date of this chapter shall meet the minimum requirements
established by this chapter.
   (D)   Uses.
      (1)   General. The principal objective of this chapter is to provide for
an orderly arrangement of compatible buildings and land uses and for the proper
location of all types of uses required for the social and economic welfare of
the community. To accomplish this objective, each type and kind of use is
classified as permitted in one or more of the various districts established by
this chapter. However, in addition to those uses specifically classified and
permitted in each district, there are certain additional uses that may be
allowed because of the unusual characteristics of the service the use provides
to the public. These special land uses require particular consideration as to
their proper location to adjacent, established, or intended uses, or to the
planned growth of the community. The conditions controlling the locations and
operation of such special land uses are established by applicable sections of
this chapter.
      (2)   Permitted uses. In each zoning district a "permitted use" shall be
a use of land or buildings subject to the minimum requirements specified for
such use in the zoning district in which such use is located, plus applicable
requirements found elsewhere in this chapter.
      (3)   Special land uses. A special land use shall be a use of land or
buildings that may be permitted in that district only after following special
procedures designed to ensure site and use compatibility with existing or
proposed surrounding land uses. In evaluating and deciding each application for
such permission, the Commission shall apply the standards contained in §§
155.185 through
155.188 and any special conditions imposed for that use. Uses are permitted
within the various districts described in this chapter and as otherwise
provided herein.
      (4)   Unclassified uses. The city recognizes that all possible uses and
variations of uses that might arise cannot reasonably be listed or categorized.
Mixed uses/sites or any use not specifically mentioned or about which there is
any question shall be administratively classified by comparison with other uses
identified in the districts described in this chapter. If the proposed use
resembles identified uses in terms of intensity and character, and is
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and the individual district
classification, the use shall be considered as a permitted use within the
appropriate district classification, subject to the regulations for the use it
most nearly resembles. If a use does not resemble other identified allowable
uses within a district, the use may be permitted as determined by the Board
after a public hearing as a variance to this chapter under §§
155.020 through
155.024.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
§ 155.050 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R).
   (A)   Intent. The Residential District (R) is established to encourage
integration of a range of housing types and to enhance individual and
neighborhood safety in a workable neighborhood oriented around the five-minute
walk.
   (B)   Permitted uses. In the R District, only the following uses shall be
permitted subject to the provisions of this chapter:
      (1)   Accessory buildings and uses as identified in this subchapter;
      (2)   Condominiums, provided that more than four unrelated people shall
be permitted to reside in one dwelling unit;
      (3)   Dwellings, single-family detached, provided that more than four
unrelated people shall be permitted to reside in one dwelling unit;
      (4)   Dwellings, two-family, provided that more than four unrelated
people shall be permitted to reside in one dwelling unit;
      (5)   Home occupations as permitted in §
155.120;
      (6)   Public utility stations;
      (7)   Public owned and operated parks and outdoor recreation facilities
and open space;
      (8)   Public services;
      (9)   Parochial, private, public, or charter elementary, junior high, and
high schools;
      (10)   Religious, cultural, and fraternal activities;
      (11)   Congregate residences;
      (12)   Townhouses;
      (13)   Planned Unit Developments; and
      (14)   Apartment houses with no more than six units.
   (C)   Uses subject to special land use approval. In the R District, only the
following uses shall be permitted, subject to the limitations of the special
land use process as prescribed by this chapter:
      (1)   Apartment houses with more than six units;
      (2)   Bars;
      (3)   Boarding houses;
      (4)   Commercial, light;
      (5)   Commercial retail sales and service;
      (6)   Commercial retail sales, food;
      (7)   Cultural services;
      (8)   Day care, family;
      (9)   Day care, group;
      (10)   Microbrewery;
      (11)   Mixed-use buildings containing a residential single-family
dwelling or dwellings and no more than one of the special land uses identified
in this section;
      (12)   Mortuary, funeral homes;
      (13)   Motel, hotel;
      (14)   Non-K-12 school, commercial;
      (15)   Production filming;
      (16)   Repair services;
      (17)   Restaurant; and
      (18)   State licensed residential facilities.
      (19)   Any two- or multiple-family residential structure dwelling unit
that is less than 500 square feet in floor area.
      (20)   Any single-family residential structure that is less than 600
square feet in floor area.
   (D)   Accessory buildings and uses. The following accessory buildings and
uses shall be permitted in the R District, subject to the conditions set forth
in § 155.111, as applicable:
      (1)   Accessory dwelling units;
      (2)   Garage, private;
      (3)   Gazebos or arbors;
      (4)   Household pets;
      (5)   Parking lots shall be permitted as an accessory use for special
land uses;
      (6)   Private swimming pools; and
      (7)   Sheds.
   (E)   Area, height, and bulk requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot size in square feet: 2,700.
      (2)   Maximum lot size in square feet: 6,000.
      (3)   Minimum lot dimensions in feet: width: 30; depth: 60.
      (4)   Maximum height of building: in stories: three; in feet: 35.
      (5)   Minimum yard setback in feet: front: six and within two feet of
adjacent structures; rear: 20; sides: five and one-half combined with a minimum
of two and one-half on not less than one side.
      (6)   Minimum floor area per single-family dwelling unit (in square
feet): 600.
      (7)   Minimum floor area per dwelling unit in a two- or multiple-family
dwelling unit (in square feet): 500.
      (8)   Maximum lot coverage by all buildings: 75%.
   (F)   Structure and site requirements.
      (1)   All new single- and two-family dwelling units shall have a two-car
garage on the same lot. Two off-street parking spaces may be provided in lieu
of a garage. Pervious surfaces may be used, including porous asphalt and
permeable pavers. Gravel and other loose aggregates are prohibited.
      (2)   Parking lots shall be screened from upper unit views, with trees,
trellises, or carports.
      (3)   The street address shall be attached to the back gate.
      (4)   Two garbage cans placed on an elevated rack or in an enclosed
building are required for each dwelling unit; in the event of a semi- or fully-
automated system of refuse collection, this provision is waived.
      (5)   Only vertically oriented windows shall be permitted on the front
façade.
      (6)   The front door shall face the front lot line.
      (7)   All new houses shall have a minimum twenty-four inch finished first
floor line above grade.
      (8)   No new driveways or curb cuts in residential zones shall be
permitted unless authorized by this chapter.
         (a)   A new curb cut for a driveway shall only be allowed on lots with
a residential structure.
         (b)   A new curb cut for a driveway may be approved if the driveway
design meets the standards of §
155.114(F).
         (c)   A permit from the Building Department must be approved before
construction begins on a new curb cut or driveway.
      (9)   Unless the entire front yard is 100 square feet or less, not less
than 50% of the uncovered lot shall be landscaped with organic materials not
prohibited by this chapter or other ordinances of the City of Hamtramck.
      (10)   All detached single- or two-family dwellings shall have a roof
pitch of eight-twelve or greater.
      (11)   Mansard roofs shall not be permitted.
      (12)   All dwelling units shall be consistent with surrounding housing
styles.
      (13)   Commercial public pedestrian entrances shall not be permitted on
the side of the building, with the exception of buildings located on corner
lots. Public pedestrian entrances for buildings on corner lots may occur only
on the front of the building, or the side of the building that is adjacent to
the public right-of-way.
      (14)   Property owners may receive approval for a rear setback of 15 feet
and a maximum lot coverage of 80% only if the following conditions are met:
         (a)   Remove portions of existing, non-permeable pavement as approved
by the Building Department, and
         (b)   Install one of the following flood prevention measures:
permeable paving, green roof, or other permanent water retention systems as
approved by the Building Department. Rain barrels do not qualify as a permanent
water retention system.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021; Am. Ord. passed 8-24-2021; Am.
Ord. —, passed 3-8-2022; Am. Ord. —, passed 12-12-2023; Am. Res. 2025-12b,
passed 2-11-2025; Am. Res. 2026-15, passed 1-27-2026)
§ 155.051 MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RM).
   (A)   Intent. The Multiple Family Residential District (RM) is intended to
serve the residential needs of families and single persons desiring greater
density, apartment-type of accommodation with central services, as opposed to
the residential pattern found in the R District.
   (B)   Permitted uses. In the RM District, only the following uses shall be
permitted subject to the provisions of this chapter:
      (1)   Accessory buildings and uses as identified in this subchapter;
      (2)   Apartment houses;
      (3)   Boarding houses;
      (4)   Condominiums;
      (5)   Day care, family;
      (6)   Day care, group;
      (7)   Recreation, outdoor; and
      (8)   Townhouses.
   (C)   Uses subject to special land use approval. In the RM District, only
the following uses shall be permitted, subject to the requirements of the
special land use process as prescribed by §§
155.185 through
155.188:
      (1)   Hotel.
      (2)   Parking lots.
      (3)   An apartment house with a grocery store, laundromat, barber shop,
beauty salon, confectionery, or delicatessen on the ground floor that is open
to patrons other than residents of the apartment house.
      (4)   Any residential structure with one or more dwelling unit that is
less than 500 square feet in floor area.
   (D)   Accessory buildings and uses. The following accessory buildings and
uses shall be permitted in the RM District:
      (1)   Courts;
      (2)   Garage, private;
      (3)   Gazebos, arbors;
      (4)   Household pets;
      (5)   Private swimming pools;
      (6)   Sheds.
   (E)   Area, height, and bulk requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot size in square feet: 6,000.
      (2)   Minimum lot dimensions in feet: width: 60; depth: 60.
      (3)   Maximum height of building: see side yard setback.
      (4)   Minimum yard setback in feet: front: 12; rear: 20; sides: every lot
upon which a multiple- family dwelling is erected shall be provided with a side
yard on each side of such lot. Each such yard shall have a minimum width of
five feet which shall be increased one one-half foot for each story by which
the height of the main building exceeds two stories, and also by one-half foot
for each ten feet or part thereof by which the length of the main building
exceeds 50 feet in overall dimension along the side yard.
      (5)   Maximum lot coverage by all buildings: 80%.
   (F)   Structure and site requirements.
      (1)   All new single- and two-family dwelling units shall have a two-car
garage on the same lot.
      (2)   Any fences to be erected on the side and rear lot lines under §§
155.135 through
155.138.
      (3)   A dumpster shall be provided on site and appropriately screened
under §
155.117 if the use houses more than two families.
      (4)   All unpaved areas of the lot shall be landscaped and maintained
under §
155.118.
      (5)   The street address shall be attached to the front and back gate.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021; Am. Ord. —, passed 12-12-2023)
COMMERCIAL ZONES
§ 155.065 MULTI-USE DISTRICT (C2).
   (A)   Intent. The Multi-Use District (C2) is established to encourage a
diversity of compatible land uses, which may include a mixture of residential,
office, retail, recreational, office research, light manufacturing, and other
miscellaneous uses within an aesthetically attractive environment conducive to
the development and protection against nuisance type uses and combinations.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Residential uses. In the C2 District, only the following
residential uses shall be permitted subject to the provisions of this chapter:
         (a)   Accessory buildings and uses as identified in this subchapter;
         (b)   Condominiums;
         (c)   Dwellings, single-family detached;
         (d)   Dwellings, two-family;
         (e)   Public owned and operated parks and outdoor recreation
facilities and open space;
         (f)   Public services;
         (g)   Parochial, private, public, or charter elementary, junior high,
and high schools;
         (h)   Religious, cultural, and fraternal activities;
         (i)   Congregate residences;
         (j)   State licensed residential facilities;
         (k)   Townhouses;
         (l)   Home occupations as defined in §
155.120(B); and
         (m)   Apartment houses.
      (2)   Commercial uses. In the C2 District, only the following commercial
uses shall be permitted subject to the provisions of this chapter:
         (a)   Amusement centers;
         (b)   Bakeries;
         (c)   Bars;
         (d)   Brewery;
         (e)   Brewpub;
         (f)   Business or financial services, unless specifically addressed as
a special land use in this district or specifically prohibited by this chapter;
         (g)   Butchers that do not process live farm animals;
         (h)   Commercial, light;
         (i)   Commercial retail sales and services, unless specifically
addressed as a special land use in this district or specifically prohibited by
this chapter;
         (j)   Commercial retail sales, food;
         (k)   Commercial schools;
         (l)   Confectioneries;
         (m)   Delicatessens;
         (n)   Distillery;
         (o)   Grocery stores;
         (p)   Laundromats;
         (q)   Mortuary, funeral home;
         (r)   Motel, hotel;
         (s)   Museums;
         (t)   Open air business uses;
         (u)   Production filming;
         (v)   Professional offices, such as medical and dental clinics,
accountants, and attorneys at law;
         (w)   Restaurants, take-out;
         (x)   Restaurants;
         (y)   Theatres;
         (z)   Establishments with sidewalk cafes on public sidewalks; and
         (aa)   Mixed-use commercial and residential uses provided that the
commercial use is a permitted use in the C2 District.
   (C)   Uses subject to special land use approval. In the C2 District, only
the following uses shall be permitted, subject to the requirements of the
special land use process as prescribed by §§
155.185 through
155.188:
      (1)   Laboratory;
      (2)   Light manufacturing plants;
      (3)   Parking lots with overnight parking prohibited except for
residential designated and labeled parking spots; and
      (4)   Event halls.
   (D)   Accessory buildings and uses. The following accessory buildings and
uses shall be permitted in the C2 District, subject to the conditions set forth
in §
155.111, as applicable:
      (1)   Garage, private;
      (2)   Private swimming pools;
      (3)   Courts;
      (4)   Accessory shipping containers;
      (5)   Sheds; and
      (6)   Parking lots with overnight parking prohibited except for
residential designated and labeled parking spots.
   (E)   Area, height, and bulk requirements.
      (1)   Residential uses. The area, height, and bulk requirements in the R
District shall apply to all residential uses in the C2 District.
      (2)   Commercial uses. The following area, height, and bulk requirements
shall apply to all commercial uses in the C2 District.
         (a)   All new buildings shall be constructed within one foot of the
front lot line. All new buildings on corner lots shall also be constructed
within one foot of the side lot line.
         (b)   Minimum lot size in square feet: none, provided that the
provisions of off-street loading berth requirements are complied with.
         (c)   Minimum lot dimensions in feet: width: none; depth: none.
         (d)   Maximum height of building: four stories; 60 feet.
         (e)   Minimum yard setback in feet: front: none, provided that the
provisions of off-street loading berth requirements are complied with; rear:
none, provided that the provisions of off-street loading berth requirements are
complied with; sides: none, provided that the provisions of off-street loading
berth requirements are met.
         (f)   Maximum lot coverage by all buildings: none.
   (F)   Structure and site requirements. The structure and site requirements
listed in this section shall apply only to commercial uses:
      (1)   All new buildings shall be constructed within one foot of the front
lot line and side lot line on corner lots. Entryways may be recessed to allow
for traditional storefront entryways consistent with the district character.
See diagram below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3c2c3f2dd391eb5f919bb22a33f0ce05df359f04/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3449.png]
 
      (2)   All buildings shall have not less than one pedestrian entrance on
the front lot line.
      (3)   The street number of not less than three inches in height shall be
displayed above the front door and shall be painted on the rear door of the
building.
      (4)   Roof-mounted appliances shall be enclosed on all sides by view
obscuring screening so as not to be visible from off the site from any angle.
If such appliances or equipment shall be placed on the ground, the above
screening requirements shall apply.
      (5)   All new buildings, additions, and significant exterior changes or
renovations shall be found to be architecturally compatible with adjacent
buildings. In making such a determination, the following shall be considered:
         (a)   Not less than 90% of the exterior finish material on all facades
that face a street shall be limited to the following: glass, brick, cut stone,
cast stone, synthetic stone, coarsely textured stucco, pressure treated wood,
standing seam metal (on roofing or awnings only), ceramic tile, integrally
tinted textured masonry block, concrete (precast or cast-in-place), or concrete
siding. Pressure treated wood can be a secondary material comprising only up to
50% of exterior finish material, and the durability of the wood is subject to
approval by the Building Department. E.I.F.S. may also be used on the second
story and above, but shall not cover more than 75% of the façade.On the second
story and above, no more than 75% E.I.F.S. shall be permitted. Vinyl siding
shall not be allowed.
         (b)   Colors shall be compatible with the majority of the adjacent
buildings in the district.
         (c)   The back of the building shall be constructed of brick or
painted or dyed concrete blocks.
         (d)   Blank walls shall not face a public street. Walls facing a
public street shall include windows and architectural features customarily
found on the front façade of a building, such as awnings, cornice work, edge
detailing, or decorative materials.
         (e)   Each storefront shall have window openings equal to at least 50%
of the façade between two feet and eight feet from the ground. The wood or
metal armature of such storefronts shall be painted, bronze, or powder-coated.
The glazed area of a façade above the ground floor shall not exceed 35% of the
total window area.
         (f)   Walls, displays, stored merchandise, signs, or other items shall
not obstruct views into the store from street side windows.
         (g)   Windows shall have a light transmission factor of 80% or
greater.
         (h)   Windows at or above the second story shall not be covered on the
exterior.
         (i)   Upper-story windows that are replaced or exposed shall retain
their original size, orientation, and shape so that the configuration of the
façade is not changed.
         (j)   Exterior security gates or grills placed on a street-facing
façade of a non- residential building shall be retractable, shall remain open
and retracted when the use is open to the public or otherwise in operation.
They shall stay in operational condition, shall not be unfinished metal, and
shall not have any signs. No security gate shall be installed prior to received
façade review approval from the Planning Commission.
         (k)   Metal overhead doors for interior-loading areas or loading docks
shall not face a public street. Loading docks shall be not be permitted on the
front of a building.
         (l)   Cantilevered mansard roofs shall not be permitted.
         (m)   All HVAC equipment shall be located on the roof or within the
building. If such equipment is installed on the roof, it shall be screened by a
parapet wall so as not to be visible from street level. Window air conditioners
shall not be permitted in the front façade windows.
         (n)   Public pedestrian entrances shall not be permitted on the side
of the building, with the exception of buildings located on corner lots. Public
pedestrian entrances for buildings on corner lots may occur only on the front
of the building, or the side of the building that is adjacent to the public
right-of-way.
      (6)   No new driveways, service drives, or curb cuts shall be permitted
off of any public road.
      (7)   A screenwall shall be built along the front lot line and aligned
with the adjacent building façade for all new parking lots. Screen walls shall
be between two and one-half to three feet in height and made of brick, stone,
or other masonry materials matching the building. Screenwalls may have openings
of a maximum of 25 feet for existing curb cuts to allow vehicular and
pedestrian access.
      (8)   Parking lots shall be permitted in the area of a maximum of 30 feet
off of the rear lot line and behind the main building, unless otherwise
approved for good reason by the zoning official and the building official.
      (9)   There shall be not less than 20 feet of clear space between every
residential building and another main building on the same lot.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021; Am. Ord. passed 8-24-2021; Am.
Ord. —, passed 3-8-2022; Am. Ord. —, passed 12-12-2023; Am. Res. 2024-75b,
passed 8-13-2024; Am. Res. 2025-12b, passed 2-11-2025; Am. Res. 2025-94b,
passed 8-26-2025; Am. Res. 2026-15, passed 1-27-2026)
§ 155.066 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CBD).
   (A)   Intent. The Central Business District (CBD) is established to
encourage a form of development that shall achieve the physical qualities
necessary to maintain and enhance the economic vitality of downtown Hamtramck,
promote the preservation and restoration of historic buildings, ensure that new
buildings are compatible with and enhance the downtown and reflect the city's
cultural, social, economic, and architectural heritage, and maintain uses that
relate to the pedestrian. The CBD should promote unique, attractive, pedestrian
and bicycle-friendly places with a streetscape that prioritizes pedestrian
circulation.
   (B)   Permitted uses. In the CBD, all business establishments shall be
retail or service establishments that deal directly with customers. All goods
produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premise. Only the
following uses shall be permitted subject to the provisions of this chapter:
      (1)   Accessory buildings and uses as identified in this subchapter;
      (2)   Amusement centers;
      (3)   Bakeries;
      (4)   Bars;
      (5)   Brewery;
      (6)   Brewpub;
      (7)   Business or financial services, unless specifically addressed as a
special land use in this district or specifically prohibited by this chapter;
      (8)   Butchers that do not process live farm animals;
      (9)   Clothing stores;
      (10)   Coffee houses;
      (11)   Commercial, light;
      (12)   Commercial retail sales and services, unless specifically
addressed as a special land use in this district or specifically prohibited by
this chapter;
      (13)   Commercial retail sales, food;
      (14)   Confectioneries;
      (15)   Cultural services;
      (16)   Delicatessens;
      (17)   Distillery;
      (18)   Fabric stores;
      (19)   Florists;
      (20)   Fruit and vegetable stores;
      (21)   Grocery stores;
      (22)   Hardware stores;
      (23)   Motel, hotel;
      (24)   Production filming;
      (25)   Restaurants;
      (26)   Restaurants, take-out;
      (27)   Specialty gift stores;
      (28)   Theatres;
      (29)   Establishments with sidewalk cafes on public sidewalks; and
      (30)   Mixed-use commercial and residential uses provided that the
commercial use is a permitted use in the CBD.
   (C)   Uses subject to special land use approval. In the CBD District, only
the following uses shall be permitted, subject to the requirements of the
special land use process as prescribed by §§
155.185 through
155.188:
      (1)   Parking lots with overnight parking prohibited except for
residential designated and labeled parking spots;
      (2)   Open air business uses; and
      (3)   Event halls.
   (D)   Accessory buildings and uses. The following accessory buildings and
uses shall be permitted in the CBD District, subject to the conditions set
forth in §
155.111, as applicable:
      (1)   Courts;
      (2)   Sheds;
      (3)   Parking lots with overnight parking prohibited except for
residential designated and labeled parking spots; and
      (4)   Garages, private.
   (E)   Area, height, and bulk requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot size in square feet: none, provided that the provisions
of off-street loading berth requirements are complied with.
      (2)   Minimum lot dimensions in feet: width: none; depth: none.
      (3)   Maximum height of building: four stories; 60 feet.
      (4)   Minimum yard setback in feet: Front: none, provided that the
provisions of off-street loading berth requirements are complied with; Rear:
none, provided that the provisions of off-street loading berth requirements are
complied with; Sides: none, provided that the provisions of off-street loading
berth requirements are met.
      (5)   Maximum lot coverage by all buildings: none.
   (F)   Structure and site requirements.
      (1)   All new buildings shall be constructed within one foot of the front
lot line. All new buildings on corner lots shall also be constructed within one
foot of the side lot line. Entryways may be recessed to allow for traditional
storefront entryways consistent with the district character.
      (2)   All buildings shall have not less than one pedestrian entrance on
the front lot line.
      (3)   Upper-floor awnings shall be permitted, provided that the awning is
only the width of the window, encroaches upon the front lot line no more than
three feet, and is not used as a backlit sign. Awnings, which shall be straight
sheds may supplement facades, except if used solely to cover entryways. Cubed
or curved awnings shall not be permitted. Awnings shall be between eight and 12
feet above sidewalk grade at the lower drip edge.
      (4)   The street number of not less than three inches in height shall be
displayed above the front door and shall be professionally painted in
appearance on the rear door of the building.
      (5)   Roof-mounted appliances shall be enclosed on all sides by view
obscuring screening so as not to be visible from off the site from any angle.
If such appliances or equipment shall be placed on the ground, the above
screening requirements shall apply.
      (6)   All new buildings and additions or structural alterations to the
footprint of existing buildings shall be found to be architecturally compatible
with adjacent buildings. Any existing building which façade shall be altered
after the effective date of this chapter or any subsequent amendment shall
conform to the guidelines listed in this division, except that no zoning permit
shall be issued until the Plan Commission has approved of the proposed changes
to the façade and is assured of its compliance with this chapter. Updates that
materially alter the facade no more than 20% may be approved administratively
if in compliance with this chapter. This division shall not apply to regular
maintenance of front facades. In making such a determination, the following
shall be considered:
         (a)   Not less than 90% of the exterior finish material on all facades
that face a street shall be limited to glass, brick, cut stone, cast stone,
synthetic stone, coarsely textured stucco, pressure treated wood, standing seam
metal (on roofing or awnings only), ceramic tile, integrally tinted textured
masonry block, concrete (precast or case-in-place), or concrete siding.
Pressure treated wood can be a secondary material comprising no more than 50%
of exterior finish material, and the durability of the wood is subject to
approval by the Building Department. On the second story and above, no more
than 75% E.I.F.S. shall be permitted. Vinyl siding shall not be allowed.
         (b)   Colors shall be compatible with the majority of the buildings in
the district.
         (c)   Blank walls shall not face a public street. Walls facing a
public street shall include windows and architectural features customarily
found on the front façade of a building, such as awnings, cornice work, edge
detailing, or decorative materials.
         (d)   Each storefront shall have ground level window openings not less
than 70% of the façade between two and eight from the ground. The wood or metal
armature of such storefronts shall be painted, bronze, or powder-coated. The
glazed area of a façade above the ground floor shall not exceed 35% of the
total window area. Window air conditioners shall not be permitted in the front
façade windows.
         (e)   Walls, displays, stored merchandise, signs, or other items shall
not obstruct views into the store from street side windows.
         (f)   Windows shall have a light transmission factor of 80% or
greater.
         (g)   Façade openings, other than ground floor display windows,
including porches, windows, and colonnades, shall be vertical in proportion.
         (h)   Windows at or above the second story shall not be covered on the
exterior.
         (i)   Upper-story windows that are replaced or exposed shall retain
their original size, orientation, and shape so that the configuration of the
façade is not changed.
         (j)   Exterior security gates or grills placed on a street-facing
façade of a non- residential building shall be retractable, shall remain open
and retracted when the use is open to the public or otherwise in operation.
They shall stay in operational condition, shall not be unfinished metal, and
shall not have any signs. No security gate shall be installed prior to received
façade review approval from the Planning Commission.
         (k)   Metal overhead doors for access to the building or interior-
loading area shall not face a public street. Overhead doors for any other use
shall not have less than 60% fenestration. If the overhead type door is not
less than 60% fenestration, then such door shall be permissible. Loading docks
and service areas shall be permitted only in the rear yard.
         (l)   Cantilevered mansard roofs shall not be permitted.
         (m)   The back of the building shall be constructed of brick, painted
or dyed concrete block, or the same materials used on the building's façade.
Painted concrete blocks shall be permitted for the back wall.
         (n)   Public pedestrian entrances shall not be permitted on the side
of the building, with the exception of buildings located on corner lots. Public
pedestrian entrances for buildings on corner lots may occur only on the front
of the building, or the side of the building that is adjacent to the public
right-of-way.
      (7)   All empty lots in the Central Business District shall be sodded and
maintained, unless such lot is specifically allowed for parking.
      (8)   A screenwall shall be built along the front lot line and aligned
with the adjacent building façade for all parking lots, and lots in the absence
of a building façade. Screen walls shall be between two and one-half to three
feet in height and made of brick, stone, or other masonry materials matching
the building. Screenwalls may have openings of a maximum of 24 feet for
existing curb cuts to allow vehicular and pedestrian access.
      (9)   Parking shall be permitted in the area of a maximum of 30 feet off
of the rear lot line and behind the main building, unless otherwise approved
for good reason by the zoning official and the building official. In the
absence of a building façade along the side lot line a screenwall shall be
constructed in accordance with §
155.116(C).
      (10)   No new driveways, service drives, or curb cuts shall be permitted
off any public road.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021; Am. Ord. passed 8-24-2021; Am.
Ord. —, passed 3-8-2022; Am. Ord. —, passed 12-12-2023; Am. Res. 2024-75b,
passed 8-13-2024; Am. Res. 2025-12b, passed 2-11-2025; Am. Res. 2025-94b,
passed 8-26-2025; Am. Res. 2026-15, passed 1-27-2026)
INDUSTRIAL ZONES
§ 155.080 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I).
   (A)   Intent.
      (1)   General. The Industrial District (I) is intended to provide land
for the more large-scale and intense manufacturing, fabricating and assembling
uses. While such uses may occasionally produce external physical effects
noticeable to a limited degree beyond the boundaries of the site, nevertheless,
every possible effort shall be made to minimize such effects. All uses located
within this district shall be so designed and operated as to observe the
performance standards and regulations of use contained herein.
      (2)   Prohibited uses. The following shall be considered prohibited uses:
         (a)   Any business whose function would create, or have a high
potential to create, an adverse or ongoing environmental impact.
         (b)   Any business whose function has historically demonstrated an
adverse or ongoing negative environmental impact.
         (c)   Any business that emits, releases, or causes to be dispersed a
contaminant or toxin in quantities that cause, alone or in reaction with other
contaminants or toxins, either of the following, and should not be considered
complete nor construed as a means of limiting the inclusion of other
businesses:
            1.   Injurious effects to the public health or safety, animal life,
plant life or significant economic value, or property;
            2.   Unreasonable interference with the comfortable enjoyment of
life and property.
         (d)   This would include, but certainly not be limited to, the
following listed types of businesses and those that perform similar purposes or
functions:
            1.   Incinerators;
            2.   Commercial or industrial waste processing, injection,
dispersion, or storage;
            3.   Scrap yards;
            4.   Any business having anything to do with the manufacture,
processing, transport, or storage of nuclear products or waste;
            5.   Recyclers of hazardous materials or of products containing
proportionately large amounts of hazardous materials.
   (B)   Permitted uses. In the I District, only the following uses shall be
permitted subject to the provisions of this chapter, and such uses shall also
comply with all applicable county, state, and federal health and pollution laws
and regulations:
      (1)   Accessory buildings and uses as identified in this subchapter;
      (2)   Automobile repair, minor;
      (3)   Automobile repair, major;
      (4)   Brewery;
      (5)   Brewpub;
      (6)   Commercial, heavy;
      (7)   Distillery;
      (8)   Industrial or research park;
      (9)   Laboratory;
      (10)   Manufacturing, heavy;
      (11)   Manufacturing, light;
      (12)   Manufacturing, medium;
      (13)   Open air business uses;
      (14)   Production filming;
      (15)   Public services;
      (16)   Public utility station;
      (17)   Recycling facility;
      (18)   Recreation, indoor;
      (19)   School, commercial;
      (20)   Warehouse, wholesale or storage; and
      (21)   Planned unit development
   (C)   Uses subject to special land use approval. In the I District subject
to the requirements of the special land use process as prescribed by §§
155.185 through
155.188, and such uses shall also comply with all applicable county, state, and
federal health and pollution laws and regulations:
      (1)   Automotive self-service stations;
      (2)   Automotive service stations;
      (3)   Open storage yards of construction contractor's equipment and
supplies, building materials, sand, gravel, or lumber; and
      (4)   Towers (e.g. cell phone, radio, transmitting).
   (D)   Area, height, and bulk requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot size in square feet: none, provided that the provisions
of off-street loading berth requirements are complied with.
      (2)   Minimum lot dimensions in feet: width: none; Depth: none.
      (3)   Maximum height of building: six stories; 80 feet. A building or
structure shall be permitted to exceed a building height of 80 feet provided
that such building or structure is not less than 300 feet from any R or RM
District.
      (4)   Minimum yard setback. For lots less than three acres in area, the
front yard shall have a minimum depth of 25 feet, the rear yard shall have a
minimum depth of 20 feet, and there shall be two side yards, each having a
width of not less than ten feet and the combined width of both side yards shall
not be less than 40 feet. For lots greater than three acres in area, the front
yard shall have a minimum depth of 40 feet, the rear yard shall have a minimum
depth of 25 feet, and the side yards shall be not less than 20 feet each.
      (5)   Maximum lot coverage by all buildings: 50%.
   (E)   Accessory buildings and uses, subject to the conditions set forth in §
155.111, as applicable.
      (1)   Parking lots; and
      (2)   Accessory shipping containers.
   (F)   Structure and site requirements.
      (1)   No owner or lessee, or their respective agents, shall construct or
maintain a barbed wire fence partially or wholly around any area along any
street, alley, sidewalk, or public right-of-way, except that upon the issuance
of a proper permit, fences not less than eight feet high may have barbed wire
attached to arms or brackets extending inward over such private property of the
person erecting or paying for such fence, but no such barbed wire shall be
placed at any point closer to grade level than eight feet. Fences may be
constructed only on lot lines enclosing property with industrial uses; provided
further, that when an industrial use adjoins a residential use, the arms shall
project over the industrial use of the lot line only.
      (2)   Upon the issuance of a proper permit, fences enclosing industrial
or commercial uses may be permitted to be 12 feet four inches in height,
subject to the consent of not less than 50% of all property owners within 500
feet from the fence.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021 ; Am. Res. 2026-15, passed 1-27-
2026)
NONCONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
§ 155.090 GENERAL.
   (A)   Intent. Within the districts established by this chapter there may
exist structures, lots, uses of land, and characteristics of uses which were
lawful before this chapter was adopted or amended, but which would be
prohibited or regulated under the term of this chapter or future amendments.
This chapter intends to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are
removed, but not to encourage their survival. With the knowledge that some
nonconforming uses, buildings, or structures shall not disappear, the city
desires and requires, in pursuit of the public interest, to distinguish between
nonconforming uses, buildings, or structures which shall be eliminated as
rapidly as possible and nonconforming uses, buildings, or structures which
ought to be given separate treatment.
   (B)   Board authority to permit some changes. In recognition of this fact,
the Board shall have the authority to permit some expansion or changes to
lawfully existing nonconforming uses based upon the standards set forth in this
subchapter.
   (C)   Status of alleged nonconformities. Those alleged nonconforming uses,
structures, or uses and structures in combination, which cannot be proved
conclusively to have been lawfully existing before the enactment or amendment
of this chapter, shall be declared illegal uses and shall be discontinued. In
other than criminal proceedings, the owner, occupant, or user shall have the
burden to show that the lot, use, or structure was lawfully established.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.091 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.
   If, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, lawful
use of land exists that is no longer permissible under the terms of this
chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as the land
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   No such nonconforming use shall be extended, enlarged, or increased to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter;
   (B)   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this chapter;
   (C)   If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period
of more than one year, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the
regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is
located.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.092 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   If, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, a lawful
structure exists that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by
reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, type of structure,
its location on the lot, or other restrictions of the structure, such structure
may be continued so long as the structure remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions: No such structure may be enlarged or altered in any
way which increases its nonconformity;
   (A)   If such structure or nonconforming portion of the structure be
destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50% of its state equalized
value at time of destruction, the structure shall not be reconstructed except
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   If such structure be removed for any reason or moved any distance
whatsoever, the structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
district in which the structure is located after the structure is removed or
relocated.
   (C)   If a nonconforming structure exists in a residential zone, the
structure may remain nonconforming as long as the use is converted to a
permitted use; therefore, the area, height, and bulk requirements shall be
waived.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.093 NONCONFORMING USE OF STRUCTURES AND LAND.
   If, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, a lawful
use of a structure and land in combination exists that would not be allowed in
the district under the terms of this chapter, such structure and land use may
be continued so long as the structure and land use remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter
in the district in which the structure is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which the
structure is located;
   (B)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of the
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use and which
existed when this chapter was adopted or amended, but no such use shall be
extended to occupy any land outside such building;
   (C)   Any structure or structure and land in combination in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded in whole or in part by a permitted use shall
thereafter conform to all regulations for the district in which such structure
is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed;
   (D)   When a nonconforming use of a structure or structure and premises in
combination is discontinued or ceases to exist for one year or for 12 months
during any three-year period or otherwise sooner abandoned, the structure or
structure and premises in combination shall not thereafter be used, except in
conformance with the regulations of the district in which the structure is
located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be excepted from this
provision.
   (E)   If nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-23-2021)
§ 155.094 USES SUBJECT TO SPECIAL LAND USE.
   Any use for which a special land use approval is required and is permitted
as provided in this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall,
without further action, be deemed a conforming use in the district. Such use
shall remain subject to all of the provisions of the special land use section
of this chapter for use, enlargement, change, or addition of activities.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.095 CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING USE.
   (A)   Any nonconforming use of a building, structure, or land may be changed
to another nonconforming use upon written findings of the Board that the
proposed use meets the following standards:
      (1)   There is no increase in the intensity of the use of the land,
building, or structure involved;
      (2)   Such change in use shall have an equal or less detrimental effect
or negative impact on neighboring property than the existing nonconforming use
the change is replacing; and
      (3)   The proposed use is more appropriate to the zoning district than
the existing nonconforming use and is desirable and useful in the pursuit of
the public interest.
   (B)   In permitting such a change in use, the Board may require appropriate
conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this
chapter, including the upgrading of the premises to comply as nearly as is
practicable with requirements of this chapter. Notice of approval of the change
in nonconforming use (including any conditions) shall be recorded with the
Wayne County Register of Deeds before the issuance of any permit or certificate
of compliance.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.096 EXPANSION OF NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   The Board may permit the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure
upon written findings that the following standards have been met:
      (1)   That the use, building, or structure was lawful when permitted or
constructed;
      (2)   Continuance thereof would not be contrary to the public health,
safety, or welfare or the spirit and intent of this chapter;
      (3)   That the use, building, or structure does not, and is not likely
to, significantly depress the value of nearby properties;
      (4)   That no useful purpose would be served by strict application of the
provisions or requirements of this chapter with which the use, building, or
structure does not conform; and
      (5)   Expansion shall not have an adverse impact on adjoining property.
   (B)   In permitting such an expansion of a nonconforming building or use,
the Board may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the
purpose and intent of this chapter, including upgrading the premises to comply
as nearly as is practicable with the requirements of this chapter. Notice of
approval, including any conditions attached, shall be recorded with the Wayne
County Register of Deeds before the issuance of any permit or certificate of
compliance.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.097 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE TO NONCONFORMITIES.
   (A)   General. This section applies to all nonconforming structures and
uses, except those which have been granted the right to expand by the Board as
noted in the above section.
   (B)   Work permitted. When the owner of property upon which a nonconforming
use or structure exists desires to modify or alter the site without increasing
the nonconformity of the use or structure, the site shall be brought into
compliance with this chapter to the maximum extent possible. On any structure
or building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be
done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs or on repair or
replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing to an extent not
exceeding 50% of the state equalized value of the building, but the cubic
content of the building or structure, or area of the use shall not be increased
from when this chapter was passed or amended. Nothing in this chapter shall be
deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any
building or structure or nonconforming use or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of
such official.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.098 CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIP.
   There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or management of any existing
nonconforming use of land, structures, and buildings, but there shall not be a
change in the nature or character of such nonconforming use, except to bring
the use into greater conformity.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.099 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   (A)   Single-family dwellings. In any district in which single-family
dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory
buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter. The yard setback dimensions and all
other requirements not involving area or width or both shall conform to the
regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance to yard
requirements may be obtained through approval of the Board.
   (B)   Nonconforming lots. If, when this chapter or any subsequent amendment
became effective, two or more lots, combinations of lots, and portions of lots
with a continuous frontage and single ownership are of record and if all or
part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width or area as
established by this chapter, the lands involved shall be considered an
undivided parcel for the purpose of this chapter, and no portion of the parcels
shall be used or occupied which does not meet lot width and area requirements
established by this chapter, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which
leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the requirement stated in
this chapter.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.100 CITY ACQUISITION OF NONCONFORMITIES.
   The city may acquire, by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, private
property or an interest in private property for the removal of nonconforming
uses and structures, except that the property shall not be used for public
housing. The Common Council may provide that the cost and expense of acquiring
private property be paid from general funds, or the cost and expense or a
portion thereof be assessed to a special district. The elimination of
nonconforming uses and structures in a zoned district as authorized under the
City and Village Zoning Act and this chapter is declared to be for a public
use. The Common Council may institute and prosecute proceedings for the
condemnation of nonconforming uses and structures under the power of eminent
domain under the City Charter or under the Acquisition of Property by State
Agencies and Public Corporations Act, Act No. 149 of the Public Acts of 1911,
as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 213.21 to 213.41 or any other applicable statute.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 155.110 EXISTING BUILDINGS AND USES.
   (A)   General. Lawfully established buildings and uses in existence when
this chapter became effective shall be permitted to have their existing use or
occupancy continued, except as otherwise authorized in this chapter or in state
law, and such continued use is not dangerous to life.
   (B)   Additions, alterations, or repairs. Additions, alterations, or repairs
shall be permitted to be made to any building or use without requiring the
existing building or use to comply with the requirements of this chapter, and
the addition, alteration, or repair conforms to that required for a new
building or use.
   (C)   Maintenance. All buildings or uses, both existing and new, and all
parts thereof, shall be maintained. The owner or designated agent shall be
responsible for the maintenance of buildings and parcels of land. To determine
compliance with this section, the code official shall be permitted to cause any
structure or use to be inspected.
   (D)   Moved and temporary buildings, structures, and uses. Buildings or
structures moved into or within the city shall comply with the provisions of
this chapter for new buildings and structures. Temporary buildings, structures,
and uses, such as reviewing stands and other miscellaneous structures, sheds,
canopies, booths, tents, or fences, shall be permitted to be erected, and a
special approval is received from the code official for a limited period of
time. Temporary buildings or structures shall be completely removed upon the
expiration of the time limit stated in the permit.
   (E)   Illegal uses. Uses that were illegally established before the adoption
of this chapter shall remain illegal and subject to the penalty provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.111 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   (A)   General. Accessory buildings shall occupy the same lot as the
principal use or main building.
   (B)   Separation from main building. All accessory buildings shall be
separated from the main building by no less than ten feet. Attached private
garages shall contain the setback requirements for the main building, and that
such attached private garages are part of condominium developments. Attached
accessory dwelling units shall be considered a component of the principal
structure and shall comply with the height and setback requirements for the
principal structure.
   (C)   Private garage. An accessory building used as a private garage shall
be permitted to be located in the rear yard or side yard and that the such
structure is setback not less than one foot and no more than three feet from
the rear lot line, not less than ten feet from the principal building, and not
less than a combined six feet on the sides with a minimum of not less than one
foot on one side. Private garages shall not encroach into any recorded
easements. A private garage shall be constructed with access only from a public
alley. A garage shall be permitted to be constructed with access from a public
street only if an accessible public alley does not exist or if there is an
existing city authorized curb cut and an existing city authorized driveway.
(Please reference definition of "garage, private" for more details).
   (D)   Shipping containers. No active commercial use, no power, no plumbing,
no heat, no cooling, where the structure is located shall be allowed as dry
storage use only in the Multi-Use District and Industrial District, subject to
the following requirements:
      (1)   Shipping containers shall meet the requirements of this section and
all other applicable construction codes.
      (2)   Shipping containers shall be on a combined lot or same lot with
main commercial use building.
      (3)   Opaque fence or wall installation is required to screen the
shipping container within the Multi-Use District. The fence or wall must match
the height of the structure and screen the shipping container from street view
and must have no gaps, holes, or missing sections.
      (4)   Shipping containers greater than 80 square feet and up to 600
square feet shall be required to be set on a four-inch concrete slab or other
hard surface, as approved by the zoning official and building official, and
have rat-walling around.
      (5)   Shipping containers greater than 600 square feet shall be required
to rest on a foundation.
      (6)   Property owners or tenants applying for a newly placed shipping
container are required to apply for a general use permit.
         (a)   General use permits must be renewed every three years.
         (b)   General use permits must be submitted by the property owner or
submitted by the property tenant with the property owner's approval.
         (c)   General use permits must be renewed should the property be sold
to a new owner or should a new tenant arrive.
         (d)   Once applicant applies for a general use permit, the shipping
container will be inspected by the Building Inspector. Reinspection will follow
renewal or new property ownership and/or lease agreement.
      (7)   Shipping container dimensional requirements:
         (a)   Lot coverage. Lot coverage of the shipping containers shall be
calculated to the total maximum log coverage of the lot.
         (b)   Setbacks. Minimum shipping container setback: Front: none; Rear:
one foot; Sides: six feet or subject to approval for good reason by the Zoning
Official and the Building Official. Shipping containers shall be constructed
with a setback of ten feet from any residential dwelling.
         (c)   Height. None.
         (d)   Stacking of shipping containers is prohibited.
      (8)   No shipping container shall be located in the front yard.
   (E)   Sheds. No active commercial use, no power, no plumbing, no heat, no
cooling, where the structure is located shall be allowed as dry storage use
only in the Residential District, Central Business District, and Multi-Use
District, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Sheds shall meet the requirements of this section and all other
applicable construction codes.
      (2)   Sheds in the Residential District and Central Business District
shall be on a combined lot or same lot with main residential use building.
      (3)   Sheds in the Multi-Use District may be on a combined lot or same
lot with main commercial use building or subject to be a standalone structure
for good reason by the Zoning Official and Building Official. Standalone
structures must be adjacent to the commercial property or shared corner.
Standalone structures must be used for the registered, primary business and
cannot be leased.
      (4)   Sheds greater than 80 square feet and up to 600 square feet shall
be required to be set on a concrete slab and have rat-walling around.
      (5)   Sheds greater than 600 square feet shall be required to rest on a
foundation.
      (6)   Property owners or tenants applying for newly placed sheds over 80
square feet are required to apply for a general use permit.
         (a)   General use permits must be renewed every three years.
         (b)   General use permits must be submitted by the property owner or
submitted by the property tenant with the property owner's approval.
         (c)   General use permits must be renewed should the property be sold
to a new owner or should a new tenant arrive.
         (d)   Once applicant applies for a general use permit, the shed will
be inspected by the Building Inspector. Reinspection will follow renewal or new
property ownership and/or lease agreement.
      (7)   Shed dimensional requirements:
         (a)   Lot coverage. Lot coverage of the shipping containers shall be
calculated to the total maximum log coverage of the lot, if applicable.
         (b)   Setbacks. Minimum shed setback: Front: none; Rear: one foot;
Sides: six feet or subject to approval for good reason by the zoning official
and the building official. Sheds shall be constructed with a setback of ten
feet from any residential dwelling.
         (c)   Height. None.
      (8)   No shed shall be located in the front yard.
   (F)   Solar energy systems. Solar energy systems, designed to service the
energy needs of the property where the structure is located shall be allowed as
an accessory structure in all districts, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Solar energy systems shall meet the requirements of this section
and all other applicable construction codes.
      (2)   The design of the solar energy system shall conform to applicable
industry standards.
      (3)   Solar energy systems shall be screened per the discretion of the
Community and Economic Development Department.
      (4)   Solar energy systems shall meet height and setback requirements of
the zoning district in which they are located.
      (5)   Solar energy systems shall be securely anchored to the ground or a
permanent structure.
      (6)   A ground-mounted solar energy system shall comply with the
accessory structure restrictions contained in the zoning district where it is
located.
      (7)   All exterior electrical and/or plumbing lines must be buried below
the surface of the ground in compliance with current code.
      (8)   Any solar energy system not used for one year or longer shall be
deemed to be abandoned and shall be promptly dismantled and removed from the
property by the owner of the solar energy system.
      (9)   Upon request, the plan commission may grant waivers of the setback
or height requirements, provided that the waiver will not present any undue
hardships on adjoining properties. The Plan Commission shall take into
consideration the support or opposition of adjacent property owners in granting
waivers of setback or height requirements.
   (G)   Accessory dwelling units. Accessory dwelling units shall be considered
a permitted use on lots of 3,000 square feet or larger in area or in the R,
Residential district, subject to the following standards:
      (1)   The unit shall be connected to public water and wastewater systems.
      (2)   The unit shall include, at a minimum, a kitchen, bathroom, and
sleeping area separate from the primary residence, and shall meet all
provisions of the Building Code and regulations of the City's Housing Code
before being issued a certificate of occupancy.
      (3)   The exterior design of an accessory unit, whether a detached
structure or attached to the principal structure, shall be compatible with the
existing residence on the lot.
      (4)   The building form, construction materials, dimensions, and
landscaping shall remain consistent with the principal structure and in harmony
with the character and scale of the surrounding neighborhood.
      (5)   The accessory dwelling shall not result in excessive traffic,
parking congestion, or noise.
      (6)   No more than one accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted on a
single parcel.
      (7)   Accessory dwelling units intended to be rented shall comply with
applicable City codes for non-owner-occupied units. An accessory dwelling unit
shall be owned by the same person who owns the principal dwelling unit and the
lot and shall not be sold separately from the principal structure and/or lot.
      (8)   Accessory dwelling units shall not encroach into any recorded
easements.
      (9)   Attached accessory dwelling unit dimensional requirements:
         (a)   Attached accessory dwelling units shall be considered a
component of the principal structure and shall comply with the dimensional
requirements for the principal structure.
         (b)   Attached accessory dwelling units shall occupy no more than one-
third of the total floor area of the principal structure.
      (10)   Detached accessory dwelling unit location and dimensional
requirements:
         (a)   Location. Detached accessory dwelling units shall be permitted
only in the rear yard of a lot.
         (b)   Setbacks. Detached accessory dwelling units shall be setback not
less than one foot and no more than three feet from the rear lot line, and not
less than a combined six feet from the side lot lines with a minimum of not
less than one foot on one side lot line. Detached accessory dwellings shall be
setback a minimum of ten feet from the principal building.
         (c)   Unit size. Detached accessory dwelling units shall have a
minimum building footprint no greater than 600 square feet. The total floor
area of all the floors within a detached accessory dwelling unit shall not be
area greater than 66% of the total floor area of all the floors within the
principal structure on the lot.
         (d)   Lot coverage. Detached accessory dwelling units shall be
included in the calculation for maximum lot coverage for the lot.
         (e)   Height. A detached accessory dwelling unit shall have no more
than two stories. A single story detached accessory dwelling unit shall not
exceed 14 feet in height. A two-story detached accessory dwelling unit shall
not exceed 28 feet in height.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021; Am. Ord. —, passed 12-12-2023;
Am. Res. 2026-15, passed 1-27-2026)
§ 155.112 ALLOWABLE PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS.
   (A)   General. Eaves, cornices, or other similar architectural features
shall be permitted to project into a required yard no more than 12 inches.
Chimneys shall be permitted to project no more than two feet, and the width of
any side yard is not reduced to less than 30 inches.
   (B)   Front yards. Open, unenclosed ramps, porches, platforms, or landings
not covered by a roof shall be permitted to extend no more than four feet into
the required front yard.
   (C)   Rear yards. Windows shall be permitted to project into a required rear
yard no more than six inches.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.113 PASSAGEWAYS.
   (A)   Residential entrances. There shall be a passageway not less than four
feet in width leading from the public way to the exterior entrance of each
dwelling unit in every residential building. The passageway shall be increased
by two feet for every story over two.
   (B)   Location of passageways. Passageways shall be permitted to be located
in that space set aside for required yards. Passageways shall be open and
unobstructed to the sky and shall be permitted to have such projections as
allowed for yards, and the users of the passageway have a clear walkway to the
public way. Any space between buildings or passageways that has less width than
that prescribed herein shall not be further reduced.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.114 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   General. When the main building is erected or experiences a change in
use or when such buildings is altered, enlarged, converted, or increased in
capacity, there shall be provided minimum off-street parking space with
adequate provision for ingress and egress by standard-sized vehicles under this
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Parking space requirements.
      (1)   Required number. The off-street parking spaces required for each
use permitted by this code shall not be less than that found in
Appendix B, and that any fractional parking space be computed as a whole space.
No parking spaces shall be required for any uses in the Central Business
District or Multi-Use (C2) District. Up to five spots of the parking
requirement may be waived in the Residential District per the discretion of the
CED Director when it is determined that doing so will not create a parking
shortage in the surrounding neighborhood.
Use Spots Standard Exception
Use                              Spots Standard                       Exception
Automotive self-service station, 2     Per service stall               
service station, repair shop
Automotive self-service station, 2     Per pump (includes the pump)    
service station, repair shop
Bar with dance entertainment     1     Per two people of maximum       
permit, over 3,600 square feet         capacity
Car wash (automatic)             1     Per employee                    
Car wash (self-service)          2     Per stall (includes the stall)  
Dwelling unit                    1     Per dwelling unit               
Financial institutions           2     Per drive up windows (includes  
                                       the window)
Financial institutions                 Per 300 square feet of gross    
                                       floor area
Hotels/motels                    1     Per guest room                  
Hotels/motels                    1     Per 500 square feet of common   
                                       area
Industrial/manufacturing/              Per 500 square feet of gross
research/warehousing             1     floor area                     C2
establishment
Laundromat                       2     Per set washer/dryer            
Medical/dental office            1     Per 200 square feet of gross    
                                       floor area
Mortuary/funeral home            1     Per 50 square feet of gross     
                                       floor area
Newly constructed professional         Per 1,000 square feet of gross
office/personal service over     1     floor area                      
3,600 square feet
Religious, cultural, and         1     Per every two seats based on    
fraternal activities                   maximum seating capacity
Religious, cultural, and         1     Per every 54 inches of bench    
fraternal activities                   seating
Schools (all)                    1     Per faculty member              
Schools with assembly halls      1     Per every two seats based on    
                                       maximum seating capacity
Theaters, assembly halls over    1     Per every two seats based on    
5,000 square feet                      maximum seating capacity
No parking requirements for the
Central Business District (CBD)                                       
and Multi-Use (C-2) District for
any use
 
      (2)   Combination of uses. If there is a combination of uses on a lot,
the required number of parking spaces shall be the sum of that found for each
use.
      (3)   Location of lot. The parking spaces required by this chapter shall
be provided on the same lot as the use or where the exclusive use of such is
provided on another lot nor more than 500 feet radially from the subject lot
within the same or less-restrictive zoning district.
      (4)   Sharing of parking. If, in the opinion of the code official,
sufficient evidence is provided by a property owner that different uses
operating in different structures at different times have a written agreement
to allow for the sharing of parking spaces that shall meet the parking space
requirements and location of lot as identified in this chapter, the code
official may consider the required number of parking spaces to have been met.
Such agreement shall be a condition of any certificate of compliance and shall
be reviewed annually by the code official. If such agreement at any time is no
longer in effect, the code official shall have the authority to revoke the
certificate of compliance.
      (5)   Bicycle facilities. All developments in the Commercial District may
be designed to accommodate bicycle travel, including bike racks. Per the
discretion of the Community and Economic Development Director, parking
structures and parking lots may be required to provide sufficient bike racks
based on a minimum of one bike for every ten automobiles or one bike for every
3,000 square feet of building floor area, whichever is greater. The use of
enclosed bicycle storage and/or shared facilities is encouraged.
   (C)   Parking stall dimensions.
      (1)   Width. A minimum width of nine feet shall be provided for each
parking stall, with the following exceptions:
         (a)   Compact parking stalls shall be permitted to be eight-feet wide.
         (b)   Parallel parking stalls shall be permitted to be eight-feet
wide.
         (c)   The width of a parking stall shall be increased ten inches for
obstructions located on either side of the stall within 14 feet of the access
aisle.
      (2)   Length. A minimum length of 20 feet shall be provided for each
parking stall, with the following exceptions:
         (a)   Compact parking stalls shall be permitted to be 18 feet in
length.
         (b)   Parallel parking stalls shall be a minimum of 22 feet in length.
   (D)   Design of parking facilities.
      (1)   Driveway width. Every parking facility shall be provided with one
or more access driveways, the width of which shall be the following:
         (a)   Private driveways shall be not less than nine feet and no more
than ten-feet wide.
         (b)   Commercial driveways shall be not less than 12 feet and no more
than 15-feet wide for one-way traffic and not less than 24 feet and no more
than 27 feet wide for two-way traffic.
      (2)   Driveway and ramp slopes. The maximum slope of any driveway or ramp
shall not exceed 20%. Transition slopes in driveways and ramps shall be
provided under the standards set by the code official and the city's
engineering firm.
      (3)   Stall accessibility. Each required parking stall shall be
individually and easily accessible. No automobile shall be required to back
onto any public street or sidewalk to leave any parking stall when such stall
serves more than two dwelling units or other than residential uses. All
portions of a public lot or garage shall be accessible to other portions
thereof without requiring the use of any public street.
      (4)   Compact-to-standard stall ratio. The maximum ratio of compact
stalls to standard stalls in any parking area shall not exceed one to two.
      (5)   Screening. A two-foot high buffer at the lot lines bordering a
public way except an alley shall be provided for all parking areas of five or
more parking spaces. The buffer shall be constructed of the same material used
on the front facade of the main building or of shrubs.
      (6)   Striping. All parking stalls, except those inside a private garage
or parking area for the exclusive use of a dwelling unit, shall be clearly
striped.
      (7)   Lighting. All parking areas shall be illuminated. All lights
illuminating a parking area shall be designed and located so as to reflect away
from any street and adjacent property.
   (E)   Use of parking facilities.
      (1)   Storage. No motor vehicles or trailers shall be stored on any lot
if the motor vehicle or trailer is not properly registered with the State of
Michigan or does not display its proper current license plate as identified by
its vehicle registration, unless such a motor vehicle or trailer is stored
within a private garage.
      (2)   Repair. Except for emergency conditions, no repair of any motor
vehicle shall be conducted outside of a private garage. Repairs of motor
vehicles in private garages in residential zones shall be permitted only if the
owner of the motor vehicle is repairing a motor vehicle of which a title is
properly registered in his or her name, at the address that is shown on the
title, and conducted by a person whose driver's license has the same address
where the repairs are being performed and where the motor vehicle is
registered.
   (F)   Requirements for residential driveways.
      (1)   Driveways in the residential district must hold at least two
vehicles.
      (2)   Pervious driveway surfaces may be utilized to meet the landscape
requirements of §
155.050(F)(9). Acceptable pervious pavements include porous asphalt or concrete
and permeable pavers or others approved by the Building Official. Gravel and
other loose aggregates are prohibited.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021; Am. Res. 2024-75b, passed 8-13-
2024)
§ 155.115 LOADING SPACES.
   (A)   General. Loading spaces shall be provided on the same lot for every
building in the I District. No loading space shall be required if prevented by
an existing lawful building. The code official shall be authorized to waive
this requirement on unusual lots.
   (B)   Size. Each loading space shall have a clear height of 14 feet and
shall be directly accessible through a usable door not less than three feet in
width and six feet, eight inches in height. The minimum area of a loading space
shall be 400 square feet and the minimum dimensions shall be 20-feet long and
ten feet deep
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.116 GENERAL SCREENING AND LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Lighting. All private lights used for the illumination of dwellings or
business establishments or for the illumination of business buildings or areas
surrounding them, or the illumination or display of merchandise or products of
business establishments shall be completely shielded from the view of vehicular
traffic using the road or roads abutting such business property. Lighting which
is designed to illuminate the premises shall be installed in a manner which
shall not cast direct illumination on adjacent properties.
   (B)   Screenwalls. Unless otherwise required in this chapter, all
screenwalls shall be two and one-half to three feet in height and made of
brick, stone, or other masonry materials matching the adjacent buildings as
nearly as possible. Screenwalls may have openings no larger than the maximum
opening required for pedestrian or vehicular access.
   (C)   Side and rear yard screening. Except as otherwise required in this
chapter, all premises used for business, commercial, or industrial purposes
shall be screened from abutting residential zones. Screening shall be any of
the following and shall apply to side yard and rear yards:
      (1)   A natural buffer planted with evergreens or shrubbery which
maintains their density and screening effect throughout the calendar year, not
less than four feet in height when planted, and maintained in a neat and
attractive manner commensurate with the adjoining residential district.
      (2)   An artificial wall or fence of sufficient density or compactness to
screen the structures and activities of the business from the view of occupants
of adjoining premises, not less than five feet in height and maintained in a
neat and attractive manner, commensurate with the adjoining residential
district.
      (3)   For side yard screening, no such wall or fence shall terminate
closer than 20 feet from any adjoining street right-of-way (or rear alley into
which a lot has vehicular access/egress), to provide safe visual sight
distances.
   (D)   Right-of-way. It is unlawful to construct any private fence or barrier
within a public right-of-way.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.117 DUMPSTERS.
   Outdoor trash containers or dumpsters shall comply with the following
requirements:
   (A)   Adequate vehicular access shall be provided to such containers for
truck pick-up either via a public alley or vehicular access aisle which does
not conflict with the use of off-street parking areas or entrances to or exits
from main buildings. The placement of the dumpster shall be subject to site
plan review.
   (B)   A solid ornamental screening wall or fence shall be provided around
all sides of such containers. An access gate shall also be provided and be of
such height as to completely screen the containers. The maximum height of
walls, fences, and gates shall be six feet.
   (C)   The container or containers, the screening walls or fences, and gate
shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner, free from loose rubbish,
waste paper, and other debris.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.118 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General. Landscaping is required for all new buildings and additions
over 500 square feet. The landscaping shall be completed within eight months
from the date of the occupancy of the building.
   (B)   Front yards. Front yards required by this chapter shall be completely
landscaped, except for those areas occupied by utilities, access driveways,
paved walks, walls, and structures. No front yard shall be entirely covered in
concrete or a concrete-like material, unless otherwise permitted by this
chapter.
   (C)   Street-side side yards. All side yards flanking a public street shall
be completely landscaped, except for those areas occupied by utilities, access
driveways, paved walks, walls, and structures. No side yard flanking a public
street shall be entirely covered in concrete or a concrete-like material.
   (D)   Rear yards. All rear yards shall be completely landscaped, except for
those areas occupied by utilities, access driveways, paved walks, walls, and
structures. No rear yard shall be entirely covered in concrete or a concrete-
like material.
   (E)   Maintenance. All live landscaping required by this chapter shall be
properly maintained. All dead or dying landscaping shall be replaced
immediately and all sodded areas mowed, fertilized, and irrigated on a regular
basis. All animal droppings shall be cleaned up and properly disposed of
immediately upon discovery.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.119 GRADING AND EXCAVATION REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General. This section is intended to provide the city with fair and
equitable grading practices.
   (B)   Grading responsibilities.
      (1)   Design standards. The grading design standards required herein
shall be those found in nationally recognized standards.
      (2)   Protection of utilities. Public utilities or services shall be
protected from damage due to grading or excavation operations.
      (3)   Protection of adjacent property. Adjacent properties shall be
protected from damage due to grading operations. A person shall not excavate on
land sufficiently close to any property line to endanger any adjoining public
street, sidewalk, alley, or other public or private property, without
supporting and protecting such property from any damage that might result.
      (4)   Inspection notice. The code official shall be notified not less
than one full business day before the start of work.
      (5)   Temporary erosion control. Precautionary measures necessary to
protect adjacent public or private property from damage by water erosion,
flooding, or deposition of mud or debris originating from the site shall be put
in effect. Precautionary measures shall include provisions of properly designed
sediment control facilities so that downstream properties are not affected by
upstream erosion.
      (6)   Traffic control and protection of streets. Flaggers, signs,
barricades, and other safety devises to ensure adequate safety when working on
or near public streets shall be provided.
      (7)   Hazard from existing grading. When any existing excavation,
embankment, or fill has become a hazard to life or limb, endangers structures,
or adversely affects the safety, use, or stability of a public way, such
excavation, embankment, or fill shall be eliminated.
      (8)   Tracking of dirt into public streets. Adequate cleaning of
equipment to prevent the tracking of dirt and debris onto public streets shall
be provided. The developer shall clean any dirt or debris tracked onto a public
street within twenty-four hours upon discovery.
      (9)   Revegetation. The loss of trees, ground cover, and topsoil shall be
minimized on any grading project. In addition to mechanical methods of erosion
control, graded areas shall be protected to the extent practical from damage by
erosion by planting grass or ground to cover plants or trees. Such plantings
shall provide for rapid, short-term coverage of the slopes as well as long-term
permanent coverage. A plan by a registered design professional shall be
provided when required by the code official.
      (10)   Protection of trees. During development, building, renovating, or
razing operations, the developer shall erect and maintain suitable protective
barriers around all trees specified to be maintained so as to prevent damage to
the trees and shall not allow storage of equipment, materials, debris, or fill
to be placed in this area except as may be necessary for no more than 30 days,
if no other storage space is elsewhere available, as prescribed in demolition
specifications.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.120 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Conditions. Home occupations as identified in this section shall be
permitted in all residential zones when the following conditions are met:
      (1)   A certificate of compliance and general business license shall have
been issued by the appropriate licensing agents of the city;
      (2)   Such use is wholly confined within the dwelling unit (main
building);
      (3)   The home occupation is not offensive and does not change the
character of the principal structure;
      (4)   Such use is conducted only by permanent residents of the dwelling;
      (5)   Such occupation shall not require internal or external alterations
or construction features;
      (6)   No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation that
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the premises if the occupation is conducted
in a single-family dwelling. If the occupation is conducted in other than a
single-family dwelling, such nuisances shall not be detectable outside the
dwelling unit. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process
shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or
television receivers off the premises or cause fluctuations in the line voltage
off the premises;
      (7)   Such occupation is clearly incidental to the residential use to the
extent that not more than 25% of the floor area of the main building shall be
occupied by such occupation, including the storage of inventory and supplies;
      (8)   There shall be no exterior display or storage of goods on the
premises, including in garages or accessory structures unless a special land
use permit is obtained;
      (9)   Home occupations involving beauty shops or barbershops shall
require a special land use permit;
      (10)   No sign of any nature shall be displayed;
      (11)   Such use does not generate traffic or a need for parking beyond
that required for the dwelling unit, nor shall such use create any external
effect not normally associated with a residential use, or otherwise adversely
effect the pedestrian or vehicular circulation of the area;
      (12)   Sales and services to patrons shall be arranged by appointment and
scheduled so that not more than one patron with a vehicle is on the premises at
the same time
   (B)   Allowable home occupations. The following home occupations shall be
allowed:
      (1)   Accountant;
      (2)   Artist;
      (3)   Author/freelance journalist;
      (4)   Caterer/cook;
      (5)   Collector/hobbyist;
      (6)   Consultant;
      (7)   Instructor of a craft or fine art (with no more than four pupils at
one time);
      (8)   Musician;
      (9)   Office;
      (10)   Photographer;
      (11)   Sales representative;
      (12)   Tailor/dressmaker/seamstress; and
      (13)   Technology technician.
   (C)   Home occupations not identified. The code official shall have the
authority, upon application, to determine if a home occupation not identified
in this section shall be permitted. An applicant who has been denied a
certificate of compliance because the code official does not believe that the
occupation is permitted by this chapter shall have the right to file an appeal
of the code official's decision with the Board, whose decision shall be final.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.121 ADULT USES.
   (A)   Intent. The intention of the Common Council is to outlaw any form of
adult uses in the city.
   (B)   Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, have the meanings shown herein:
      ADULT BOOKSTORE OR VIDEO STORE. An establishment having, as a substantial
or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, and other
periodicals, video cassettes, films and other such visual media which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" as defined in this section, or an establishment with a
significant segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material,
unless such area is physically separated from the remainder of such
establishment and which is accessible to adults only.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE. Any adult bookstore or video store, adult mini-
motion picture theater, adult motion picture theater, cabaret, massage parlor,
adult personal service businesses, adult novelty businesses or any combination
of such uses.
      ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or any part thereof with a
capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined in
this section, for observation by patrons therein.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or any part thereof or a drive-
in theater with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas,"
as defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein.
      ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESSES. A business that has as a principal activity the
sale of devices of simulated human genitals or devices designed for sexual
stimulation.
      ADULT PERSONAL SERVICE BUSINESSES. A business having as a principal
activity the provision of personal services to another person on an individual
basis in a closed room while nude or partially nude. It includes but is not
limited to the following activities and services: massage parlors, erotic rubs,
modeling studios, body painting studios, wrestling studios, and individual
theatrical performances.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of
areola; and
         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
         (a)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
         (b)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
         (c)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast.
   (C)   Adult uses prohibited. No adult use as defined in this section shall
be permitted in the city.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
FENCES
§ 155.135 GENERAL.
   (A)   Scope. The respective owners of all lots in the city shall construct
and maintain fences between their own and adjoining lots owned by other
persons.
   (B)   Responsibility. Fences shall be between four feet four inches and six
feet four inches high. No more than two fences shall be constructed along the
side lot line between the rear property line and front building line. If the
parcel runs north and south, the owner is responsible for the west fence line.
If the parcel runs east and west, the owner is responsible for the north fence
line. For odd shaped parcels, the code official shall determine the
responsibility for fence construction and maintenance. Fences enclosing a
property shall provide adequate access for fire fighting purposes, with not
less than one access at the front lot line and not less than one access at the
rear lot line, except that access can be provided on the side lot line for
corner lots. Double fences constructed along the rear of the lot shall be
permissible if they comply with all rules and regulations required herein and
by the State of Michigan.
   (C)   Mixed-use adjoining properties. In the absence of a building façade
within five feet of the lot line, owners of properties with nonresidential uses
abutting properties with residential uses shall erect and maintain a privacy
fence of six feet four inches along such property lines. If the nonresidential
use is an industrial use, an eight-foot four-inch privacy fence may be
permitted by the code official.
   (D)   Bodies of water. Any swimming pool, pond, or other artificially
installed body of water, all of which may contain not less than 12 inches of
water in depth at any point, shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four
feet four inches in height. Gates shall be of a self-closing and latching type,
with the latch on the inside of the gate so that the latch is not readily
accessible for children to open. Gates shall be capable of being securely
locked. If the entire premises is enclosed, then the code official may waive
this provision upon proper application and approval.
   (E)   Maintenance, repair, and removal. All fences shall be maintained in a
neat and safe condition. Fences erected between residential uses and other uses
shall be maintained in a neat and safe condition at the expense of the owner of
the other use under the terms of any waiver granted under to this chapter.
Fences shall be kept free of weeds, trees, and other nuisance vegetation. The
respective owners of all lots shall also be responsible for the care, repair,
and upkeep of all fences contiguous to or bordering upon streets, alleys, and
other public areas. Fences erected on or between residential uses shall be
maintained in a neat and safe condition at the expense of the owner legally
responsible for the fence. If ownership and responsibility of the fence, in the
opinion of the code official, is not reasonably and readily ascertainable, the
code official shall have the authority to require that any or all property
owners abutting the fence maintain or repair the fence. This chapter shall not
require the city to secure a survey to determine responsibility or property
ownership. In the absence of any other agreement, the fence owner shall, if
necessary, be allowed by the adjoining property owner access to that fence not
less than two days twice a year for the purpose of periodic maintenance work,
and at any time and as long as required for emergency repair work. In the case
of a disagreement between the two property owners, the code official shall make
a determination. If a fence falls into such disrepair that the fence becomes a
threat to public health, safety, or welfare, the city shall have the authority
to replace or repair the fence and the cost of such replacement or repair shall
be that of the property owner who is legally responsible for maintaining the
fence. The city shall have the authority to place the cost of such replacement
or repair on the tax rolls.
   (F)   Nonconforming fences. Any fence legally existing when this chapter or
subsequent amendment became effective that does not conform in use, location,
height, or size with the regulations of this chapter shall be considered a
legal nonconforming fence and shall be permitted to continue in such status
while it is either abandoned or removed by its owner, subject to the following
limitations:
      (1)   Structural alterations, enlargement, or re-erection are permissible
only if such changes shall not increase the degree of nonconformity of the
fence.
      (2)   Any legal nonconforming fence shall be replaced without increasing
the existing height or area if its is damaged, or removed if allowed to
deteriorate to the extent that the cost of repair or restoration exceeds 50% of
the replacement cost of the fence as determined by the code official.
      (3)   Fences that comply with either item division (F)(1) or (F)(2) above
need not be permitted.
   (G)   Prohibited fences. The following fences shall be specifically
prohibited:
      (1)   Any fence charged or connected with an electric current.
      (2)   Any fence constructed in whole or in part with barbed wire.
      (3)   Any fence with a protruding or projecting instrument, spike, nail,
or other sharp points or any other materials that may endanger the health,
safety, and welfare of the public.
      (4)   Any fence made out of "chicken wire" or other similar material.
      (5)   Any fence made out of coil or concertina wire.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021; Am. Res. 2024-75b, passed 8-13-
2024)
§ 155.136 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. Unless specifically exempted, a permit shall be
obtained from the code official for the erection of all fences erected within
the city and under other ordinances of the city. Exemptions from the necessity
of securing a permit, however, shall not be construed to relieve the owner of
the fence involved from responsibility for its erection and maintenance in a
safe manner and in a manner under all the other provisions of this chapter. No
permit shall be issued to any person who is in default to the city. By way of
illustration, a person in default could owe the city income tax, property tax,
water bill, or a business license fee. If a written payment plan has been
accepted by the chief executive officer, the code official shall issue a
conditional permit if all other provisions of this chapter are met. All rights
and privileges acquired under this chapter are mere licenses and may be revoked
by the city by a letter to the permit holder upon the violation of any of the
conditions herein, whereupon the code official may revoke the fence with costs
of removal charged to the permit holder. If the work authorized under a fence
permit has not be started within six months, and then finished within thirty
days after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void.
   (B)   Permit fees. A fee for services shall be charged. All fees shall be
established by resolution of the Common Council during the adoption of the
annual budget. Failure to apply for the appropriate fence permit shall result
in a municipal civil infraction and a doubling of the permit fee.
   (C)   Construction documents. Before any permit is granted for the purpose
of erecting a fence requiring such permit, construction documents shall be
filed with the code official showing the dimensions, materials, and details of
fence construction, the location of the parcel of land upon which the fence is
to be erected with the property line and the position of the fence in relation
to nearby buildings or structures, and any other pertinent data required by the
code official. The permit application shall be accompanied by written consent
of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the fence is to be erected
and a written agreement between the adjoining property owners as to the
location of the lot line or a certified land survey by a licensed land surveyor
showing the location of the property line.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.137 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   (A)   Types of fences. The following types of fences shall be permitted to
be erected or re-erected, subject to the following limitations:
      (1)   Partition fences may be erected for the purpose of separating,
enclosing, or protecting property within its perimeter.
      (2)   Privacy fences may be erected to constitute a complete visual
barrier to persons outside of the perimeter. All privacy fences shall have
posts, cross-members, bolts, or any other frame support placed on the side of
the fence facing the property of the erector. Privacy fences shall be permitted
along the rear lot line. Privacy fences constructed along a side lot line shall
be permitted to extend from the rear lot line to the front building line.
      (3)   Decorative fences out of metal, wood, pipe, or rail as a non-sight-
obstructing structure may be erected as a landscape treatment to enhance,
accent, beautify, or protect the site.
   (B)   Vegetation. Hedges, shrubs, bushes, and evergreen trees shall be
considered legal fences if they do not enclose swimming pools, ponds, or other
bodies of water. When fully grown, the hedges, shrubs, bushes, and evergreen
trees shall not exceed six feet four inches in height and shall be planted not
closer than two feet from the lot line. No vegetation considered a legal fence
shall obscure the line of sight for drivers on an abutting public right-of-way
or private driveway.
   (C)   Building lines. Fences erected along established front building lines
and along rear lot lines shall not exceed the height of six feet four inches
above grade level, except that in residential zones, no fence shall be
constructed along the front building or lot line that exceeds two feet four
inches in height. Along the side lot lines, no fence shall be constructed
between the established front building lines and the front property lines with
the exception of a four-foot four-inch high fence of decorative non-sight-
obscuring material. On a corner lot abutting a public right-of-way, a non-
sight-obscuring fence may be permitted not to exceed four feet four inches in
height at the established building line, tapering down to a height of two feet
four inches at the front lot line.
   (D)   Construction. Any fence post hereinafter erected shall consist of
posts that may be one and five-eighths inches diameter galvanized steel pipe,
four inch reinforced concrete, four-inch treated wood, primarily wood
composite, or vinyl, spaced a maximum of ten feet apart, embedded in concrete
footings not less than three-feet deep in the ground, and shall allow for the
erection of a fence as authorized by this chapter that is four inches off of
the ground to the fence height of four feet four inches to six feet four inches
above grade level. All fence posts shall be within the lot line of the person
responsible for the maintenance of the fence. Fences shall be made of
galvanized woven wire, metal, decay resistant wood boards, primarily wood
composite, or vinyl. If the fence is erected on the lot line, the junction line
of the posts and wire or boards shall be considered to coincide with the
property line.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.138 APPEALS AND VARIANCES.
   (A)   Appeals. Any person denied a permit to erect or re-erect a fence shall
have the right to appeal the decision of the code official to the Board upon
filing the appropriate fee. The Board shall, after a public hearing conducted
under this chapter and the rules of the Board, be authorized to grant
dimensional and use variances if the applicant demonstrates upon a finding that
all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical
conditions of the property would render compliance with the requirements of
this section difficult and would likely result in a particular hardship on the
person causing the fence to be erected. No variance shall be granted to anyone
who deems a waiver based on the mere inconvenience of the requirements of this
chapter or to increase financial gain or avoid the financial expense of
compliance.
      (2)   Strict enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would serve no
useful purpose.
      (3)   The type of fence and the location proposed would not pose a
significant risk to the public health, safety, and welfare.
      (4)   The benefit of the fence to the general public outweighs any risk
to public health, safety, and welfare.
      (5)   A waiver would be in the best interest of the city and not against
the spirit and intent of this chapter.
   (B)   Variances. A dimensional variance shall require a simple majority vote
of the Board, and a use variance shall require a two-thirds majority vote of
the Board.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 155.150 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to regulate signs and outdoor
advertising so as to protect the health, safety, general welfare, property
values, aesthetics and the character of the various neighborhoods in the City
of Hamtramck.
   (B)   The principle features are the restriction of the location, height,
and total area of signs permissible per site. Any sign placed on land or on a
building for the purposes of identification or for advertising a use conducted
on the premises shall be deemed an accessory use. It is intended that the
display of signs will be appropriate to the land, building, or use to which
they are appurtenant and be adequate, but not excessive, for the intended
purpose of identification or advertisement. With respect to all signs, it is
specifically intended, among other things, to reduce visibility blockages for
motorists and pedestrians, avoid excessive visual competition and clutter among
sign displays that distract motorists and pedestrians, and to reduce the
negative aesthetic impact on the city from excessive signage. The regulations
contained in this section are the minimum amount of regulations necessary to
achieve its purpose.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the substitution
or display of a non-commercial message on any permitted sign. All violations of
this subchapter shall be subject to the penalties set forth in §
155.999.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.151 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this subchapter,
have the meanings shown herein.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign, including any supporting structure or pole, which is
in disrepair or no longer in good condition
   ANIMATED SIGN. A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of motion.
Animated signs, which are differentiated from changeable signs as defined and
regulated by this chapter, include the following types:
      (1)   ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED. Animated signs producing the illusion of
movement by means of electronic, electrical, or electro-mechanical input or
illumination capable of simulation movement through employment of the
characteristics of one or both of the classifications noted below:
         (a)   FLASHING. Animated signs or animated portions of signs when
illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period of
illumination is either the same as or less than the period of non-illumination.
For the purposes of this chapter, flashing shall not be defined as occurring if
the cyclical period between on-off phases of illumination exceeds four seconds.
         (b)   PATTERNED ILLUSIONARY MOVEMENT. Animated signs or animated
portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by simulated movement
through alternate or sequential activation of various illuminated elements for
the purpose of producing repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some
form of constant motion.
      (2)   ENVIRONMENTALLY ACTIVATED. Animated signs or devices motivated by
wind, thermal changes, or other natural environmental input. Includes spinners,
pinwheels, pennant strings, or other devices or displays that respond to
naturally occurring external motivation.
      (3)   MECHANICALLY ACTIVATED. Animated signs characterized by repetitive
motion or rotation activated by a mechanical system powered by electric motors
or other mechanically induced means.
   ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION. Any projection that is not intended for occupancy
and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building, but that
does not include signs as defined herein.
   AWNING. An architectural projection or shelter projecting from, and fully or
partially supported by, the exterior wall of a building and composed of a
covering of rigid or non-rigid materials or fabric on a supporting framework
that may be either permanent or retractable, including such structures that are
internally illuminated by fluorescent or other light sources.
   AWNING SIGN. A sign displayed on, or attached flat against, the surface or
surfaces of an awning. See also, WALL or FASCIA SIGN.
   BACKLIT AWNING. An awning with a translucent covering material and a source
of illumination contained within its framework.
   BANNER. A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be displayed.
   BANNER SIGN. A sign utilizing a banner as its display surface.
   BENCH SIGN. A bench, or chair or an attachment to a building which provides
a bench, chair or seating device which also has painted, or in any other way
attached to it, a sign.
   BILLBOARD. An outdoor sign, whether placed individually or on a T-type, V-
type, back to back or double-faced display, erected for the purpose of
advertising a product, event, person, or subject not related to the premises on
which the sign is located.
   BUILDING ELEVATION. The entire side of a building, from ground level to the
roofline, as viewed perpendicular to the walls on that side of the building.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Official of the City of Hamtramck or an
authorized representative.
   CANOPY. A multisided overhead structure or architectural projection
supported by attachments to a building on one or more sides and either
cantilevered from such building or also supported by columns at additional
points. The surface(s) or soffit of an attached canopy may be illuminated by
means of internal or external sources of light.
   CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN. A sign with the capability of content change by
means of manual or remote input, including signs which are:
      (1)   MANUALLY ACTIVATED. Changeable sign whose message copy or content
can be changed manually.
      (2)   ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED. Changeable sign whose message copy or
content can be changed by means of remote electrically energized on-off
switching combinations of alphabetic or pictographic components arranged on a
display surface. Illumination maybe integral to the components, such as
characterized by lamps or other light-emitting devices; or it may be from an
external light source designed to reflect off the changeable component display.
See also, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN or CENTER.
   COMBINATION SIGN. A sign supported partly by a pole and partly by a building
structure.
   COPY. See SIGN COPY.
   DEVELOPMENT COMPLEX SIGN. A freestanding sign identifying a multiple-
occupancy development, such as a shopping center or planned industrial park,
which is controlled by a single owner or landlord.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. Any sign designed and erected to provide direction or
orientation for pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   DOUBLE-FACED SIGN. A sign with two faces, back to back.
   ELECTRIC SIGN. Any sign activated or illuminated by means of electrical
energy.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN OR CENTER. An electronically activated changeable
sign whose variable message capability can be electronically programmed.
   EXTERIOR SIGN. Any sign placed outside a building.
   FAÇADE. The front exterior wall of a structure.
   FLAG. A sign on paper, cloth, fabric, or other flexible or combustible
material of any kind that is attached to a permanent conforming pole or
attached flat to a wall or sign face.
   FLASHING SIGN. See ANIMATED SIGN, ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign erected upon or supported by the ground.
Freestanding signs include ground signs, which are self-supporting base-mounted
signs consisting of two or more sides extending up from the base, and pole
signs, which are elevated on poles or braces above the ground and not attached
to any other building or structure.
   FRONTAGE (BUILDING). The length of an exterior building wall or structure of
a single premise facing the street on which it is addressed.
   FRONTAGE (PROPERTY). The length of the property line(s) of any single
premise along either a public way or other properties on which it borders.
   GROUND SIGN. See FREESTANDING SIGN.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign which uses artificial light, either projection
through its surface(s) (internally illuminated); or reflecting off its surface
(s) (externally illuminated).
   INTERIOR SIGN. Any sign placed within a building and which is not visible
from the exterior of the building. This definition does not include "window
signs" as defined by this section. Interior signs are not regulated by this
subchapter.
   MANSARD. An inclined decorative roof-like projection that is attached to an
exterior building façade.
   MARQUEE OR MARQUEE SIGN. See CANOPY.
   MENU BOARD. A freestanding sign oriented to the drive-through lane for a
restaurant which is oriented to drivers in the drive-through lane and generally
only legible on the premises.
   MULTIPLE-FACED SIGN. A sign containing three or more faces.
   OFF-PREMISE SIGN. A sign other than an on-premises sign.
   ON-PREMISE SIGN. A sign erected, maintained, or used in the outdoor
environment for display of commercial or noncommercial messages in relation to
the use of, products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it
is displayed.
   PAINTED SIGN. A sign that is painted directly on the exterior surface of a
building or structure. Painted signs shall be treated as wall signs.
   PARAPET. The extension of a building façade above the line of the structural
roof.
   POLE SIGN. See FREESTANDING SIGN.
   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to a
building or building surface.
   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign, other than a marquee, which is affixed to any
building or structure or part thereof which extends more than 12 inches beyond
the building or structure wall and the horizontal sign surface is not parallel
to the building wall.
   PUBLIC SIGN. Any sign established by the city, county, state, or federal
governments such as a warning or hazard sign, traffic sign in conformance with
the Michigan Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, any sign required to be
placed by law, or any other similar sign.
   REFACED SIGN. An existing sign that has the sign face changed within the
existing structure or cabinet.
   REVOLVING SIGN. A sign that revolves 360 degrees about an axis. See also,
ANIMATED SIGN, MECHANICALLY ACTIVATED.
   ROOF LINE. The top edge of a peaked roof or, in the case of an extended
façade or parapet, the uppermost point of the façade or parapet.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign mounted on, and supported by, the main roof portion of a
building, or above the uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a building and which
such a building wholly or partially supports. Sign mounted on mansard facades,
and architectural projections such as canopies or marquees are not considered
roof signs.
   SIGN. Any structure or wall or part thereof, or device attached thereto or
painted or represented thereon, or any material or thing, illuminated or
otherwise, which displays or includes any numeral, letter, word, model, banner,
emblem, insignia, device, service mark, trade mark or other representation used
as, or in the nature of, an announcement, advertisement, direction or
designation, of any person, firm, organization, place, commodity, service,
business, profession, or industry, or any backlit building area, which is
located upon any land or in or on any building, in such a manner as to attract
attention from outside the premises. The term SIGN shall also include any
bulbs, string of lights, other lighting devices, streamers, pennants, hot and
cold air balloon(s) or inflatable structures, propeller(s), flags, other
structure(s) conveying a message, any similar device(s) of any type or kind
whether bearing lettering or not in any combination of the above. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to prohibit noncommercial messages on any
permitted sign.
   SIGN AREA. The sign area shall include the total area within any circle,
triangle, rectangle or square, or combination of two shapes which are
contiguous to each other, enclosing the extreme limits of writing,
representation, emblem or any similar figure, together with any frame or other
material forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such
sign from the background against which it is placed. In the case of a broken
sign, (a sign with open spaces between the letters or insignia) the sign area
to be considered for size shall include all air space between the letters or
insignia. Where more than one wall sign is used, each sign may be measured
individually, using the procedure above, provided the signs are separated by a
distance equal to, or greater than, the width of the largest sign. Any back-lit
area of a building exterior shall be considered a sign area.
   SIGN COPY. Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos, and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign, excluding numerals
identifying a street address only.
   SIGN ERECTOR. A licensed company or person engaged in the business of
erecting, altering, removing or painting signs.
   SIGN FACE. The surface upon, against, or through which the sign copy is
displayed or illustrated, not including structural supports, architectural
features of a building or sign structure, nonstructural or decorative trim, or
any areas that are separated from the background surface upon which the sign
copy is displayed by a distinct delineation, such as a reveal or border.
      (1)   In the case of a panel or cabinet type signs, the sign face shall
include the entire area of the sign panel, cabinet, or face substrate upon
which the sign copy is displayed or illustrated, but not open space between
separate panels or cabinets.
      (2)   In the case of sign structures with routed areas of sign copy, the
sign face shall include the entire area of the surface that is routed, except
where interrupted by a reveal, border, or a contrasting surface or color.
      (3)   In the case of signs or individual letters or graphic elements
affixed to a building or structure, the sign face shall include the total area
within any circle, triangle, rectangle or square, or combination of two shapes
which are contiguous to each other, enclosing the extreme limits of writing,
representation, emblem or any similar figure.
      (4)   In the case of sign copy enclosed within a painted or illuminated
border or displayed on a background contrasting in color with the color of the
building or structure, the sign face shall comprise the area within the
contrasting background, or within the painted or illuminated border.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure supporting a sign.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. A free-standing sign, banner or other device, constructed of
cloth, canvas, fabric, plastic, wood, paper or other material, with or without
a structural frame, or any other sign intended for a limited period of display.
   UNDER CANOPY SIGN OR UNDER MARQUEE SIGN. A sign attached to the underside of
a canopy or marquee.
   V SIGN. Signs containing two faces of approximately equal size, erected upon
common or separate structures, positioned in a "V" shape with an interior angle
between faces of not more than 90 degrees with the distance between the sign
faces not exceeding five feet at their closest point.
   WALL OR FASCIA SIGN. A sign that is attached either parallel or
perpendicular to the exterior of a building or structure and that projects not
more than 12 inches from the building or structure, including signs affixed to
architectural projections from a building if the copy area of such signs remain
on a parallel plane to the face of the building façade or to the face or faces
of the architectural projection to which it is affixed.
   WINDOW SIGN. A sign affixed to the interior surface of a window with its
message intended to be visible to, and readable from, the public way or from
adjacent property.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021; Am. Ord. passed 8-24-2021)
§ 155.152 SIGN REGULATIONS BY TYPE.
   (A)   Table 1: Summary of sign regulations.
SUMMARY OF SIGN REGULATIONS
          Zoning    Sign Permit Max. Number Max. Sign Max. Sign    Other
Sign Type Districts Required    of Signs    Height    Area (square Regulations
          Permitted                         (feet)    feet)
SUMMARY OF SIGN REGULATIONS
             Zoning     Sign                 Max. Sign  Max. Sign
Sign Type    Districts  Permit   Max. Number Height     Area        Other
             Permitted  Required of Signs    (feet)     (square     Regulations
                                                        feet)
                                 1 per 1st              Part of
Awning and   C2, CBD,            or 2nd                 total       See
canopy signs R* with    Yes      story       -          allowed     division
             discretion          tenant                 wall sign   (B)(1)
                                                        area
                                                                    See
Billboards   I          Yes      1           60         700         division
                                                                    (B)(2)
Changeable   All                                                    See
message      districts  Yes      -           -          -           division
                                                                    (B)(3)
Electronic   All                                                    See
message      districts  Yes      -           -          -           division
boards                                                              (B)(4)
             All                                                    See
Flags        districts  No       3           -          -           division
                                                                    (B)(5)
                                                        1/linear
                                             20 max.    foot of lot See
Freestanding C2, CBD, I Yes      -           (C2/CBD)   frontage;   division
signs                                        6 max. (I) 60 max.     (B)(6)
                                                        (C2/CBD)
                                                        40 max. (I)
Interior     All        No       -           -          -            
signs        districts
                                                                    See
Menu boards  C2, CBD    No       -           -          50          division
                                                                    (B)(7)
On-site      All                                                    See
directional  districts  No       -           3          4           division
signs                                                               (B)(8)
Projecting   C2, CBD,            1 per 1st                          See
and marquee  R* with    Yes      or 2nd      -          12          division
signs        discretion          story                              (B)(9)
                                 tenant
Public signs All        No       -           -          -            
             districts
Signs                                                               See
advertising  R, R-M     Yes      -           6          18          division
developments                                                        (B)(10)
or
Temporary    All                                                    See
signs        districts  No       -           4          24 (total)  division
                                                                    (B)(11)
                                                        2.5/linear
                                                        foot of
                                             Height of  building;
             C2, CBD,                        building   100 max.    See
Wall signs   I, R* with Yes      -           (all) 20   (C2/CBD/R)  division
             discretion                      max. (C2/  1/linear    (B)(12)
                                             CBD/R)     foot of
                                                        building;
                                                        200 max.
                                                        (I)
                                                        25% of
                                                        total
                                                        window area
             C2, CBD,                                   (other      See
Window signs I, R* with Yes      -           -          regulations division
             discretion                                 for         (B)(13)
                                                        specific
                                                        window sign
                                                        types)
*These signs may be permitted on commercial storefronts in the Residential
District per the discretion of the CED Department. This does not apply to signs
on home occupations in residential structures.
 
   (B)   Footnotes to Table 1: Summary of Sign Regulations.
      (1)   Awning and canopy signs. Awning and canopy signs shall be permitted
for ground or second floor uses only in the C2 and CBD districts, and may be
permitted in the R District per CED Department discretion, subject to the
following limitations:
         (a)   Signs may be straight sheds or curved.
         (b)   Signs shall be limited to one awning sign per first or second
story business tenant, on either awning or valance, but not on both.
         (c)   Such signs are considered wall signs for computing the total
allowed sign area per building.
         (d)   The distance from the sidewalk to the lower drip edge of the
awning or canopy shall be between eight feet and 12 feet.
      (2)   Billboards.
         (a)   Billboards shall be permitted only on parcels abutting
interstate highways or freeways in the I (Industrial) Zoning District provided
that such billboard shall not be placed on a parcel having any other structure
within 100 feet of the billboard, no other structure shall be placed on the
parcel within 100 feet of the billboard and no billboard shall be located
within 300 feet of a Residential District. Billboards shall not be located
within any required setback of such parcel.
         (b)   Billboards shall not be less than 2,500 feet apart. A double
face (back to back) or a V-type structure shall be considered a single
billboard provided the two faces are not separated by more than ten feet, or
the interior angle does not exceed 20 degrees, whichever is applicable.
         (c)   The total surface area, facing in the same direction, of any
billboard, shall not exceed 700 square feet and shall be contained on a single
panel.
         (d)   Billboards shall not exceed 60 feet in height from the adjacent
grade.
         (e)   Billboards shall not be erected on the roof of any building.
      (3)   Changeable messages. Changeable message signs whose message copy or
content is changed manually may be incorporated as part of any permitted sign.
The message shall not change more than once every 30 seconds.
      (4)   Electronic message boards. Electronic changeable message boards
(signs) may be included as part of any permitted sign. The message shall not
change more than once every 30 seconds. Moving or scrolling text and/or moving
video displays shall not be permitted. The change cycle for time and
temperature shall not be less than 30 seconds. In no case shall any sign
illumination produce an increase in the ambient light level at the property
line of any adjacent residentially zoned property.
      (5)   Flags. No more than three flags are permitted on any site.
      (6)   Freestanding signs. All freestanding signs located within 50 feet
of any intersecting right-of-way lines shall be subject to the approval of the
Building Official or his or her designee. All freestanding signs are subject to
the following regulations by district:
         (a)   In the C2 and CBD Districts. One freestanding sign for each
business development.
            1.   Not over 20 feet in height above the adjacent grade nor more
than 22 feet above the adjacent roadway.
            2.   Signs may not obstruct visibility at driveways or
intersections. The Building Official may require the sign base or height of the
bottom of the sign to be adjusted to protect the public safety.
            3.   No sign shall be located closer than 30 feet to any property
line of an adjacent R Residential District.
            4.   The base of the sign be not less than ten feet from a side lot
line.
            5.   Freestanding signs under this section shall not exceed one
square foot per each lineal foot of lot frontage to a total maximum of 60
square feet.
            6.   Individual freestanding signs for each business tenant in a
development are prohibited.
         (b)   In the I District.
            1.   One sign is permitted in the front yard with a minimum setback
of one-quarter of the building setback.
            2.   Such sign shall not exceed six feet in total height nor more
than ten feet in total length and contain no more than 40 square feet in sign
area.
            3.   No more than one sign is allowed for each principal structure
on the property.
      (7)   Menu boards. Menu boards shall not be permitted to exceed 50 square
feet.
      (8)   On-site directional signs. Signs with the sole purpose of directing
traffic movement onto or within a property shall not require a permit. Such
signs shall not exceed three feet in height or four square feet in area for
each sign. A directional sign shall be located on the property to which it is
directing traffic and shall be located behind the front right-of-way line.
      (9)   Projecting and marquee signs. Projecting and marquee signs shall be
permitted for ground or second floor uses only in commercial districts, and at
the discretion of the CED Department in the R District, subject to the
following limitations:
         (a)   No more than one projecting sign for each business tenant shall
be permitted.
         (b)   Projecting signs shall be spaced no less than 20 feet apart
horizontally and no less than ten feet apart vertically.
         (c)   Minimum distance from the ground to the lower edge of the
signboard: eight feet.
         (d)   Maximum area of the projecting sign: 12 square feet.
         (e)   Maximum distance from the primary face of building to the
signboard: six inches.
         (f)   Projecting signs over county roads shall meet conditions
established by Wayne County.
      (10)   Signs advertising developments or subdivisions. Signs advertising
developments or subdivisions not exceeding 18 square feet in area, and six feet
in overall height, may be erected in a common area as shown on the approved
site plan or plat. Where a commercial use is permitted in the District the
requirements of the C2 District shall apply to that structure.
      (11)   Temporary signs. The following regulations shall apply to all
exterior temporary signs:
         (a)   Temporary sign(s) may be located only on private property with
the owner's permission.
         (b)   Except as provided herein, signs shall not be placed in the
public right-of-way or between the public sidewalk and the road. Signs
improperly placed in the right-of-way shall be removed and discarded.
            1.   Exception: In the C2 and CBD Zoning Districts, where a
building is less than three feet from the property line, a freestanding
temporary sign may be placed on the public sidewalk. Such sign shall be placed
in such a manner to maintain a minimum of five feet of clear sidewalk. If the
building is more than three feet from the sidewalk the sign shall be placed on
private property. Such sign shall be displayed only during the hours when the
business is open and shall be stored indoors otherwise.
         (c)   The total combined area of all temporary signs shall not exceed
24 square feet per address.
         (d)   No sign shall be greater in height than four feet above the
ground.
         (e)   In the R and R-M Districts, one or more temporary signs for each
address may be displayed, up to the maximum permitted 16 square feet sign area.
In all other zoning districts, one temporary sign for each address may be
displayed, up to the maximum permitted 16 square feet sign area.
         (f)   Signs shall not be attached to any utility pole, street sign,
traffic signal pole, street light, hydrant or tree. Signs shall not block
visibility at intersections, sidewalks or driveways.
         (g)   Damaged temporary signs shall be removed promptly.
         (h)   Wall-mounted temporary signs shall not be placed in the same
location for more than 90 consecutive days.
      (12)   Wall signs.
         (a)   The total maximum allowable area for wall signs shall include
all sides of the building or structure, with the following specific standards
by zoning district:
            1.   In the C2, CBD, and R Districts: two and one-half square feet
for each lineal foot of building frontage, not to exceed a total wall sign area
of 100 square feet.
            2.   In the I District, one square foot for each lineal foot of
building frontage, not to exceed a total wall sign area of 200 square feet.
         (b)   No wall sign shall protrude more than 18 inches from the
building or structure wall on which it is mounted.
         (c)   No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening.
         (d)   No wall sign shall be erected to extend above the top of the
wall to which it is attached, nor extend beyond the ends of the wall to which
it is attached.
         (e)   Wall signs larger than 50 square feet shall be comprised of non-
combustible material.
         (f)   Service entrances may be identified with one sign not exceeding
two square feet.
         (g)   In a multi-tenant building, each additional tenant shall be
permitted one identification sign. Such sign shall include only the name of the
tenant business and shall consist only of block letters or numbers no greater
than six inches in height.
         (h)   The following standards apply to all wall signs in the C2 and
CBD Zoning Districts:
            1.   Wall signs shall be permitted for each business development
(that is, one or more uses within a building).
            2.   No portion of a wall sign shall be more than 20 feet above
grade.
            3.   One wall sign, not exceeding six square feet in area, shall be
permitted on any side or rear entrance open to the public.
         (i)   Painted signs shall be treated as wall signs and are subject to
their requirements in this chapter.
      (13)   Window signs.
         (a)   Total signage placed on interior window glass of a building,
whether carrying a message or not, shall not cover more than 25% of the total
glass area, excluding doors, for that side of the building.
         (b)   Signs located inside a building that are visible from the front
lot line shall be included in the total allowable sign area of this provision.
         (c)   Signage placed on exterior window glass shall be considered a
wall sign.
         (d)   In an enclosed building in a C2 or CBD Use District where the
public is not allowed in the building and where food is offered to the public
through a window for immediate consumption the maximum coverage shall be 50%.
         (e)   Compact neon signs shall be permitted within the interior of
shop fronts if they do not exceed a maximum of four square feet in area per 50
square feet of window area.
         (f)   In the C2, CBD, or R Districts, one open/closed sign not
exceeding two square feet may be displayed in the window or above the door, but
not both. In the I District, one open/closed sign not exceeding two square feet
may be displayed in the window or door, but not both.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021; Am. Ord. passed 8-24-2021; Am.
Res. 2024–120b, passed 10-8-2024)
§ 155.153 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits, applications, plans, specifications and revocation.
      (1)   Permits generally.
         (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, re-erect, repair,
alter, paint or relocate, reconstruct or reface, on the same or another
premises or to maintain within the city, any sign as defined in this section
unless a permit shall have been first obtained from the city and a permit fee
paid in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the City
Council.
         (b)   This section shall not be construed to prevent repair or
restoration of any part of an existing sign when said sign is less than 50%
destroyed or damaged by storm or other accidental emergency, and when the
Building Official has ordered said repair or restoration of the sign to return
that sign to a safe condition. If a sign is to be repaired or restored under
this exception, the sign message must remain the same. If the sign copy will be
changed, a sign permit is required.
      (2)   Application. Application for sign permits shall be made upon forms
provided by the city for this purpose and shall contain the following
information:
         (a)   Name, address and telephone number of applicant(s).
         (b)   Location and dimensions of the building, structure or lot to
which the sign is to be attached or erected.
         (c)   Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings,
structures, property lines and rights-of-way, existing or proposed.
         (d)   Two copies of the plans and specifications with color renderings
and showing the method of construction and attachment to the building or in the
ground.
         (e)   Copies of stress sheets and calculations if deemed necessary by
the Building Official, showing the structure as designed for dead load and wind
pressure in accordance with the regulations adopted by the City of Hamtramck.
         (f)   Name, address and phone number and license information of the
sign erector.
         (g)   Insurance policy as required herein.
         (h)   Such other information as may be required by the Building
Official to show full compliance with this and other applicable laws of the
City of Hamtramck and State of Michigan.
         (i)   The Building Official may require that the application
containing the aforesaid material shall, in addition, bear the certificate or
seal of a registered structural or civil engineer as a condition to the
issuance of a permit.
         (j)   Indicate the zoning district in which the sign is located.
      (3)   Insurance requirements. Permits may be issued to sign erectors only
under the following conditions:
         (a)   Insurance certificates. Before a permit is issued for the
erection of any sign which overhangs any public property or right-of-way, the
installing company shall submit for filing with the Community Development
Department a certificate of insurance, in a form acceptable to the city, for
public liability in the amount of $100,000 for injuries to one person and
$300,000 for injuries to more than one person, and property damage insurance in
the amount of $25,000 for damage to any city property due to the actions of
himself or any of his or her agents or employees.
         (b)   Lapsing of insurance. At any time, the insurance of any sign
erector is permitted to lapse, his or her contractor registration shall
automatically be revoked.
         (c)   Notification of change. A sign erector shall notify the city of
any change in address, and if a firm or corporation, any change in ownership or
management if other than that indicated on the insurance certificates.
      (4)   Permit insurance and revocation. All rights and privileges acquired
under the provisions of this section, or any amendment thereto, are mere
licenses and may be revoked by the city upon violation of this section.
         (a)   Compliance. Except as provided herein, permits are required for
all signs. All signs shall be inspected for compliance at the time of
installation. If work indicated to be done on the application for permit has
not been started within three months the permit will expire and become null and
void.
         (b)   Concealed work. All work shall remain accessible and exposed for
inspection until approved. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to
cause said work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes.
Neither the Building Official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for any
expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to
allow inspection.
         (c)   Removal of signs. Should any sign be found unsafe, insecure,
improperly constructed or not in accordance with the requirements of this
section, the erector and/or owner shall be required to make the sign safe,
secure and otherwise in compliance with the requirements of this section within
ten days of notice. Failure to comply shall result in an order to remove the
sign, with costs charged to the permit holder, within 48 hours from the time of
notification in writing. Exception: Existing signs determined to be unsafe and
an immediate hazard to health or safety shall be removed or repaired at the
owner's expense within 48 hours of notification by the Building Official.
   (B)   Permit fees. All fees for permits or services shall be established by
resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   Signs not requiring a permit. Signs not requiring a permit shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section. Such exemptions, however, shall not
be construed to relieve the owner of the sign from responsibility for its
proper location, erection and maintenance as described in this subchapter.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.154 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Changes to signs. No sign shall be structurally altered, enlarged,
relocated, repaired or refaced except in conformity to the provisions herein
and until a proper permit if required, has been secured. The maintenance of
moveable parts or electrical components of an approved sign shall not be deemed
a structural alteration.
   (B)   Conformance to codes. Any sign hereinafter erected shall conform to
the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the State Construction Code,
and any other ordinances of the city.
   (C)   Signs in rights-of-way. No signs other than public signs shall be
erected on any public sidewalk or public way, unless specifically authorized by
this chapter.
   (D)   Projections over public ways. Signs projecting over public walkways
shall be permitted to do so up to 18 inches at a minimum height of eight feet
from grade level to the bottom of the sign. Signs, architectural projections,
or sign structures projecting over vehicular access areas shall conform to the
minimum height clearance limitations imposed by the city for such structures.
   (E)   Traffic visibility. No sign or sign structure shall be erected at the
intersection of any street in such a manner as to obstruct the free and clear
vision, nor at any location if, by its position, shape, or color, it may
interfere with or obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal, or device.
   (F)   Computation of frontage. Frontage shall be determined by the width of
the building wall of the space occupied by the business advertised on the side
facing the street on which it is addressed. If a premise borders more than one
street the sign area(s) for each building wall facing a street shall be
computed separately based on the building frontage. The sign area(s) thus
calculated shall be permitted to be applied to permitted signs placed on each
separate wall.
   (G)   Maintenance, repair, and removal. Every sign permitted by this chapter
shall be kept in good condition and repair. When any sign becomes insecure, in
danger of falling, or is otherwise deemed unsafe by the code official, or if
any sign shall be unlawfully installed, erected, or maintained in violation of
any provision of this chapter, the owner thereof or the person or firm using
the sign shall, upon written notice by the code official immediately in the
case of immediate danger, and in any case within not more than ten days, make
such sign conform to the provisions of this chapter, or shall remove it. If
within ten days the order is not complied with, the code official may issue a
citation for violation of this section.
   (H)   Nonconforming signs.
      (1)   Intention. It is the intention of this section to encourage
eventual elimination of signs that, because of the adoption of this chapter,
become nonconforming. It is considered as much a subject of health, safety, and
welfare as the prohibition of new signs in violation of this section. It is the
intention, therefore, to administer this section to realize the removal of
illegal, nonconforming signs and to avoid any unreasonable invasion of
established private property rights by providing for removal of nonconforming
signs.
      (2)   Continuance. A non conforming sign may be continued but shall be
maintained in good condition, and shall not be:
         (a)   Replaced by another nonconforming sign.
         (b)   Structurally altered to prolong the life of the sign.
         (c)   Rebuilt, expanded or substantially added to, changed or
reconstructed after damage or destruction if the estimated expense of
reconstruction exceeds 50% of the estimated replacement cost.
      (3)   Removal of nonconforming signs. Any non-conforming sign now or
hereafter existing which is not maintained in good condition shall be removed.
   (I)   Lighting. Internal and external lighting shall be permitted, but the
illumination thereof shall not be anything other than a steady, continuously
burning bulb or light. The movement, flashing or illusion of flashing, or
turning on and off the sign illumination or of any bulb or component part
thereof is prohibited. In no case shall any sign illumination cause an increase
in the ambient light level at the property line of any adjacent residential-
zoned property. No sign shall be illuminated by other than electrical means and
electrical devices and wiring shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the Michigan Electrical Code. All electrically illuminated
signs shall be certified as to wiring and devices by the electrical inspector
and all wiring and accessory electrical equipment shall conform to the
requirements of the Michigan Electrical Code.
      (1)   Strip lighting. Permanently affixed incandescent, LED, neon or
other forms of strip lighting on the interior of any building are permitted
when all of the following are adhered to:
         (a)   LED lights shall be buffered and/or diffused to decrease
intensity, and only surrounding the main front facing windows.
         (b)   LED lights can only be illuminated during the hours of 8:00 a.m.
to 12:00 a..m.
         (c)   LED strip lighting may not exceed 8.0 footcandles beyond the
property line.
   (J)   Measurement of signs.
      (1)   Sign area.
         (a)   The sign area shall include the total area within any circle,
triangle, rectangle or square, or combination of two shapes which are
contiguous to each other, enclosing the extreme limits of the writing,
representation, emblem or any similar figure, together with any frame or other
material forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such
sign from the background against which it is placed. In the case of a broken
sign, (a sign with open spaces between the letters or insignia) the sign area
to be considered for size shall include all air space between the letters or
insignia. Where more than one wall sign is used, each sign may be measured
individually, using the procedure above, provided the signs are separated by a
distance equal to, or greater than, the width of the largest sign. Any back-lit
area of a building exterior is considered a sign area.
         (b)   For signs with two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be
included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two such faces
are placed back to back and less than 24 inches apart, the area of the sign
shall equal the area of one face.
      (2)   Sign height. The height of the sign is measured from the ground to
the highest point of the sign from the ground.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021; Am. Res. 2024-120b, passed 10-8-
2024)
§ 155.155 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following devices and locations shall be specifically prohibited:
   (A)   Signs located in such a manner as to obstruct or otherwise interfere
with an official traffic sign, signal, or device, or obstruct or interfere with
a driver's view of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic.
   (B)   Except as authorized elsewhere in this chapter, signs encroaching upon
or overhanging public right-of-way.
   (C)   Signs placed on, in or attached to, any utility pole, light standard,
street tree, planter, trash can, or any other public facility located within
the public right-of-way unless specifically authorized elsewhere in this
chapter.
   (D)   Signs that blink, flash, or are animated by lighting in any fashion
including signs that have the appearance of traffic safety signs and lights, or
municipal vehicle warnings from a distance.
   (E)   Portable signs except as allowed for temporary signs.
   (F)   Except as specifically permitted elsewhere in this chapter, no
vehicle, or any type of trailer, which has attached thereto, or painted or
placed thereon, any sign or advertising device displaying the name of any
business, product or service located on the subject premises, nor any marked
delivery vehicles owned by any business located on the subject premises, shall
be parked on private property, in any commercial or industrial district,
between the front line of the structures located thereon and the front property
line, nor shall any such vehicles be parked on a public right-of-way, or on
public property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way. Vehicles
engaged in attended loading or unloading activities shall be exempt from this
provision.
      (1)   Exception: The owner of any property where no other parking exists,
except in front of the building, may utilize not more than 10%, but not less
than one, of the existing spaces.
   (G)   Vehicles and trailers used primarily as static displays, advertising a
product or service, used as storage, shelter, or distribution points for
commercial products, or services for the public.
   (H)   Bulbs or strings of lights, except where permitted or required as part
of a permitted outdoor sales area or for temporary holiday display, other
lighting devices, streamers, hot and cold air balloon(s) or inflatable devices,
structures, or propeller(s).
   (I)   Under canopy signs.
   (J)   Roof signs.
   (K)   Abandoned signs.
   (L)   Any sign that projects more than 18 inches from the building wall.
   (M)   Permanently affixed incandescent, LED, neon or other forms of strip
lighting on the exterior of any building, or on interior windows facing the
street.
   (N)   Animated signs.
   (O)   Roof signs.
   (P)   Bench signs, to prevent, reduce or eliminate blight in the city caused
by such signs which often protrude into the city's right-of-way and are not
maintained on a regular basis.
   (Q)   Off-premises signs, except as may be specifically permitted elsewhere
in this chapter.
   (R)   Searchlights, except as may be specifically permitted elsewhere in
this chapter.
   (S)   Any other signs not specifically permitted by this chapter.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021; Am. Ord. passed 8-24-2021)
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
§ 155.165 GENERAL.
   (A)   Scope. 
      (1)   In every zoning district, no building or structure shall be
demolished or razed, except for dangerous or condemned buildings, erected,
converted to other use, or structurally altered, except as may be otherwise
provided in this chapter, until Common Council has reviewed and approved a site
plan for such use. Each action taken with respect to site plan review and
approval shall be duly recorded in the minutes of Common Council. One and two-
family residential structures shall be exempted from the application of the
provisions of this section.
      (2)   The Building Code Official or their designee may administratively
approve applications to modify previously approved site plans, or site plans
which renovate, expand or convert the use of buildings or site improvements
which legally existed prior to the adoption of this section, which meet all of
the following standards:
         (a)   The modification would comply with all other requirements of
this chapter and other applicable regulations;
         (b)   The modification would comply with all previously imposed
conditions of approval, if any;
         (c)   The modification would not otherwise increase the overall scale
or intensity of the use in a way that would have a material adverse effect on
adjacent properties, natural features, public streets or public services;
         (d)   The modification would not increase by more than 20% any or all
of the following characteristics of the property: the total floor area of
building(s); the total residential occupancy; or the total number of parking
spaces provided;
         (e)   The modification would not decrease by more than 10% any of the
principal building setbacks from the perimeter of the property; and
         (f)   The modification would not materially alter more than 20% of the
architectural style, façade materials to be used, or other architectural
features and adornments of the street front façade wall area in any way other
than in compliance with the requirements of the zoning ordinance.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of site plan review is to provide flexibility in
the placement and interrelationship of the buildings and uses within each
building site subject to plan approval, and to provide for the implementation
of design concepts while at the same time maintaining the overall intensity of
land use, density of population, and amounts of light, air, access and
landscaped open space as required in this chapter. The objectives of site plan
review are to:
      (1)   Discourage monotonous, drab, unsightly, dreary and inharmonious
developments, and poor quality;
      (2)   Conserve the city's natural beauty and visual character and charm
by ensuring that structures, signs, and other improvements are properly related
to their sites, and to surrounding sites and structures, with due regard to the
aesthetic qualities of the natural terrain and landscaping, and that proper
attention is given to exterior appearance of structures, signs, and other
improvements;
      (3)   Stabilize and improve property values and prevent blighted areas;
      (4)   Foster civic pride and community spirit so as to improve the
quality and quantity of citizen participation in local government and in
community growth, change and improvement;
      (5)   Sustain the comfort, health, tranquility, and contentment of
residents and attract new residents by reason of the city's favorable
environment; and
      (6)   Provide for consultation and cooperation between the developer and
the Commission so that both parties might realize maximum utilization of land
and minimum adverse effects upon the surrounding area.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021; Am. Ord. passed 8-24-2021; Am.
Ord. —, passed 12-12-2023)
§ 155.166 SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   Scope. The city has established a two-tier site plan review process:
preliminary site plan review and final site plan review. This process has been
established so that an applicant can receive city comments on the general
conformity of a proposed site plan to city requirements before preparing a
complete package of engineering, drawings, landscape plans, construction
details, etc. Questions regarding this process may be directed to Building Code
Official or Common Council.
   (B)   Preliminary site plan review.
      (1)   Scope. A site plan submitted to the city for preliminary site plan
review shall contain all of the information set forth in the preliminary site
plan data checklist included in this section. Adequate engineering data to
establish engineering feasibility of utilities proposed is required, however,
detailed engineering plans and detailed landscaping plans are optional at this
stage in the process.
      (2)   Fees. A fee as determined from time to time by resolution of the
Common Council shall accompany any application for site plan approval,
preliminary or final. Such fee may be utilized by the city to determine if the
development shall conform to the applicable city ordinances, policies and
standards, and for investigation and report of any objectionable elements.
      (3)   Initiating the process.
         (a)   To initiate the preliminary site plan review process, the
applicant shall submit the following information to the Building Code Official
15 days prior to the next regularly scheduled Common Council meeting:
            1.   Two copies (please fold) of the site plan and one digital
copy;
            2.   Two copies of the site plan application form;
            3.   Two copies of the completed site plan data checklist; and
            4.   Payment of all applicable fees.
         (b)   Completed application packets shall be distributed by the
Building Code Official to the Common Council and other appropriate a
departments and agencies.
      (4)   City Council approval, conditional approval, or denial of
preliminary site plan. Common Council shall grant approval, conditional
approval, or deny approval, of the preliminary site plan within 65 days of
receipt of site plan.
         (a)   Approval. Upon determination by the Common Council that a
preliminary site plan is in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, as amended,
and other applicable standards and requirements, preliminary site plan approval
shall be granted and such approval shall be indicated on the plan. The
applicant may then proceed to the final site plan review process described
below.
         (b)   Conditional approval. Upon determination of the Common Council
that a plan is in compliance except for minor required revisions, preliminary
site plan approval, conditional upon such revisions being made, shall be
granted and that the required changes shall be stated in writing. The applicant
may then proceed to the final site plan review process described below,
provided that the required changes are incorporated in the final site plan.
         (c)   Denial. If extensive revisions to the preliminary site plan are
necessary to meet applicable standards and requirements, preliminary site plan
approval shall be denied and the applicant requested to provide an alternative
site plan. In this case, "DENIED" shall be written on the plan and the reasons
for denial indicated in writing. If the applicant desires to prepare an
alternative plan, the same procedures as outlined above beginning with
submittal to the Building Code Official shall be followed.
      (5)   Failure of applicant to appear. The applicant or his or her
representative(s) shall attend all meetings at which the development is
scheduled for discussion or action. Failure to appear at the meeting may cause
the item to be tabled to the next meeting.
   (C)   Final site plan review.
      (1)   Fees. A fee as determined from time to time by resolution of the
Common Council shall accompany any application for site plan approval,
preliminary or final. Such fee may be utilized by the city to determine if the
development shall conform to the applicable city ordinances, policies and
standards, and for investigation and report of any objectionable elements.
      (2)   Initiating the process. Within six months of the granting of
preliminary site plan approval, the applicant may initiate the final site plan
review process by submitting the following information to the Building Code
Official 15 days prior to the next regularly scheduled Common Council meeting:
         (a)   Two copies (please fold) of the site plan and one digital copy;
         (b)   Two copies of the site plan application form;
         (c)   Two copies of the completed site plan data checklist; and
         (d)   Payment of all applicable fees.
      (3)   Public hearing. Upon receipt and review of a final site plan, the
Common Council shall establish a public hearing thereon in any of the following
events:
         (a)   When at least three members of the Common Council deem it
necessary;
         (b)   When requested by the applicant seeking site plan review and
approval; or
         (c)   When the Common Council receives a petition signed by 20% of the
property taxpayers, within 300 feet.
      (4)   Review process. After submission of a complete final site plan
review package pursuant to the requirements listed above, and within 60 days
after completion of review and recommendation by the Building Code Official and
other departments and agencies, the application shall be placed on regular
agenda of a meeting of the City Council to consider final site plan approval.
The applicant shall be notified of the date, time, and place of the meeting at
which the Common Council shall consider the application. The Common Council
shall consider all review letters and reports from the Building Code Official
and other departments and agencies, together with statements, evidence, or
arguments as the applicant may present concerning the application. The Common
Council shall determine whether the site plan is in compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance and all applicable standards and requirements, and shall make a
decision to grant, conditionally grant, or deny final site plan approval.
      (5)   Failure of applicant to appear. The applicant or his or her
representative(s) shall attend all meetings at which the development is
scheduled for discussion or action. Failure to appear at the meeting may cause
the item to be tabled to the next meeting.
      (6)   Expiration of site plan approval. The approval of any preliminary
site plan under the provisions of this chapter shall expire and be considered
revoked six months after the date of such approval unless final site plan
approval has been granted or is in an active stage of review. Approval of any
final site plan under the provisions of this chapter shall expire and be
considered revoked one year after the date of such approval unless actual
construction has commenced in accordance with the issuance of a valid building
permit. Upon expiration of a final site plan approval, all preliminary site
plan approvals shall expire.
      (7)   Outside agency approval required. Final site plan approval shall
not be granted until all approvals have been obtained from outside agencies.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021; Am. Ord. —, passed 3-8-2022)
§ 155.167 SITE PLAN REVIEW CRITERIA.
   (A)   General. In reviewing site plans, the Building Code Official and
Common Council shall consider and endeavor to assure the following:
      (1)   The location of development features, including principal
buildings, and open spaces, and the location, design, width, and adequacy of
all curb cuts, parking areas, driveways, and sidewalks within the site and
their relationship to nearby connecting streets and sidewalks providing access
to and egress from the site, are such as to minimize possible adverse effects
on adjacent properties and so as to relate properly to pedestrian vehicular
traffic safety;
      (2)   On-site circulation of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic shall
achieve both safety and convenience of persons and vehicles using or visiting
the site;
      (3)   Landscaping, earth berms, fencing, signs, and obscuring walls are
of such a such a design and location that the proposed development is
aesthetically pleasing and is harmonious with nearby existing or future
developments;
      (4)   Utility service, including proposed water, sanitary sewer, and
stormwater runoff systems are sufficient to fulfill the projected needs of the
development and the recommendation of the City Engineer and the Director of
Public Safety. Approval by a state or county department having jurisdiction may
also be a prerequisite to approval;
      (5)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city may
require as a condition of final site plan approval, landscaping, berming,
fencing, construction of walls, marginal access drives or other appurtenances
as necessary or desirable to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the
community, to provide adequate protection to surrounding properties, to
preserve and promote the character of the district and to achieve a lasting and
desirable improvement to the community.
   (B)   Preliminary and final site plan application form contents. The
following information shall be included on all preliminary and final site plan
application forms:
      (1)   Applicant's name, address, and phone number;
      (2)   Name of proposed development;
      (3)   Common description of property and complete legal description;
      (4)   Land acreage and frontage on public roads or rights-of-way;
      (5)   Existing zoning and zoning of adjacent properties;
      (6)   Detailed description of the proposed use of the land;
      (7)   Name, address, and phone number of the firm or individual who
prepared the site plan and legal owner of the property; and
      (8)   Signature of applicant and legal owner of the property, if not the
applicant.
   (C)   Preliminary site plan data required. The following information shall
be included on all preliminary site plans submitted for consideration:
      (1)   Name of development and title block;
      (2)   Location map at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet, showing
section number(s), site location, major roads, and railroads;
      (3)   A scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet if the subject
property is less than three acres, and one inch equals 100 feet if there are
three acres or more;
      (4)   Date, north point, and scale (graphic and written);
      (5)   Property identification number(s) and the dimensions of all lot and
property lines, showing the relationship of the subject property to abutting
properties;
      (6)   Location of all existing and proposed structures, uses, number of
stories, gross building area, setback lines, distances between structures, and
location of loading areas on the subject property;
      (7)   Location of all existing structures within 100 feet of the subject
property lines;
      (8)   All existing and proposed aisles, drives, pedestrian paths,
roadways, parking areas, and number of parking spaces on the subject property
lines;
      (9)   All existing and proposed roadways, drives, parking areas, and
pedestrian paths within 100 feet of the subject property;
      (10)   Location and height of all walls, fences, and screen planting,
including a plan for landscaping of the development and the method by which
landscaping is to be accomplished and maintained;
      (11)   Location and width of all abutting streets, rights-of-way,
easements, and pavements;
      (12)   Types of surfacing, such as asphalt or concrete paving, turfing,
sod, or stone to be used;
      (13)   Types of facing materials to be used on structures;
      (14)   Elevations (front, sides and rear views) of all sides of the
building(s);
      (15)   A floor plan drawing showing the specific use areas of all
existing and proposed building on-site;
      (16)   Seal of registered architect, landscape architect, land surveyor,
or, civil engineer that prepared the plan. In cases of minor structural
alterations where professional services are not required, additions of 300
square feet or less, or for changes in the use of existing buildings, the
Building Code Official may waive this requirement; density calculations (for
multiple family projects);
      (17)   Principal and accessory buildings;
      (18)   Designation of units by type of buildings;
      (19)   Interior walks and pedestrian or bicycle paths within the right-
of-way;
      (20)   Exterior lighting locations, type of fixtures, and methods of
shielding them from projecting onto adjoining properties;
      (21)   Trash receptacle and transformer locations and method of
screening;
      (22)   Drive or street approaches including acceleration, deceleration,
and passing lanes where appropriate;
      (23)   All utilities located on or serving the site, including sizes of
water and sewer lines;
      (24)   Loading and unloading areas;
      (25)   Designation of fire lanes;
      (26)   Estimated number of full-time and part-time employees;
      (27)   Address location an building and size of numbers;
      (28)   Where large equipment or machinery is to be installed as part of
the development, the location, type, horse-power, fuel, dimensions, noise,
vibration, and emission levels and other data of all such equipment or
machinery;
      (29)   General location and types of proposed signs for all buildings and
uses on site; and
      (30)   Such other reasonable and relevant information as may be required
by the city to assist in the review of the proposed development.
   (D)   Final site plan data required. In addition to the preliminary site
plan data specified above, the following minimum information shall be added for
final site plan review and approval:
      (1)   Site engineer plans prepared by a registered civil engineer. Such
plans shall be submitted to the Building Code Official for review and
recommendation prior to Common Council consideration of final site plan
approval. Plans shall include the following:
         (a)   A proposed grading and drainage plan. The plan shall show
proposed finished floor elevations, finished grades at structures, proposed
storm collection system (including bioswales or other green infrastructure such
as rain gardens, permeable pavement, and green roofs), storm outlet(s),
ultimate downstream outlets and, when required retention/detention basin design
calculations. Any areas of filled or reclaimed land shall be identified and all
development shall detain stormwater so that the runoff from the property does
not negatively impact upon adjacent properties or public and private rights-of-
way;
         (b)   All utilities located on or serving the site, including sizes of
water and sewer lines, proposed hydrants, proposed meter size, and proposed
fire suppression line into building. Proposed sanitary leads, disposal systems
shall also be shown, as applicable;
         (c)   Proposed streets and drives showing type of surfacing, whether
public or private, and grade elevations.
      (2)   Proposed fire lanes and fire lane signs;
      (3)   Proposed signs and specifications for control of traffic;
      (4)   Seal and signature of registered design professional responsible
for preparation of the plans;
      (5)   Measures to be taken to protect existing on-site trees not proposed
for removal as part of the development;
      (6)   Landscaping plan showing species, spacing, and size of each tree
and plant material and ground cover; and
      (7)   Proposed signs for all buildings and uses on site, including
character, size, letters, symbols, and lighting.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.168 COMBINING PRELIMINARY AND FINAL SITE PLANS.
   An applicant may, at the applicant's discretion and risk, with approval of
the Common Council combine a preliminary and final site plan in an application
for approval. The Common Council shall have the authority to require submittal
of a preliminary site plan separate from a final site plan, where, in its
opinion, the complexity or size of the proposed development so warrants. A
preliminary and final site plan shall not be combined for any development
consisting of two or more phases.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.169 PHASING OF DEVELOPMENT.
   An applicant may divide the proposed development into two or more phases. In
such case, the preliminary site plan shall cover the entire property involved
and shall clearly indicate the location, size, and character of each phase. A
final site plan shall be submitted for review and approval for each phase.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.170 INSPECTION.
   The Building Code Official shall be responsible for inspecting all
improvements for conformance with the approved final site plan. All sub-grade
improvements, such as utilities, sub-base installations for drives and parking
lots, and similar improvement shall be inspected and approved prior to
covering. The applicant shall be responsible for requesting the necessary
inspections. The Building Code Official shall notify the Common Council in
writing when a development for which a final site plan is approved has passed
inspection with respect to the approved final site plan. The Building Code
Official shall notify the Common Council in writing, of any development for
which a final site plan was approved, which does not pass inspection with
respect to the approved final site plan, and shall advise the Common Council of
the steps taken to achieve compliance. In such case the Building Code Official
shall periodically notify the Common Council of progress towards compliance
with the approved final site plan and when compliance is achieved.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.171 VIOLATIONS.
   The approved final site plan shall become part of the record of approval,
and subsequent action relating to the site in question shall be consistent with
the approved final site plan, unless the Common Council agrees to such changes.
Any violation of the provisions set forth above, including any improvements not
in conformance with the approved final site plan, shall be deemed a violation
of this chapter and shall be subject to all penalties herein.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
SPECIAL LAND USE REVIEW REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
§ 155.185 GENERAL.
   (A)   Intent. The formulation and enactment of this chapter is based upon
the division of the city into districts, in each of which are specified
permitted uses which are mutually compatible. In addition to such permitted
uses, however, there are certain other uses which may be necessary or desirable
to allow in certain locations in certain districts; but because of their actual
or potential impacts on neighboring uses or public facilities, there is a need
to carefully regulate them with respect to their location for the protection of
the community. These uses, due to their peculiar locational need or the nature
of the service offered may have to be established in a district where they
cannot be reasonably allowed as a permitted use.
   (B)   Authority. The Commission shall have the sole power to approve or
disapprove all special land uses. In consideration of all applications for
special land use, the Commission shall review each case individually as to its
appropriateness and consider the following standards as it relates to the
proposed land use. Such uses shall be subject to conditions, restrictions, and
safeguards deemed necessary to the interest of public health, safety, and
welfare.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.186 SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Fee required. A fee for services shall be charged. All fees for
special land use requests shall be established by resolution of the Common
Council during the adoption of the annual budget and which shall be paid when
the application for special land use approval is filed.
   (B)   Application. An application for the approval of a special land use
shall be made by an owner, lessee, or other person with a legal interest in the
property and who has the owner's consent to file the application. The
application form shall contain such information as the Building Code Official
or Plan Commission may require. The necessary fees shall accompany such
application. The applicant shall also submit a color photograph of the site and
existing front elevation for each special land use request submitted to the
city for review. Such photographs shall be submitted with the application. With
the application, the applicant shall submit the requisite number of folded site
plans as required by this chapter. The application shall not be considered
received by the city until all required application conditions are met.
   (C)   Notification required.
      (1)   Process. Upon receipt of an application for a special land use, one
notice that a request for special land use has been received shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and shall be sent by mail or
personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being
considered, to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of
the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all
structures within 300 feet, except that the notice shall be given at least 15
days before the application shall be considered. If the name of the occupant is
not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification
need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a
structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased
by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one
occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a
single structure containing more than four dwelling units, or other distinct
spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships,
businesses, or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of
the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance
to the structure.
      (2)   Content. The notice shall describe the nature of the special land
use request; indicate the property that is the subject of the special land use
request; state when and where the special land use request shall be considered;
indicate when and where written comments shall be received concerning the
request; indicate that a public hearing on the special land use request may be
requested by a property owner or the occupant of a structure located within 300
feet of the boundary of the property being considered for a special use.
   (D)   Request for public hearing. At the initiative of the Commission, upon
the request of the applicant for special land use authorization, or upon the
request of a property owner of a structure located within 300 feet of the
boundary of the property being considered for a special land use, a public
hearing with notification as required for a notice of a request for special
land use approval as prescribed above shall be held before a decision is made
on the special land use request, which request is based on discretionary
grounds. If the applicant or the Commission requests a public hearing, only
notification of the public hearing need be made. A decision on a special land
use request which is based on discretionary grounds shall not be made unless
notification of the request for special land use or notification of a public
hearing on a special land use request is given as required by this section.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.187 STANDARDS.
   (A)   General standards. The following general standards shall be applied by
the Commission to all special land use requests:
      (1)   The proposed special land use shall be of such location, size, and
character that it shall be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly
development of the surrounding neighborhood and vicinity and applicable
regulations of the zoning district (including but not limited to any applicable
performance standards) in which it is to be located.
      (2)   The proposed use shall be of a nature that shall make vehicular and
pedestrian traffic no more hazardous than is normal for the district involved,
taking into consideration vehicular turning movements in relations to routes of
traffic flow, proximity and relationship to intersections, adequacy of sight
distances, location and access of off-street parking, and provisions for
pedestrian traffic, with particular attention to minimizing child-vehicle
interfacing.
      (3)   The proposed use shall be designed as to the location, size,
intensity, site layout, and periods of operation of any such proposed use to
eliminate any possible nuisance emanating therefrom which might be noxious to
the occupants of any other nearby permitted uses, whether by reason of dust,
noise, fumes, vibration, smoke, or lights.
      (4)   The proposed use shall be such that the proposed location and
height of buildings or structures and location, nature, and height of walls,
fences, and landscaping shall not interfere with or discourage the appropriate
development and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonably affect their
value.
      (5)   The proposed use shall relate harmoniously with the physical and
economic aspects of adjacent land uses.
      (6)   The proposed use offers a service or benefit for the public
convenience at the proposed location.
      (7)   The proposed use is so designed, located, planned, and to be
operated that the public health, safety, and welfare shall be protected.
      (8)   The proposed use shall not be detrimental or injurious to the
neighborhood within which it is to be located, nor shall such use operate as a
deterrent to future land uses permitted within the zoning district, and shall
be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter.
      (9)   Consideration will be given to the hours of operation of the
proposed use. Approval of a special land use may be conditioned upon operation
within specified hours considered appropriate to ensure minimal impact on
surrounding uses.
      (10)   Consideration will be given to compatibility with the Master Plan.
The proposed special land use shall be consistent with the general principles
and objectives of the adopted Hamtramck Master Plan.
      (11)   Consideration will be given to public services. The proposed use
shall not exceed the capacity of existing and available public services,
including, but not limited to, utilities, public roads, and police and fire
services. Provision of stormwater management or green infrastructure on-site
over and above the specific requirements of this chapter may be required as a
condition of a special use approval.
   (B)   Eligible uses and activities. The following additional standards shall
be applied by the Commission to uses if authorized as a special land use in a
district:
      (1)   Commercial zones. Light manufacturing uses shall not be directly
adjacent to a residential use in a C2 District.
      (2)   Industrial Zone. Towers in the I District shall be setback from the
nearest building not associated with the tower directly, one foot for every one
foot in height of the tower.
      (3)   Residential zones (R and/or RM).
         (a)   Bars with a Class C liquor license without a dance/entertainment
permit shall be permitted in the R District if such bar is not less than 800
feet away from public owned and operated parks; recreation centers; swimming
pools; playgrounds; public governmental services such as administrative
facilities; police and fire stations; libraries; schools and colleges;
parochial, private, or charter elementary, junior high, and high schools;
religious, cultural, and fraternal activities; congregate residences; and state
licensed residential facilities, and any other establishment holding Class C
liquor licenses.
         (b)   Boarding houses in R Districts shall be permitted if there is
one on-site parking location per each rented unit and that a boarding house
shall have no more than four rented units.
         (c)   “Commercial, light” in the R District shall exclude overnight
stay, 24-hour emergency and 24-hour urgent care facilities.
         (d)   Commercial uses in R may be permitted if the gross floor area
does not exceed 3,000 square feet.
         (e)   “Commercial retail sales establishment, food” in R shall not
sell liquor or have a SDM liquor license.
         (f)   Family and group day care centers and state licensed residential
facilities shall be permitted if there are no dormitory facilities on the
premises, the outdoor play area is fenced in or screened by a heavily planted
greenbelt from any abutting residential use, and that for each child cared for,
there shall be provided, equipped, and maintained on the premises a minimum of
150 square feet of useable outdoor play area with a minimum total area of 1,500
square feet per facility; such facility shall be no closer than 1,000 feet from
a similar facility.
         (g)   Mortuary and funeral homes in the R District shall be permitted
if it is within 500 feet of a religious institution.
         (h)   “Motels, hotels” in R shall be limited to eight rooms.
         (i)   Townhouses in a residential district shall not be required to
have front or side yard setbacks, and townhouses shall not be bordered on each
end by single- or two-family dwellings.
      (4)   Other/general.
         (a)   Automotive self-service stations shall be permitted if the
combined number of automotive self-service stations and automotive service
stations within the city does not exceed five, and the use shall be on a lot
that had a legal automotive self-service or service station within the year
previous to its future use. Automotive self-service stations shall not abut a
residential use.
         (b)   Automotive service stations shall be permitted if the combined
number of automotive- self service stations and automotive service stations
within the city does not exceed five, and the use shall be on a lot that had a
legal automotive self-service or service station within the year previous to
its future use. Automotive service stations shall not abut a residential use.
         (c)   Open storage yards of construction contractor’s equipment and
supplies, building materials, sand, gravel, or lumber shall be permitted, if
such use is located not less than 200 feet from any R or RM District.
         (d)   Parking lots cannot abut more than one residential use; cannot
be greater than 64 feet wide, and no two parking lots may abut each other.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021; Am. Ord. —, passed 3-8-2022; Am.
Res. 2024-75b, passed 8-13-2024)
§ 155.188 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
   (A)   Conditions. The Commission, before approving a special land use
request, shall determine that the conditions set for the special land use have
been satisfied unless the Board has granted a variance for such conditions. The
Commission may deny, approve, or approve with conditions, requests for a
special land use. The Commission may impose such conditions or limitations in
granting approval as may be permitted by state law and this chapter if the
Commission deems conditions necessary to fulfill the spirit or purpose of this
chapter. The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land use or
activity shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall
remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the Commission and the
landowner. The Commission shall maintain a record of changes granted in
conditions. The conditions may include, conditions necessary to ensure that
public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity
shall be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused
by the land use or activity, to protect the natural environment, to conserve
natural resources and energy, to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of
land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable
manner. Conditions imposed shall do all the following:
      (1)   Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety, and
welfare, as well as the social and economic well-being of those who shall use
the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners
immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the community as
a whole;
      (2)   Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes
which are affected by the proposed use or activity;
      (3)   Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning
regulations, be related to the standards established in this chapter for the
land use or activity under consideration, and be necessary to ensure compliance
with those standards.
   (B)   Decision.
      (1)   General. The Commission shall deny, approve, or approve with
conditions requests for a special land use. The Commission shall approve the
any special land use request when the applicant demonstrates that all of the
standards contained in this chapter have been met. The basis of a decision for
a special land use shall be incorporated in a statement of conclusions relative
to the special land use under consideration. The decision shall specify the
basis of the decision, and any condition imposed. Any changes in the conditions
shall be filed with the Wayne County Register of Deeds as provided herein.
      (2)   Approval. If the particular special land use is in compliance with
the standards set forth in this chapter, the requirements specific to the
particular zoning district in which the special land use is proposed, and the
conditions imposed under this chapter, the special land use request shall be
approved. Upon approval of a special land use, the applicant shall submit a
site plan under this chapter. Subsequent amendments to an approved site plan
for a special land use shall not require Commission approval unless the
amendments significantly impact factors considered by the Commission in
approving the special land use, as determined by the Building Code Official.
Thereafter, the Building Code Official shall issue a building permit in
conformity with the particular special land use so approved. In all cases where
a particular special land use has been granted as provided herein, application
for a building permit in pursuance thereof shall be made and received by the
city not later than one year thereafter or such approval shall automatically be
revoked. The Building Code Official may grant an extension thereof for good
cause shown under such terms and conditions and for such period of time not
exceeding six months as he or she shall determine to be necessary and
appropriate. Any special land use that is discontinued or abandoned for a
period exceeding one year shall have its approval revoked. No special land use
approval shall be effective until a notice of such approval, including all
applicable conditions, are filed with the Wayne County Register of Deeds. Any
subsequent changes to a special land use shall also be filed with the Wayne
County Register of Deeds.
      (3)   Denial. If the Commission shall determine that the particular
special land use(s) requested does not meet the standards of this chapter or
otherwise shall tend to be injurious to the public health, safety, welfare or
orderly development of the city, the Commission shall deny the application in
writing which clearly sets forth the reason(s) for such denial in its minutes.
      (4)   Appeal. Any person who is denied a special land use request by the
Commission may appeal the decision to the Board. In hearing the appeal, the
Board shall examine the record of the Commission and determine if the
Commission properly applied the conditions established by this chapter. If the
Board determines that the Commission properly applied the conditions
established by this chapter, then the Board shall uphold the decision of the
Commission. If the Board determines that the Commission failed to properly
apply the conditions established by this chapter, then the Board shall so state
the perceived deficiency and remand the request to the Commission for further
examination.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
ZONING CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
§ 155.200 CODE OFFICIAL TO PROCESS.
   (A)   General. All requests for amendments or changes to the comprehensive
plan, this chapter, or Map shall be submitted to the code official for
processing.
   (B)   Rezoning upon request. A property owner may request the Commission to
recommend the rezoning of his or her parcel. The request shall be filed with
the code official along with any other documentation that the Commission or the
code official deems necessary. The Common Council shall by resolution establish
a fee for a rezoning request during the adoption of the annual budget, which
shall be paid at the time the rezoning request is filed. The Commission shall
consider the rezoning request as a normal amendment to this chapter.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.201 PLAN COMMISSION TO REVIEW.
   The Common Council shall not amend this chapter or Map until the proposed
amendment has been submitted to the Plan Commission, which has held not less
than one public hearing and made report thereon. Following the public hearing
by the Commission and upon the Common Council's receipt of the Commission's
report, the Common Council may adopt the ordinance and maps with or without
amendments or refer the ordinance and maps again to the Commission for further
report.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.202 PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURE.
   Not less than 15 days' notice of the time and place of the public hearing
shall first be published in a newspaper of general circulation. Not less than
15 days' notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given by
mail to each public utility company and each railroad company owning or
operating any public utility or railroad within the zones affected and the
airport manager of each airport that registers its name and mailing address
with the City Clerk for the purpose of receiving the notice. If an individual
property or several adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, notice of
the proposed rezoning and hearing shall be given to the owners of the property
in question not less than 15 days before the hearing. An affidavit of mailing
shall be maintained. A hearing shall be granted to an interested person at the
time and place specified on the notice.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.203 EFFECT OF PROTEST TO PROPOSED AMENDMENT.
   (A)   Upon presentation of a protest petition meeting the requirements of
this division, an amendment to this chapter that is the object of the petition
shall be passed only by a two-thirds vote of the Common Council. The protest
petition shall be presented to the Common Council before final legislative
action on the amendment and shall be signed by one of the following:
      (1)   The owners of not less than 20% of the area of land included in the
proposed change.
      (2)   The owners of not less than 20% of the area of land included within
an area extending outward 100 feet from any point on the boundary of the land
included in the proposed change.
   (B)   Publicly owned land shall be excluded in calculating the 20% land area
requirement.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of law. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish,
equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or land or cause or permit the
aforementioned to be done in violation of this chapter. When any building or
parcel of land regulated by this chapter is being used contrary to this
chapter, the code official shall be permitted to order such use discontinued
and the structure, parcel of land, or portion thereof, vacated by notice served
on any person causing such use to be discontinued. Such person shall
discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the code official after
receipt of such notice to make the structure, parcel of land, or portion
thereof, comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Nuisance declaration. Any building or structure which is erected,
altered, or converted or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed
after the time of passage of this chapter and in violation of any of the
provisions thereof is declared to be a public nuisance per se and shall be
abated by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   Infraction type.
      (1)   Municipal civil infraction. Any person, firm, or corporation who
violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with any provision of
this chapter shall be punished for a municipal civil infraction. Each day that
a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   Misdemeanor. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with any provision of this
chapter for any time after the second repeat offense (third offense), then such
person shall be punished for a misdemeanor violation.
   (D)   Sanctions. The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil
infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as prescribed by resolution of
the Common Council, plus any costs, damages, expenses, and other sanctions as
authorized under Chapter 87 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as
amended, and other applicable laws.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specifically prescribed for a particular municipal
civil infraction violation by this chapter or any ordinance, the civil fine for
a violation shall be not less than an amount prescribed by resolution of the
Common Council, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction.
      (2)   Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations of any
requirement or provision of this chapter by a person. As used in this section,
"repeat offense" means a second municipal civil infraction violation of the
same requirement or provision committed by a person within one year (unless
some other period is specifically prescribed by this chapter) and for which the
person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless
otherwise specifically prescribed by this chapter for a particular municipal
civil infraction violation, the increased fine for the first repeat offense
shall be not less than an amount prescribed by resolution of the Common
Council, plus costs.
      (3)   Any person, firm, or corporation that violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with any provision of this chapter as any
offense after a second repeat offense (third offense), shall be punished for
each offense upon conviction, by a fine of not more than $500, and costs of
prosecution, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or by both
fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
APPENDIX A: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
   The Official Zoning Map of the City of Hamtramck is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in full.
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
APPENDIX B: TABLE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Use Spots Standard Exception
Use                              Spots Standard                       Exception
Automotive self-service station, 2     Per service stall               
service station, repair shop
Automotive self-service station, 2     Per pump (includes the pump)    
service station, repair shop
Bar with dance entertainment     1     Per two people of maximum       
permit, over 3,600 square feet         capacity
Car wash (automatic)             1     Per employee                    
Car wash (self-service)          2     Per stall (includes the stall)  
Dwelling unit                    1     Per dwelling unit               
Financial institutions           2     Per drive up windows (includes  
                                       the window)
Financial institutions           1     Per 300 square feet of gross    
                                       floor area
Hotels/motels                    1     Per guest room                  
Hotels/motels                    1     Per 500 square feet of common   
                                       area
Industrial/manufacturing/              Per 500 square feet of gross
research/ warehousing            1     floor area                     C2
establishment
Laundromat                       2     Per set washer/dryer            
Medical/dental office            1     Per 200 square feet of gross   C2
                                       floor area
Mortuary/funeral home            1     Per 50 square feet of gross     
                                       floor area
Newly constructed professional         Per 1,000 square feet of gross
office/personal service over     1     floor area                      
3,600 square feet
Religious cultural, and          1     Per every two seats based on    
fraternal activities                   maximum seating capacity
Religious cultural, and          1     Per every 54 inches of bench    
fraternal activities                   seating
Schools (all)                    1     Per faculty member              
Schools with assembly halls      1     Per every two seats based on    
                                       maximum seating capacity
Theatres, assembly halls over    1     Per every two seats based on    
5,000 square feet                      maximum seating capacity
No parking requirements for the
Central Business District for                                        
any use
 
(Ord. 497, passed 2-3-2004; Am. Ord. 523, passed 6-13-2006; Am. Ord. 2011-7,
passed 12-13-2011; Am. Ord. 2019-02, passed 10-8-2019; Am. Ord. 2020-28, passed
3-3-2020; Am. Res. 2021-46, passed 4-13-2021)
CHAPTER 156: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT PROVISIONS
Section
   
156.001   Agency designated
   
156.002   Code appendix enforced
   
156.003   Designation of regulated flood prone hazard areas
§ 156.001 AGENCY DESIGNATED.
   Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance
with Public Act 230 of 1972, § 8b(6), as amended, the Building Official of the
City of Hamtramck is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the
responsibility of the City of Hamtramck under Public Act 230 of 1972, as
amended, State of Michigan. The Building Official of the City of Hamtramck
assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act
throughout the corporate limits of the community adopting this chapter.
(Ord. 2021-07, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 156.002 CODE APPENDIX ENFORCED.
   Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code, in accordance
with Public Act 230 of 1972, § 8b(6), as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan
Building Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the jurisdiction
of the community adopting this chapter.
(Ord. 2021-07, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 156.003 DESIGNATION OF REGULATED FLOOD PRONE HAZARD AREAS.
   The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
Entitled "Flood Insurance Study for Wayne County, all jurisdictions" and dated
October 21, 2021 and the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) of
26163CIND1C, 26163CIND2C dated October 21, 2021 are adopted by reference for
the purposes of administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared
to be a part of § 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the
content of the "Flood Hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan
Residential Code.
(Ord. 2021-07, passed 12-14-2021)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
      
II.   BONDS, LOANS AND NOTES
      
III.   ZONING
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
104      8-2-1932    Granting to Thomas E. Currie, the right to lay, maintain
                     and operate pipes for the distribution of gas.
                     Granting a franchise to the Detroit Edison Co. to erect,
229      1-13-1953   construct, lay, operate and maintain all equipment
                     requisite for the transmission, transforming and
                     distribution of electricity for public and private use.
393      4-15-1980   Granting a franchise to Omnicom of Michigan, Inc. to own,
                     operate and maintain a cable televisions system.
                     Granting a franchise to Michigan Consolidated Gas Co. the
454      6-8-1995    right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate
                     gas mains, pipes and services for a period of 30 years.
455      6-22-1995   Granting a cable franchise for a period of 15 years to
                     Omnicom of Michigan, Inc.
 
TABLE II: BONDS, LOANS AND NOTES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Authorizing execution of Amendment No. 2 to annual
367      8-19-1975   contributions contract No. C-3069 and issuance of project
                     loan notes and permanent notes.
                     To amend Ordinance No. 393, known as the City of Hamtramck
424      12-8-1987   CATV Ordinance, by changing the performance bond
                     requirements.
 
TABLE III: ZONING
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
312      9-17-1968   Creating a Urban Renewal District to be known as the
                     Wyandotte Neighborhood District Area.
                     Providing for the designation of an Urban Renewal District
328      4-21-1970   Area to be known as the Wyandotte Neighborhood District
                     Area.
                     Designation of a Community Development Program District
360      1-7-1975    area to encompass the corporate limits of the City of
                     Hamtramck, excepting the Wyandotte Urban Renewal Area (R-
                     31).
                     Establishing a Neighborhood Enterprise Zone located within
489      1-7-2003    the area bounded by Commor Ave. on the north, Dequindre
                     Avenue on the east, Grand Trunk Railroad on the west and
                     Caniff Avenue on the south.
                     Establishing the general rules and regulations that
                     control the design, location, use or occupancy of all
497      5-12-2004   buildings, structures, and land usage in the City, copies
                     of which are on file in the Office of the City Clerk and
                     are adopted and incorporated as part of this Code of
                     Ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS ANNOTATED
M.C.L.A. Cites Code Section
M.C.L.A. Cites      Code Section
15.231 et seq.      150.003
                    92.002,
                    111.004,
                    111.016,
15.231 - 15.246     151.004,
                    151.007,
                    155.023,
                    155.024
15.261              151.007
                    30.001,
                    30.006,
                    92.002,
15.261 - 15.275     150.003,
                    151.004,
                    151.007,
                    155.023,
                    155.024
28.291 - 28.300     91.004
28.301 - 28.308     91.004
117.4(2)            38.003
117.5b              10.001
123.161 et seq.     51.040,
                    51.041
124.651 - 124.729   150.999
125.31 - 125.45     155.023
125.581 - 125.600   155.024
125.651 - 125.709e  32.135,
                    32.137
125.655             32.135
125.1401 et seq.    37.018
125.1501 et seq.    92.002,
                    92.003
                    150.002,
125.1501 - 125.1531 150.003,
                    150.007,
                    155.007
125.1651 - 125.1681 153.025
125.1664            153.025
                    153.002 -
                    153.005,
125.4201 - 125.4230 153.007,
                    153.011,
                    153.012
125.4205            153.008
129.111 - 129.118   37.053
129.141 - 129.150   37.053
205.13              118.123
211.1 - 211.157     92.003
213.21 - 213.41     155.100
257.1 et seq.       74.002,
                    130.050
                    70.001,
257.1 - 257.923     72.999,
                    91.004
257.1d              91.006
257.8b              91.006
257.25              112.004
257.606             74.003
257.674             50.035
257.722             70.015,
                    70.016
323.1 et seq.       52.003
324.20101 et seq.   34.033
333.26421 et seq.   121.002
333.2701 et seq     121.002
                    121.001,
333.27101 et seq.   121.002,
                    121.004
333.27901 et seq.   121.001
                    121.001,
333.27951 et seq.   121.002,
                    121.004
333.7212 et seq.    122.013
338.1083            94.007
338.2301 - 338.2313 92.002,
                    155.007
338.41 et seq.      120.005
339.2001 - 339.2014 155.007
399.1 - 399.10      32.097,
                    32.107
399.151 et seq.     32.107
399.203             151.005
399.203(4)          151.004
399.205(3)          151.010
399.205(6)          151.003
400.701 - 400.737   155.007
418.101 - 418.941   33.043
436.1101 - 436.2303 113.002
436.1801 - 426.1815 119.001
445.471 - 445.476   114.023
445.481 et seq.     115.007,
                    115.013
445.481 - 445.492   114.023
445.482             115.001
445.551 - 445.555   114.023
445.2001            118.123
446.201 - 446.219   114.023
484.2102            111.003
484.2251            111.004
484.3101 - 484.3120 111.001,
                    111.003
560.101 - 560.293   155.022
600.113(1)(c)       10.002
600.3801            122.006
600.8701 et seq.    10.999
712A.2.             135.003
750.227             133.999
750.5               38.003
750.82              130.008
750.535             115.013
764.9c(2)           10.010
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.       Date Passed Code Section
                           119.001 -
38             5-26-1923   119.008,
                           119.999
                           119.185 -
40             7-14-1925   119.188,
                           119.999
                           114.003,
                           114.006,
77             7-26-1928   114.009,
                           114.022,
                           114.999
                           118.095 -
                           118.102,
56             8-2-1928    118.104,
                           118.105,
                           118.999
                           119.050 -
60             8-2-1928    119.053,
                           119.999
                           119.065 -
64             8-2-1928    119.075,
                           119.999
                           118.050 -
70             8-2-1928    118.059,
                           118.999
                           132.125 -
78             9-18-1928   132.128,
                           132.999
                           118.070 -
63             1-22-1929   118.079,
                           118.999
                           116.001 -
65             1-22-1929   116.009,
                           116.999
                           114.002,
                           114.003,
                           114.006,
                           114.009,
81             2-28-1929   114.010,
                           114.017,
                           114.018,
                           114.022,
                           114.025,
                           114.999
86             3-26-1929   71.001
89             7-23-1929   117.001,
                           117.999
                           117.002 -
90             3-25-1930   117.020,
                           117.999
91             7-22-1930   119.020 -
                           119.035
97             7-21-1931   118.051
                           119.110 -
101            11-10-1931  119.114,
                           119.999
104            8-2-1932    T.S.O. I
                           119.021,
105            8-18-1932   119.022,
                           119.035
                           119.090 -
106            10-25-1932  119.099,
                           119.999
111            5-2-1933    119.092
                           132.110 -
112            5-2-1933    132.113,
                           132.999
116            7-6-1933    118.052
                           119.001,
121            12-28-1933  119.002,
                           119.005
                           116.001 -
                           116.003,
124            6-28-1934   116.005 -
                           116.007,
                           116.009
127            6-28-1934   118.103
126            7-3-1934    119.024
                           134.130 -
130            1-4-1935    134.133,
                           134.999
133            1-17-1935   116.001
134            1-17-1935   115.004
138            2-7-1935    119.001,
                           119.002
147            8-29-1935   118.070
150            10-24-1935  119.021
153            11-29-1935  119.020
154            12-17-1935  118.102,
                           118.104
156            3-26-1936   119.002
158            10-6-1936   119.020
                           134.100 -
168            6-9-1938    134.104,
                           134.999
173            7-20-1939   32.135,
                           32.136
179            11-12-1941  71.001
189            5-27-1943   118.120 -
                           118.123
191            9-21-1943   133.055,
                           133.999
                           130.075,
                           130.076,
                           130.999,
                           132.001 -
196            8-21-1944   132.003,
                           132.015,
                           132.016,
                           133.001 -
                           133.005,
                           133.999
198            1-15-1946   10.011
                           134.057 -
201            7-9-1946    134.059,
                           134.999
                           132.095 -
204            1-7-1947    132.098,
                           132.999
205            10-23-1947  71.001
215            1-30-1948   51.003
208            4-13-1948   10.011
213            9-24-1948   10.011
207            7- -1949    32.138
                           132.080,
219            8-11-1949   132.081,
                           132.999
                           119.155 -
223            8-22-1950   119.172,
                           119.999
229            1-13-1953   T.S.O. I
                           72.045 -
230            2-3-1953    72.058,
                           72.999
                           134.115,
233            9-29-1953   134.116,
                           134.999
                           72.090,
236            9-7-1954    72.091,
                           72.999
                           116.020 -
239            11-3-1955   116.026,
                           116.999
241            12-6-1955   36.001
245            10-29-1957  71.001
246            11-12-1958  36.001
247            3-31-1959   36.001
253            12-15-1959  33.040
257            5-31-1960   33.002
258            5-31-1960   34.002
260            6-31-1960   36.001
261            11-15-1960  36.001
264            6-6-1961    72.055
                           119.200 -
270            6-5-1962    119.203,
                           119.999
271            7-3-1962    119.004
278            11-13-1962  37.001
282            3-12-1963   90.999
285            10-1-1963   71.001
                           133.055,
287            2-11-1964   133.057 -
                           133.059,
                           133.999
                           130.090,
288            3-3-1964    130.091,
                           130.999
289            3-17-1964   130.075,
                           130.999
292            10-13-1964  37.001
                           93.001 -
293            10-27-1964  93.007,
                           93.999
                           132.060 -
298            3-2-1965    132.065,
                           132.999
                           133.055,
300            5-27-1965   133.057 -
                           133.059,
                           133.999
                           134.070 -
301            8-10-1965   134.074,
                           134.999
                           134.055,
303            8-24-1965   134.056,
                           134.999
304            12-21-1965  36.001
                           34.015 -
307            3-28-1967   34.018,
                           34.999
308            4-11-1967   90.999
                           112.001 -
309            9-5-1967    112.007,
                           112.999
310            9-5-1967    71.001
311            2-20-1968   71.001
312            9-17-1968   T.S.O. III
                           33.041 -
313            9-24-1968   33.046,
                           33.999
318            7-14-1969   118.054
319            10-14-1969  34.018
320            10-21-1969  37.001
325            11-12-1969  150.020
327            3-10-1970   71.001
328            4-21-1970   T.S.O. III
                           133.040,
330            8-25-1970   133.041,
                           133.999
331            8-25-1970   37.001
332            8-25-1970   71.001
333            12-15-1970  71.001
339            7-13-1971   71.001
340            7-27-1971   33.015 -
                           33.028
344            3-14-1972   37.001
353            3-28-1974   32.120 -
                           32.122
                           131.050 -
355            5-7-1974    131.053,
                           131.999
357            7-2-1974    72.055
360            1-7-1975    T.S.O. III
361            2-4-1975    36.001
364            3-11-1975   36.001
                           73.001 -
365            5-20-1975   73.006,
                           73.999
                           131.050,
366            5-20-1975   131.054 -
                           131.058,
                           131.999
367            8-19-1975   T.S.O. II
368            9-26-1975   36.001
375            3-22-1977   116.002,
                           116.003
                           118.001 -
                           118.005,
                           118.020 -
376            4-26-1977   118.024,
                           118.035,
                           118.036,
                           118.999
                           132.045,
370            12-6-1977   132.046,
                           132.999
381            10-17-1978  71.001
                           72.070,
                           72.072 -
383            11-28-1978  72.074,
                           72.077,
                           72.079,
                           72.999
                           132.030,
389            3-11-1980   132.031,
                           132.999
                           134.040 -
390            3-25-1980   134.042,
                           134.999
391            4-1-1980    34.019
                           131.030 -
392            4-15-1980   131.034,
                           131.999
393            4-15-1980   T.S.O. I
                           92.001 ,
394            5-6-1980    92.004  -
                           92.011,
                           92.999
                           131.075 -
395            1-13-1981   131.079,
                           131.999
                           110.001 -
396            1-29-1981   110.012,
                           110.999
                           134.020 -
407            7-26-1983   134.027,
                           134.999
410            2-11-1984   70.030,
                           70.031
                           90.001 -
                           90.003,
                           90.005,
412            5-8-1984    90.009,
                           90.011,
                           90.012,
                           90.999
416            5-7-1985    Ch. 75, Sch. I
424            12-8-1987   T.S.O. II
                           72.030 -
427            6-30-1988   72.032,
                           72.999
                           133.020 -
428            8-11-1988   133.028,
                           133.999
430            9-22-1988   37.001
431            10-6-1988   71.001
435            10-12-1989  132.003
435            10-12-1989  132.999
                           117.035 -
436            10-26-1989  117.042,
                           117.999
                           72.015,
440            1-30-1992   72.016,
                           72.999
443            7-22-1993   34.018
444            8-19-1993   150.999
                           72.001 -
449            10-20-1994  72.003,
                           72.999
454            6-8-1995    T.S.O. I
455            6-22-1995   T.S.O. I
                           150.075 -
456            9-21-1995   150.077,
                           150.999
457            6-20-1996   110.999
458            11-5-1996   154.001
461            5-1-1997    70.030
462            5-1-1997    70.015,
                           70.016
                           32.096,
                           32.097,
466            4-30-1998   32.099,
                           32.102,
                           32.106,
                           32.107
                           113.001 -
467            6-25-1998   113.004,
                           113.999
471            5-13-1999   Ch. 75, Sch. I
                           150.060 -
473            3-9-2000    150.064,
                           150.999
                           150.001 -
474            4-20-2000   150.008,
                           150.999
477            10-5-2001   150.002
                           134.001 -
478            12-18-2001  134.006,
                           134.999
479            2-4-2002    36.001
482            4-8-2002    150.004
484            5-30-2002   150.004
                           70.001 -
485            9-19-2002   70.003,
                           70.999
                           91.001,
486            11-6-2002   91.004,
                           91.999
                           94.001 -
487            11-6-2002   94.007,
                           94.999
489            1-7-2003    T.S.O. III
                           111.001 -
490            2-18-2003   111.018,
                           111.999
491            4-15-2003   35.001
                           74.001 -
494            10-21-2003  74.003,
                           74.005,
                           74.006
                           155.001 -
                           155.008,
                           155.020 -
                           155.024,
                           155.035,
                           155.036,
                           155.050,
                           155.051,
                           155.065,
                           155.066,
                           155.080,
                           155.090 -
                           155.100,
497            2-3-2004    155.110 -
                           155.121,
                           155.135 -
                           155.138,
                           155.150 -
                           155.155,
                           155.165 -
                           155.171,
                           155.185 -
                           155.188,
                           155.200 -
                           155.203,
                           155.999,
                           Ch. 155, App. A,
                           App. B
                           151.001 -
501            3-2-2004    151.021,
                           151.999
506            9-21-2004   131.001 -
                           131.013
                           32.075,
507            10-26-2004  32.076,
                           32.078,
                           32.080
511            4-12-2005   37.015
                           50.001 -
                           50.006,
513            5-9-2005    50.08 -
                           50.015,
                           50.999
514            6-13-2005   32.121
                           32.035 ,
                           32.037,
515            6-13-2005   32.039,
                           32.040,
                           32.044 -
                           32.046
516            12-13-2005  153.025 -
                           153.027
518            3-14-2006   37.015
                           152.001 -
520            5-9-2006    152.005,
                           152.999
519            5-23-2006   153.001 -
                           153.012
521            6-13-2006   37.045 -
                           37.062
522            6-13-2006   37.030 -
                           37.034
                           155.001 -
                           155.008,
                           155.020 -
                           155.024,
                           155.035,
                           155.036,
                           155.050,
                           155.051,
                           155.065,
                           155.066,
                           155.080,
                           155.090 -
                           155.100,
523            6-13-2006   155.110 -
                           155.121,
                           155.135 -
                           155.138,
                           155.150 -
                           155.155,
                           155.165 -
                           155.171,
                           155.185 -
                           155.188,
                           155.200 -
                           155.203,
                           155.999,
                           Ch. 155, App. A,
                           App. B
525            6-27-2006   32.021,
                           32.022
526            7-11-2006   32.003,
                           32.004
527            10-10-2006  32.077
528            10-24-2006  152.003
529            10-24-2006  37.015
                           31.015 -
530            1-23-2007   31.019,
                           33.003,
                           34.003
531            5-22-2007   153.025 -
                           153.027
                           50.030 -
2007-534       10-23-2007  50.035,
                           50.999
                           38.001 -
2008-1         1-22-2008   38.007,
                           38.999
2008-2         1-22-2008   130.055
                           95.001 -
2008-3         3-11-2008   95.016,
                           95.999
                           93.035 -
2008-5         4-8-2008    93.042,
                           93.999
2008-7         5-27-2008   37.016
2008-8         5-27-2008   37.017
2008-10        7-30-2008   37.018
                           39.001 -
2008-11        8-26-2008   39.013,
                           39.999
2008-12        11-12-2008  37.016
2008-13        12-9-2008   34.018
2009-1         3-24-2009   39.008
                           52.001 -
2009-4         6-23-2009   52.013,
                           Ch. 52, Apps. A -
                           C
2009-6         12-8-2009   150.062
                           51.001 -
                           51.029,
                           51.040 -
                           51.042,
                           51.050 -
2010-2         4-27-2010   51.052,
                           51.060 -
                           51.062,
                           51.110 -
                           51.117,
                           51.999
                           53.001 -
2010-3         4-27-2010   53.012,
                           53.999
                           54.001 -
2010-4         4-27-2010   54.015,
                           54.999
                           135.001 -
2010-5         5-11-2010   135.005,
                           135.999
                           120.001 -
2010-6         5-11-2010   120.012,
                           120.999
2011-1         2-8-2011    34.030 -
                           34.034
2011-3         6-14-2011   34.018
2011-6         10-25-2011  40.01,
                           40.02
                           155.001 -
                           155.008,
                           155.020 -
                           155.024,
                           155.035,
                           155.036,
                           155.050,
                           155.051,
                           155.065,
                           155.066,
                           155.080,
                           155.090 -
                           155.100,
2011-7         12-13-2011  155.110 -
                           155.121,
                           155.135 -
                           155.138,
                           155.150 -
                           155.155,
                           155.165 -
                           155.171,
                           155.185 -
                           155.188,
                           155.200 -
                           155.203,
                           155.999,
                           Ch. 155, App. A,
                           App. B
2012-1         2-14-2012   10.013
2012-2         5-22-2012   150.062
—            - -2013     93.045 -
                           93.048
—            - -2013     96.001 -
                           96.015
                           96.025 -
—            - -2013     96.032,
                           96.999
—            - -2013     150.010,
                           150.011
                           150.080 -
—            - -2013     150.096,
                           150.999
                           150.175 -
—            - -2013     150.177,
                           150.999
                           150.180 -
—            - -2013     150.196,
                           150.999
                           115.001 -
2013-008       1-22-2013   115.013,
                           115.999
                           114.001 -
2013-009       1-22-2013   114.025,
                           114.999
2013-010       1-22-2013   133.004,
                           133.999
2013-011       1-22-2013   132.044
2013-012       1-22-2013   134.056
2013-052       3-12-2013   119.220 -
                           119.225
—            3-26-2013   93.999
2013-17        3-26-2013   96.999
2013-113       5-28-2013   130.053
—            12-4-2013   51.024 -
                           51.026
                           91.001 -
2014-41        6-10-2014   91.007,
                           91.999
2014-42        6-10-2014   93.037,
                           93.041
2014-45        6-24-2014   53.013,
                           53.999
2014-46        6-24-2014   37.031
2016-02        7-12-2016   34.033
2016-03        9-6-2016    34.018
2016-04        9-6-2016    150.010,
                           150.011
2016-05        9-6-2016    96.001 -
                           96.014
                           150.080 -
2016-06        9-6-2016    150.096,
                           150.180 -
                           150.196
2017-01        4-25-2017   112.999
                           50.001 -
2017-02        5-9-2017    50.015,
                           50.030 -
                           50.035
2017-03        5-9-2017    150.076,
                           150.176
                           93.038,
2017-06        8-29-2017   93.039,
                           150.011
                           30.001 -
Res. 2018-19   3-13-2018   30.014,
                           30.030 -
                           30.041
Res. 2018-28   4-12-2018   Charter §
                           9-18
Res. 2018-97   1-8-2019    34.018
                           155.001 -
                           155.008,
                           155.020 -
                           155.024,
                           155.035,
                           155.036,
                           155.050,
                           155.051,
                           155.065,
                           155.066,
                           155.080,
                           155.090 -
                           155.100,
2019-02        10-8-2019   155.110 -
                           155.121,
                           155.135 -
                           155.138,
                           155.150 -
                           155.155,
                           155.165 -
                           155.171,
                           155.185 -
                           155.188,
                           155.200 -
                           155.203,
                           155.999,
                           Ch. 155, App. A,
                           App. B
                           155.001 -
                           155.008,
                           155.020 -
                           155.024,
                           155.035,
                           155.036,
                           155.050,
                           155.051,
                           155.065,
                           155.066,
                           155.080,
                           155.090 -
                           155.100,
2020-28        3-3-2020    155.110 -
                           155.121,
                           155.135 -
                           155.138,
                           155.150 -
                           155.155,
                           155.165 -
                           155.171,
                           155.185 -
                           155.188,
                           155.200 -
                           155.203,
                           155.999,
                           Ch. 155, App. A,
                           App. B
                           72.001 -
                           72.003,
                           72.010,
                           72.015,
                           72.016,
                           72.030 -
                           72.032,
                           72.045 -
Res. 2020-32.2 5-26-2020   72.058,
                           72.070,
                           72.072 -
                           72.074,
                           72.077,
                           72.079,
                           72.090,
                           72.091,
                           72.999
                           122.001 -
2020-02        5-26-2020   122.017,
                           122.999
                           91.001 -
—            6-23-2020   91.007,
                           91.999
                           133.055 -
—            6-23-2020   133.059,
                           133.999
                           110.001 -
—            9-8-2020    110.012,
                           110.999
                           121.001 -
2021-01        2-9-2021    121.008,
                           121.999
                           155.001 -
                           155.008,
                           155.020 -
                           155.024,
                           155.035,
                           155.036,
                           155.050,
                           155.051,
                           155.065,
                           155.066,
                           155.080,
                           155.090 -
                           155.100,
Res. 2021-46   4-13-2021   155.110 -
                           155.121,
                           155.135 -
                           155.138,
                           155.150 -
                           155.155,
                           155.165 -
                           155.171,
                           155.185 -
                           155.188,
                           155.200 -
                           155.203,
                           155.999,
                           Ch. 155, App. A,
                           App. B
                           50.005,
—            5-11-2021   50.009,
                           50.013
Res. 2021-64   5-25-2021   30.001 -
                           30.014
                           30.030 -
                           30.044,
                           32.021,
                           32.022,
                           32.035 -
                           32.037,
                           32.044 -
                           32.046,
                           32.075,
                           32.076,
—            8-10-2021   32.097,
                           32.099,
                           32.106,
                           32.107,
                           32.120,
                           32.121,
                           32.135,
                           32.136,
                           32.150,
                           32.151,
                           153.001 -
                           153.012
                           155.050,
                           155.065,
                           155.066,
—            8-24-2021   155.151,
                           155.152,
                           155.155,
                           155.165
2021-07        12-14-2021  156.001 -
                           156.003
                           155.007,
                           155.050,
—            3-8-2022    155.065,
                           155.066,
                           155.166,
                           155.187
Res. 2022-19   2-22-2022   30.001 -
                           30.014
                           74.001 -
Res. 2022-49   4-26-2022   74.003,
                           74.005,
                           74.006
Res. 2022-50   4-26-2022   35.001
                           150.080 -
                           150.096,
—            11-22-2022  150.180 -
                           150.196,
                           150.999
                           93.037,
—            11-22-2022  150.010,
                           150.011
                           90.001 -
—            11-22-2022  90.029,
                           90.999
                           90.004,
2023-01-10     1-10-2023   90.005,
                           90.030,
                           90.999
Res. 2023-85   6-27-2023   30.007
Res. 2023-88b  6-27-2023   51.004
                           72.005,
                           72.054,
                           72.055,
—            8-22-2023   72.070 -
                           72.072,
                           72.076,
                           72.999
                           92.001 -
—            8-22-2023   92.012,
                           92.999
Res. 2023-123b 9-12-2023   130.010
Res. 2023-127  8-22-2023   30.007
Res. 2023-151  9-26-2023   30.007
                           96.002,
Res. 2023-158b 11-14-2023  96.012,
                           96.015
                           150.080,
                           150.175,
                           155.007,
                           155.050,
—            12-12-2023  155.051,
                           155.065,
                           155.066,
                           155.111,
                           155.165
Res. 2024-45b  5-28-2024   96.002,
                           96.015
                           155.007,
                           155.065,
Res. 2024-75b  8-13-2024   155.0666,
                           155.114,
                           155.135,
                           155.187
Res. 2024-120b 10-8-2024   155.152,
                           155.154
Res. 2024-136b 11-12-2024  150.201 -
                           150.209
                           155.050,
Res. 2025-12b  2-11-2025   155.065,
                           155.066
Res. 2025-25b  3-25-2025   35.001
Res. 2025-94b  8-26-2025   155.065,
                           155.066
                           155.050,
                           155.065,
Res. 2026-15   1-27-2026   155.066,
                           155.080,
                           155.111
                          
 
 
