CODE OF ORDINANCES
CITY OF
MASON, MICHIGAN
_____________
2026 S-15 Supplement is current through
Ord. 265, passed 7-7-2025
_____________
PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE CITY COUNCIL
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
OFFICIALS
CURRENT OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF
MASON, MICHIGAN
________
Russell W. Whipple
Mayor
________
Jon Droscha, Mayor Pro Tem
Elaine J. Ferris
Thomas Husby
Scott Preadmore
Jerry Schaffer
John Vercher
City Council
________
Deborah S. Stuart
City Manager
________
Thomas M. Hitch
City Attorney
________
Sarah J. Jarvis
City Clerk
________
PREFACE
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of
the City of Mason, Michigan.
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances
adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the
history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a
note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with
the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the
back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included
herein.
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order,
and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate
usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to
relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations
and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of
this Code.
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system
used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of
two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter
number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section
within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and
the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is
identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted
in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example,
if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between
sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered
6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in
the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the
subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article
embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new
article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved
chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of
chapters is maintained when including new chapters.
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to
the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of
the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the
page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the
left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an
appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates
the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of
ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their
corresponding prefixes:
 
CODE                       CD1:1
CODE APPENDIX              CDA:1
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE     CCT:1
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLES SLT:1
CODE INDEX                 CDi:1
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has
been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay
phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language
generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous
cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct
the user to the particular item in which the user is interested.
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and
supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication
will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly
edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will
be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for
the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the
holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become
the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to
the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all
such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them
and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical
reference purposes.
Acknowledgments 
This republication was under the direct supervision of John Dombroski, Vice-
President of Production and Amy Zukeran and Janet Cramer, Editors, of the
Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to
the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able
assistance throughout the project.
The publisher is most grateful to Honorable Russell W. Whipple, Mayor, Mr.
Dennis E. McGinty, City Attorney, Mr. Martin A. Colburn, City Administrator,
and Mr. Patrick M. Price, former City Administrator for their cooperation and
assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped
that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of
Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all
citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of
the city's affairs.
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code
Corporation and the City of Mason, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include,
but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines;
prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law
references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference
table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial
purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and
the City of Mason, Michigan.
© Copyrighted material.
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mason, Michigan. 2001.
ORDINANCE NO. 138
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF MASON, INGHAM
COUNTY, MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED
THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE
MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE
SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE.
THE CITY OF MASON DOES HEREBY ORDAIN:
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances of the City of Mason,
Michigan" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1
through 94, each inclusive, is hereby adopted.
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or
before December 2, 2002, and not included in the Code or recognized and
continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed.
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed
to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent
ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.
Section 4. Except as specifically provided otherwise by state law, city
ordinance, or the code adopted by this ordinance, any violation of the Code or
any ordinance, rule, or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, is a
municipal civil infraction, punishable by a civil fine not exceeding $500 plus
all direct and indirect costs of the action. Each act of violation and each day
upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly
provided, shall apply to the amendment of any code section, whether or not such
penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty
prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of
nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits.
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to
indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be
deemed to be incorporated in the Code so that reference to the Code includes
reference to the additions and amendments.
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 8, 2002 that amend or refer to
ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they
amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.
Section 7. The effective date of this ordinance shall be 20 days after the
adoption thereof, but not before it is published in full in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City of Mason, Ingham County, Michigan.
Section 8. The Code adopted herein shall be published in loose-leaf form and
shall be distributed by the City Clerk as follows:
Mayor and Councilmembers                          7 copies (1 copy each)
City Administrator                                1 copy
City Clerk                                        2 copies
City Attorney                                     2 copies
Finance Director/Treasurer                        2 copies
Zoning & Development Director                     2 copies
Police Chief                                      2 copies
Director of Public Works                          1 copy
Fire Chief                                        1 copy
City Engineer                                     1 copy
Downtown Development Authority Executive Director 1 copy
55th Judicial District Court                      2 copies
Mason Public Library                              1 copy
 
The Clerk shall keep one (1) assigned copy of the Code available for public
inspection during office hours. The City may print and publish additional
copies of the code to be made available to the public at such charge as the
City Council may determine by resolution.
The foregoing Ordinance was moved for adoption by councilmember and seconded by
councilmember and adopted by the following vote:
Yes: (________); No: (________).
Adopted: December 2, 2002
Published: December 8, 2002
 
/s/ Martin A. Colburn, Clerk /s/ Russell W. Whipple, Mayor
 
"CLERK'S CERTIFICATION: I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and
accurate copy of an ordinance adopted by the Mason City Council at its regular
meeting held Monday, December 2, 2002, the original of which is in the City
Clerk's office."
____________________
Martin A. Colburn, Clerk
City of Mason
Ingham County, Michigan
PART I
CHARTER OF MASON, MICHIGAN*
* Editors Note: Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Mason, Michigan,
as adopted by electors on June 26, 1951. Amendments are indicated by
parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a
history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original.
Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic
purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state
statutes have been used. Such stylistic change includes printing of catchlines
in boldface type, abbreviation of the word "Section" in catchlines as "Sec.,"
placement of the catchline after the section number (rather than before it),
substitution of a period for a colon in the punctuation ending the catchline
and starting the text of the next section on a new line. Additions for clarity
are indicated by brackets.
State Law References: Home rule cities, MCL 117.1 et seq.
Chapter 1. Name and Boundaries
Sec.
1.1. Name and boundaries.
Chapter 2. Municipal Powers
Sec.
2.1. General powers.
Sec.
2.2. Further definition of powers.
Sec.
2.3. Inter-governmental contracts.
Sec.
2.4. Exercise of power.
Chapter 3. Elections
Sec.
3.1. Qualifications of electors.
Sec.
3.2. Election procedure.
Sec.
3.3. Wards and precincts.
Sec.
3.4. Election date.
Sec.
3.5. Elective officers and term of office.
Sec.
3.6. Non-partisan election.
Sec.
3.7. Special elections.
Sec.
3.8. Notice of elections.
Sec.
3.9. Voting hours.
Sec.
3.10. Nominations.
Sec.
3.11. Form of petition.
Sec.
3.12. Approval of petition.
Sec.
3.13. Additional nominations by council.
Sec.
3.14. Public inspection of petitions.
Sec.
3.15. Election commission.
Sec.
3.16. Form of ballot.
Sec.
3.17. Canvass of votes.
Sec.
3.18. Tie vote.
Sec.
3.19. Recount.
Sec.
3.20. Recall.
Chapter 4. Organization of Government
Sec.
4.1. Council.
Sec.
4.2. Qualifications of councilmen.
Sec.
4.3. Compensation of councilmen.
Sec.
4.4. Election of mayor; mayor pro tem.
Sec.
4.5. Duties of mayor.
Sec.
4.6. Administrative service.
Sec.
4.7. Clerk; functions and duties.
Sec.
4.8. Treasurer; functions and duties.
Sec.
4.9. Assessor; functions and duties.
Sec.
4.10. Attorney; functions and duties.
Sec.
4.11. Attorney; compensation.
Sec.
4.12. City police.
Sec.
4.13. Fire-fighting and prevention.
Chapter 5. General Provisions Regarding Officers and Personnel of the City
Sec.
5.1. Eligibility for office in city.
Sec.
5.2. Vacancies in office.
Sec.
5.3. Removals by council.
Sec.
5.4. Resignations.
Sec.
5.5. Filling vacancies in elective offices.
Sec.
5.6. Change in term of office or compensation.
Sec.
5.7. Oath of office and bond.
Sec.
5.8. Surety bonds.
Sec.
5.9. Delivery of office.
Sec.
5.10. Financial interest prohibited.
Sec.
5.11. Compensation of employees and officers.
Sec.
5.12. Social security benefits and retirement.
Chapter 6. The Council
Sec.
6.1. Procedure and miscellaneous powers and duties; regular meetings.
Sec.
6.2. Special meetings.
Sec.
6.3. Business of special meetings.
Sec.
6.4. Meetings to be public.
Sec.
6.5. Quorum; adjournment of meeting.
Sec.
6.6. Compulsory attendance and conduct at meetings.
Sec.
6.7. Rules of the council.
Sec.
6.8. Providing for public health and safety.
Sec.
6.9. Investigations.
Chapter 7. Legislation
Sec.
7.1. Status of Charter.
Sec.
7.2. Prior ordinances and regulations.
Sec.
7.3. Ordinances and resolutions.
Sec.
7.4. Enactment, amendment, repeal and effective date of ordinances.
Sec.
7.5. Penalties for violation of ordinances.
Sec.
7.6. Publication and recording of ordinances.
Sec.
7.7. Vacating of public places.
Sec.
7.8. Enactment of codes by reference.
Sec.
7.9. Severability of ordinances.
Sec.
7.10. Compilation or codification of ordinances.
Sec.
7.11. Initiative and referendum.
Sec.
7.12. Initiatory and referendary petitions.
Sec.
7.13. Council procedure on initiatory and referendary petitions.
Sec.
7.14. Submission of initiatory and referendary petitions to electors.
Sec.
7.15. Effect of a referendary petition.
Chapter 8. General Finance Purchasing
Sec.
8.1. Fiscal year.
Sec.
8.2. Budget procedures.
Sec.
8.3. Budget hearing.
Sec.
8.4. Adoption of budget.
Sec.
8.5. Budget control.
Sec.
8.6. Depository.
Sec.
8.7. Independent audit; annual report.
Sec.
8.8. Purchase and sale of property.
Chapter 9. Taxation
Sec.
9.1. Power to tax; tax limits.
Sec.
9.2. Subjects of taxation.
Sec.
9.3. Exemptions.
Sec.
9.4. Tax day.
Sec.
9.5. Preparation of the assessment roll.
Sec.
9.6. Board of review.
Sec.
9.7. Meetings of board of review.
Sec.
9.8. Notice of meetings.
Sec.
9.9. Duties and functions of board of review.
Sec.
9.10. Endorsement of roll.
Sec.
9.11. Clerk to certify tax levy.
Sec.
9.12. City tax roll.
Sec.
9.13. Tax roll certified for collection.
Sec.
9.14. Tax lien.
Sec.
9.15. Taxes due; notification thereof.
Sec.
9.16. Collection fees and interest.
Sec.
9.17. Failure or refusal to pay tax.
Sec.
9.18. Delinquent tax roll to county treasurer.
Sec.
9.19. State, county and school taxes.
Sec.
9.20. Protection of city lien.
Chapter 10. Borrowing Power
Sec.
10.1. Grant of authority to borrow.
Sec.
10.2. Authorization of electors required.
Sec.
10.3. Limits of borrowing powers.
Sec.
10.4. Preparation and record of bonds.
Sec.
10.5. Unissued bonds.
Chapter 11. Special Assessments
Sec.
11.1. General power relative to special assessments.
Sec.
11.2. Special assessment procedure.
Sec.
11.3. Special assessment powers.
Sec.
11.4. Disposition of excessive special assessments.
Sec.
11.5. Correction of invalid special assessments.
Sec.
11.6. Contested assessments.
Sec.
11.7. Collection of special assessments.
Sec.
11.8. Special assessments accounts.
Sec.
11.9. Assessments for sidewalks and abatement of hazards or nuisance.
Chapter 12. Municipally Owned Utilities
Sec.
12.1. General powers respecting utilities.
Sec.
12.2. Management of municipal utilities.
Sec.
12.3. Rates.
Sec.
12.4. Utility rates and charges; collection.
Sec.
12.5. Disposal of utility plants and property.
Sec.
12.6. Utility accounts.
Chapter 13. Franchises; Regulation of Utilities; Contracts; Leases
Sec.
13.1. Franchises, contracts and leases remain in effect.
Sec.
13.2. Granting of public utility franchise.
Sec.
13.3. Conditions of public utility franchise.
Sec.
13.4. Regulation of rates.
Sec.
13.5. Use of public places by utilities.
Sec.
13.6. Contracts.
Sec.
13.7. Leases.
Chapter 14. Supervisors
(Not Published)
Chapter 15. Justice Court
(Not Published)
Chapter 16. Cemeteries
Sec.
16.1. Ownership and use.
Sec.
16.2. Purchase and care.
Sec.
16.3. Board of cemetery trustees.
Sec.
16.4. Board of cemetery trustees; organization, powers and duties.
Sec.
16.5. Duties of the superintendent of cemetery.
Sec.
16.6. Regulatory powers of the council.
Sec.
16.7. Other cemeteries, council powers to regulate.
Chapter 17. Miscellaneous
Sec.
17.1. City liability.
Sec.
17.2. No estoppel; by representation.
Sec.
17.3. Vested rights continued.
Sec.
17.4. Trusts.
Sec.
17.5. Vacancies in appointive boards and commissions.
Sec.
17.6. Records to be public.
Sec.
17.7. Definition of publication; mailing of notices.
Sec.
17.8. Sundays and holidays.
Sec.
17.9. Chapter and section headings.
Sec.
17.10. Interpretations.
Sec.
17.11. Penalties for violations of Charter.
Sec.
17.12. Amendments.
Sec.
17.13. Severability of Charter provisions.
Sec.
17.14. Processes against city.
Chapter 1.
Name and Boundaries
Sec. 1.1. Name and boundaries.
The Municipal Corporation now existing and known as the City of Mason,
comprising the entire sections four, five, eight, and nine in the Township of
Vevay, in the County of Ingham, being T2N, R1W, Ingham County, Michigan, shall
continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name City of Mason and
include the territory above described.
Editor's Note: The description of city boundaries in Charter § 1.1 is no longer
accurate due to annexation.
State Law References: Annexation, MCL 117.6 et seq.
Chapter 2.
Municipal Powers
Sec. 2.1. General powers.
Unless otherwise provided or limited in this Charter, the city and its officers
shall possess and be vested with any and all powers, privileges, and
immunities, expressed or implied, which cities and their officers are, or
hereafter may be, permitted to exercise or to provide for in their Charters
under the Constitution and laws of the State of Michigan, including all powers,
privileges, and immunities which cities are, or may be, permitted to provide in
their Charters by Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq.),
as amended, as fully and completely as though these powers, privileges and
immunities were specifically enumerated in and provided for in this Charter,
and in no case shall any enumeration of particular powers, privileges, or
immunities herein be held to be exclusive.
The City and its officers shall have power to exercise all municipal powers in
the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of
the municipal government, whether such powers be expressly enumerated herein or
not; to do any act to advance the interests of the City, the good government
and prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants, and, through its
regularly constituted authority, to pass and enforce all laws, ordinances, and
resolutions relating to its municipal concerns, subject to the Constitution and
general laws of the State and the provisions of this Charter.
Sec. 2.2. Further definition of powers.*
*State Law References: Urban Cooperation Act of 1967, MCL 124.501 et seq.
In addition to the powers possessed by the City under the Constitution and
Statutes of the State of Michigan, and those set forth throughout this Charter,
the City shall have power with respect to and may, by ordinance and other
lawful acts of itsofficers, provide for the following, but this list shall not
be exclusive:
   (1)   The acquisition by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, construction,
or in any manner permitted by statute, of private property of every type and
nature for public use, which property may be located within or without the
County of Ingham and which may be required for or incidental to the present or
future exercise of the purposes, powers, and duties of the City, either
proprietary or otherwise; for the maintenance, development, operation, leasing,
and disposal of City property subject to any restrictions placed thereon by
statute or this Charter;
State Law References: Permissible Charter provisions, MCL 117.4e(1).
   (2)   Refunding money advanced or paid on special assessments for water main
extensions, for borrowing money for such refunding, and for issuing bonds
therefor;
State Law References: Permissible Charter provisions, MCL 117.4b(1).
   (3)   The installation and connection of conduits for the service of
municipally owned and operated electric lighting plants;
State Law References: Permissible Charter provisions, MCL 117.4b(3).
   (4)   The purchase or condemnation of the franchises and of the property
used in the operations of companies or individuals engaged in the cemetery,
hospital, almshouse, electric light, gas, heat, water, and power business;
State Law References: Permissible Charter provisions, MCL 117.4f(a).
   (5)   The use, regulation, improvement, and control of the surface of its
streets, alleys, public ways, and other public places, and of the space above
and beneath them, whether such be located within or without the limits of the
City;
State Law References: Permissible Charter provisions, MCL 117.4h(1).
   (6)   The use, by others than the owner, of property located in streets,
alleys, and public places in the operation of a public utility, upon the
payment of a reasonable compensation, to the owners thereof;
State Law References: Permissible Charter provisions, MCL 117.4h(2).
   (7)   A plan of streets and alleys within, and for a distance of not more
than three miles beyond, the municipal limits;
State Law References: Permissible Charter provisions, MCL 117.4h(3).
   (8)   The use, control, and regulation of streams, waters, and water courses
within its boundaries, subject to any limitations imposed by statute;
State Law References: Permissible Charter provisions, MCL 117.4h(4).
   (9)   The acquiring, establishment, operation, extension, and maintenance of
facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles within its corporate limits,
including the fixing and collection of charges for service and use thereof on a
public utility basis, and for such purpose to acquire by gift, purchase,
condemnation, or otherwise, the land necessary therefor;
State Law References: Permissible Charter provisions, MCL 117.4h(6).
   (10)   Regulating, restricting, and limiting the number and locations of oil
and gasoline stations;
State Law References: Permissible Charter provisions, MCL 117.4i(b).
   (11)   Establishing of districts or zones within which the use of land and
structures, the height, the area, the size and location of buildings, and
required open spaces for light and ventilation of such buildings, and the
density of population may be regulated by ordinance in accordance with
statutory provisions governing zoning;
State Law References: Permissible Charter provisions, MCL 117.4i(c); zoning,
MCL 125.581 et seq.
   (12)   Regulating of trades, occupations, and amusements within the City,
not inconsistent with State and Federal laws, and for the prohibition of such
trades, occupations, and amusements as are detrimental to the health, morals,
or welfare of its inhabitants;
State Law References: Permissible Charter provisions, MCL 117.4i(d).
   (13)   Preventing injury or annoyance to the inhabitants of the City from
anything which is dangerous, offensive, or unhealthful, and to prevent and
abate nuisances and punish those occasioning them or neglecting or refusing to
abate, discontinue, or remove the same;
   (14)   Prescribing the terms and conditions upon which licenses may be
granted, suspended, or revoked, for requiring payments of reasonable sums for
licenses; and for requiring the furnishing of a bond to the City for the
faithful observance of the conditions under which licenses are granted;
   (15)   Licensing, regulating, restricting, and limiting the number and
locations of advertising signs or displays and billboards within the City;
   (16)   Regulating all airports located within its boundaries, and, for the
purpose of promoting and preserving the public peace, safety, and welfare, for
controlling and regulating the use of the air above the City by aircraft of all
types;
   (17)   Prohibiting or regulating the use, occupancy, sanitation, and parking
of house trailers within the City, and the right of the City to so regulate any
house trailer shall not be abrogated because of any detachment thereof from its
wheels, or because of placing it on, or attaching it to the ground by means of
any temporary or permanent foundation or in any manner whatsoever;
Editor's Note: The provisions of MCL 125.2307(3) provide that local ordinances
cannot be designed as exclusionary to mobile homes generally whether the mobile
homes are located inside or outside of mobile home parks or seasonal mobile
home parks.
   (18)   Requiring an owner of real property within the City to construct and
maintain sidewalks abutting upon such property, and, if the owner fails to
comply with such requirements or if the owner is unknown, to construct the
sidewalk and maintain it and assess the costs thereof against the abutting
property in accordance with Section 11.9 of this Charter;
   (19)   Requiring an owner of real property within the City to abate public
hazards and nuisances which are dangerous to the health or safety of
inhabitants of the City, within a reasonable time after the Council notifies
him that such hazard or nuisance exists, and if the owner fails to comply with
such requirements, or if the owner is unknown, to abate such hazard or nuisance
and assess the costs thereof against such property in accordance with Section
11.9, of this Charter;
   (20)   For the public peace and health and for the safety of persons and
property.
State Law References: Mandatory that Charter provide for the public peace and
health and for the safety of persons and property, MCL 117.3(j).
Sec. 2.3. Inter-governmental contracts.
The City shall have power to join with any governmental unit or agency, or with
any number or combination thereof, by contract or otherwise as may be permitted
by law, to have performed jointly, or by one or more of them, or by any other
person, firm or corporation, for or on behalf of the other or others, any power
or duty which is permitted to be so performed by law or which is possessed by
or imposed upon each such governmental unit or agency.
Sec. 2.4. Exercise of power.
Where no procedure is set forth in this Charter for the exercise of any power
granted to or possessed by the City or its officers, the procedure set forth
for the exercise of such power in any statute of the State of Michigan,
including statutes passed for the government of any public body, may govern. If
alternate procedures are to be found in different statutes, then the Council
shall select that procedure which it deems to be most expedient and to the best
advantage of the city and its inhabitants. Where no procedure for the exercise
of any power of the City or its officers is set forth, either in this Charter
or in any statute of the State of Michigan, the Council shall prescribe a
procedure for the exercise of such power.
Chapter 3.
Elections*
*State Law References: Elections, MCL 168.1 et seq.
Sec. 3.1. Qualifications of electors.
The inhabitants of the City having the qualifications of electors in the State
of Michigan, and no others, shall be electors in the City.
State Law References: Qualifications for registration as elector, MCL 168.492.
Sec. 3.2. Election procedure.
The election of all city officers shall be on a non-partisan basis. The general
election laws of the State shall apply to and control, as near as may be, all
procedures relating to registration and city elections except as such general
laws relate to political parties of partisan procedure and except as otherwise
provided in this Charter.
State Law References: Nonpartisan elections permitted, MCL 117.3(a), (b).
Sec. 3.3. Wards and precincts.
The City of Mason shall consist of one ward. The Council shall, from time to
time, establish by ordinance convenient election precincts. The precincts into
which the City of Mason, is divided, as they existed on the effective date of
this Charter, shall be the precincts of the City until otherwise provided for
by the Council.
State Law References: Mandatory that Charter provide for establishment of one
or more wards, MCL 117.3(e).
Sec. 3.4. Election date.
A non-partisan city general election shall be held on the even year November
general election date prescribed by state law.
(Amendment of 8-2-2005)
Editor's Note: The provisions of Charter § 3.4 are superseded by Code § 18-1.
See MCL 168.644l.
Sec. 3.5. Elective officers and term of office.
The elective officers of the City shall be seven Councilmen. At the 1974
election four (4) Councilmen shall be elected for a term of two (2) years. At
the 1975 election three (3) Councilmen shall be elected for a term of three (3)
years, and then each four (4) years thereafter. At the 1976 election four (4)
Councilmen shall be elected for a term of four (4) years and each four (4)
years thereafter. Term of office shall begin January 1st following a
Councilman's election to office.
of 11-6-1973)
Editor's Note: Except for the first sentence, the provisions of Charter § 3.5
have been superseded by the odd-year election. See MCL 257.644a et seq. Terms
of office now commence on January 1. See Code § 18-1 and MCL 159.644h.
Sec. 3.6. Non-partisan election.
A non-partisan city primary election shall be held on the even year August
primary election date prescribed by State Law.
If upon the expiration of the time for filing nomination petitions for any
elective city office, petitions have been filed for no more than twice the
number of candidates for such office to be elected at the next city election,
then no primary election shall be held in respect to such office and the Clerk
shall publish notice of this fact. Candidates, in number to twice the number of
persons to be elected to each city office at such election who receive the
highest number of votes at any such primary election shall be declared the
nominees for election to the respective offices for which they are candidates.
The names of such nominees, together with the names of persons for whom
petitions have been filed for offices with respect to which no primary election
was held, and the names of persons who have been selected as nominees under the
provisions of Section 3.13 hereafter, shall be certified by the Clerk to the
Election Commission to be placed upon the ballot for the next subsequent
regular city election.
(Amendment of 8-2-2005)
Editor's Note: As the city now has odd-year elections pursuant to MCL 257.644a
et seq., the date of the primary in Charter § 3.6 has been superseded by Code §
18-2. See MCL 257.644b.
Sec. 3.7. Special elections.
Special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the Council
at least forty-five (45) days in advance of such election, or when required by
this Charter, or the general laws of the State. Any resolution calling a
special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. No more than two
special city elections shall be called in any one calendar year.
State Law References: Special elections to fill vacancy on governing body, MCL
168.321; special elections prohibited on regular or special primary day, MCL
168.635.
Sec. 3.8. Notice of elections.
Notice of the time and place of holding any city election, of the officers to
be nominated or elected, and of the questions to be voted upon shall be given
by the Clerk in the same manner and at the same time as provided in the State
election law for the giving of notice by township or city Clerks.
State Law References: Notice of elections, MCL 168.638, 168.653a.
Sec. 3.9. Voting hours.
The polls of all elections shall be opened and closed at the time prescribed by
law for the opening and closing of polls at State elections, subject to any
statutory right of the Council to adjust these hours to local time.
State Law References: Poll hours, MCL 168.720.
Sec. 3.10. Nominations.
The method of nomination of candidates for all offices provided for in this
Charter which are to be filled by the electors of the city shall be by
petition. Such petitions for each candidate shall be signed by not less than 25
nor more than 50 qualified registered electors of the city. No person shall
sign his name to a greater number of petitions for any one office than there
are persons to be elected to said office at said election. Where the signature
of any individual appears on more petitions than there are candidates to be
elected to said office, the signature of such individuals on all such petitions
shall be invalidated. Nomination petitions shall be filed with the Clerk. The
Clerk shall publish notice of the last day, time and place permitted for filing
nomination petitions, of the names of offices to which persons are to be
elected, and of the number of persons to be elected to each office at the next
city election, at least one week and not more than three weeks before such
date.
Editor's Note: The fourth sentence of Charter § 3.10 is superseded by MCL
168.547a. The date for filing of nominating petitions provided for in Charter §
3.10 is superseded by MCL 168.644f.
Sec. 3.11. Form of petition.
The form of petition shall be substantially as that designated by the Secretary
of State for the nomination of non-partisan judicial officers. A supply of
official petition forms shall be provided and maintained by the Clerk.
Sec. 3.12. Approval of petition.
The Clerk shall accept only nomination petitions which conform with the forms
provided and maintained by him, and which, considered together, contain the
required number of valid signatures for candidates having those qualifications
required for the respective elective city officers by this Charter. When a
petition is filed by persons other than the person whose name appears thereon
as a candidate, it may be accepted only when accompanied by the written consent
of the candidate. The Clerk shall, forthwith after the filing of a petition,
notify in writing any candidate whose petition is then known not to meet the
requirements of this Section, but the failure to so notify any candidate shall
in no way prevent a final determination that the petition does not meet such
requirements. Within five days after the last date for filing petitions, the
Clerk shall make his final determination as to the validity and sufficiency of
each nomination petition and as to whether or not the candidate has the
qualifications required for his respective elective city office as required by
this Charter, shall write his determination thereof on the face of the
petition, and shall notify in writing the candidate whose name appears thereon
of his determination.
Sec. 3.13. Additional nominations by council.
In the event that the number of nomination petitions filed for candidates for
the offices of Councilmember does not equal or exceed the number of such
offices to be filled at any election, the Council shall nominate, by
resolution, such additional qualified citizens as may be necessary to make the
number of candidates for the office of Councilmember equal to the number of
such offices to be filled. Such resolution shall in each case be passed not
later than 5 days after the date on which the primary election was to have been
held.
of 11-6-1990)
Sec. 3.14. Public inspection of petitions.
Beginning five days after the final filing date for the filing of nomination
petitions, all such petitions filed shall be open for public inspection in the
office of the Clerk.
Sec. 3.15. Election commission.
An Election Commission is hereby created, consisting of the Clerk, the
Attorney, and one member of the Council who shall not be a candidate for
elective office at the election for which he serves as a member of the Election
Commission. Such member shall be designated by the Council each year. The Clerk
shall be chairman and two members of such board shall be a quorum. The
Commission shall appoint the Board of Election Inspectors for each precinct,
and shall have charge of all activities and duties required of it by statute
and this Charter relating to the conduct of elections in the City. The
compensation of election personnel shall be determined in advance by the
Council. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the Election
Commission shall prescribe the procedure to be followed.
(Amendment of 8-2-2005)
State Law References: Election commission, MCL 168.25 et seq.
Sec. 3.16. Form of ballot.
The form, printing, and numbering of ballots or the preparation ofthe voting
machines used in any city election shall conform as nearly as may be to that
prescribed by statute except that no party designation or emblem shall appear
thereon. In all city elections, the names of qualified candidates or nominees
for each office shall be listed under a separate heading and shall be rotated
systematically in the manner prescribed by statute.
State Law References: Ballots, MCL 168.559 et seq., 168.684 et seq.
Sec. 3.17. Canvass of votes.
The Clerk, the Attorney, and the members of the Council shall bethe Board of
Canvassers to canvass the votes at city elections, except that if any of such
persons are candidates for office at the election to be canvassed, such persons
shall not be a member of the Board of Canvassers at such election. A majority
of the members of such board as so constituted shall be a quorum. The Board of
Canvassers shall convene on the Thursday next succeeding each city election at
the usual time and place of meeting of the Council and shall determine the
results of the city election upon each question and proposition voted upon and
what persons are duly elected or nominated to the several offices respectively
at said election, and shall notify, forthwith in writing, the successful
candidates or nominees of their election. The number of candidates for each
office equal to the number to be elected to such office who receive the highest
number of votes shall be elected. The Clerk shall make, under the corporate
seal of the City, duplicate certificates of the determinations of the Board and
shall file one certificate with the County Clerk and the other in his own
office.
State Law References: Board of canvassers and contracts with county for
canvassing, MCL 168.30a et seq.
Sec. 3.18. Tie vote.
If, at any city primary or election, there shall be no choice between
candidates by reason of two or more persons having received an equal number of
votes, then the Council shall name a date for the appearance of such persons
for the purpose of determining the nomination or election of such candidates by
lot, as provided by State Law. Should any person or persons fail or refuse to
appear, in person or by his representative, to determine the result of any tie
election at the time and place named by the Council, such determination shall
be made by lot, in his or their absence, at the direction and under the
supervision of the Council. Such determination shall, in any event, be final.
State Law References: Determination of election by lot, MCL 168.851 et seq.
Sec. 3.19. Recount.
A recount of the votes cast at any city election for any office or upon any
proposition may be had in accordance with the general election laws of the
state. Unless otherwise provided by statute the petition for a recount of the
votes cast at any city election shall be filed with the Clerk within six days
after the Board of Canvassers has made its official report of the result of the
election at which such votes were cast, and any counter petition shall be filed
within 24 hours thereafter.
State Law References: Recounts, MCL 168.861 et seq.
Sec. 3.20. Recall.
Any elected official may be recalled from office by the electors of the City in
the manner provided by statute. A vacancy created by the recall of any elected
official shall be filled in the manner prescribed by statute.
Chapter 4.
Organization of Government*
*State Law References: Mandatory that Charter provide for the qualifications,
duties, and compensation of the city's officers, MCL 117.3(d).
Sec. 4.1. Council.
There shall be a Council of seven members, one of whom shall serveas Mayor. The
Council shall constitute the legislative and governing body of the City and
shall have power and authority, except as otherwise provided in this Charter or
by law, to exercise all powers conferred upon or possessed by the City, and
shall have the power and authority to adopt such ordinances and resolutions as
it shall deem proper in the exercise thereof. In all cases where the word
"Council" is used in this Charter, the same shall be synonymous with the word
"Commission" or any other term used in any State or Federal law in referring to
municipal legislative or governing bodies. The Council shall not surrender its
legislative or policy forming powers to any person, firm, association, or
corporation.
State Law References: Mandatory that Charter provide for mayor and elected
legislative body, MCL 117.3(a).
Sec. 4.2. Qualifications of councilmen.
Members of the Council shall meet the eligibility requirements contained in
Section 5.1. of this Charter and the Council shall be sole judge of the
election and qualifications of its own members, subject only to review by the
courts.
Sec. 4.3. Compensation of councilmen.
For his services as a member of the Council the compensation ofeach Councilman,
except the Mayor, shall be $5.00 for each regular and special meeting attended,
but not to exceed $120.00 per year. The Mayor shall receive the sum of $7.50
for each regular and special meeting attended, but not to exceed $180.00 per
year. In the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem, or the Councilman acting
as Mayor, shall receive the sum of $2.50 per meeting in addition to all other
compensation provided for him under this section. No expenses shall be allowed
the Mayor and Councilmen except their necessary bonafide expenses incurred in
the services of the City outside of the City, when so ordered by the
affirmative vote of four members of the Council. No compensation shall be
granted the Mayor or Councilmen for their services on council committees or
other official meetings.
Editor's Note: The provisions of Charter § 4.3 are superseded by the
establishment of the local officers compensation commission. See Code, ch. 2,
art. VI, div. 2. See also MCL 117.5c.
Sec. 4.4. Election of mayor; mayor pro tem.
The Council shall, at its first meeting in January of 2007 and of each odd year
thereafter, elect one of its members to serve as Mayor and one to serve as
Mayor Pro Tem, both for a term expiring at the first Council Meeting in January
of the following odd year. In the event of absence or disability of both the
Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem, the Council may designate another of its members to
serve as Acting Mayor during such absence or disability.
(Amendment of 8-7-2001; Amendment of 8-2-2005)
Sec. 4.5. Duties of mayor.
(a)   Insofar as required by law, and for all ceremonial purposes, and in case
of Military law, the Mayor shall be the executive head of the City. He shall
have an equal voice and vote in the proceedings of the Council, but shall have
no veto power. He shall be the presiding officer of the Council.
(b)   The Mayor shall be conservator of the peace, and may exercise within the
City the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress riot and disorder, and
shall have authority to command the assistance of all able-bodied citizens to
aid in the enforcement of the ordinances of the City and to suppress riot and
disorder.
(c)   The Mayor shall execute or authenticate by his signature such instruments
as the Council, this Charter, or the laws of the State of Michigan or the
United States of America shall require.
(d)   Except as may be required by law, the Mayor shall exercise only such
powers as this Charter or the Council shall specifically confer upon him.
(e)   In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall
perform the duties of Mayor. In the absence or disability of both, the
designated Acting Mayor shall perform such duties.
Sec. 4.6. Administrative service.
The administrative officers of the City shall be the Clerk,Treasurer, Assessor,
Attorney, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, and Superintendent of Public Works, and,
if the Council deems necessary, a City Administrator, Health Officer, City
Engineer, and Building Inspector. The Council may, by ordinance, create
additional administrative offices and may, by resolution, combine any
administrative offices in any manner it deems necessary or advisable for the
proper and efficient operation of the City. Except as hereinafter provided, all
administrative officers of the City shall be appointed by the Council for an
indefinite period, shall serve at the pleasure of the Council, and shall have
their compensation fixed by the Council.
Except as may be otherwise provided by statute or this Charter, the Council
shall establish, by ordinance, such departments of the City as it deems
necessary or advisable and shall prescribe therein the functions of each
department and the duties, authorities, and responsibilities of the officers of
each department.
All personnel employed by the city who are not elected officers of the city or
declared to be administrative officers by, or under the authority of, this
Section shall be deemed to be employees of the City. The head of each
department shall have the power to hire and discharge the employees of such
department without confirmation by the Council.
The Council may, by ordinance passed by a 5/7 vote, create the office of the
City Administrator and specify the duties, authorities, and responsibilities of
such office. In the event such office is created, the Council may provide that
any administrative function, officer, or department of the City, except the
Attorney, shall be placed under the administrative direction of such City
Administrator, and in such event the City Administrator shall have the power to
appoint, subject to confirmation by the Council, such administrative officers
of the City as are placed under his administrative direction and shall have the
power to discharge such administrative officers without confirmation by the
Council.
Any administrative officer or employee who has been discharged may, within 10
days thereafter, petition the Council to hear the facts regarding such
discharge, and in any such case the Council may, in its sole discretion, hold a
hearing and inquire into such facts and may make such recommendation in the
matter as it considers proper.
State Law References: Mandatory that Charter provide for the election or
appointment of a clerk, a treasurer, an assessor or board of assessors, a board
of review, and other officers considered necessary, MCL 117.3(a).
Sec. 4.7. Clerk; functions and duties.
(a)   The Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Council and shall attend all meetings
of the Council and shall keep a permanent journal, in the English language, of
its proceedings.
State Law References: Mandatory that Charter provide for keeping in the English
language a written or printed journal of each session of the legislative body,
MCL 117.3(m).
(b)   He shall be custodian of the city seal, and shall affix it to all
documents and instruments requiring the seal, and shall attest the same. He
shall also be custodian of all papers, documents, and records pertaining to the
City the custody of which is not otherwise provided for. He shall give to the
proper department or officials ample notice of the expiration or termination of
any franchise, contract, or agreement.
(c)   He shall certify, by his signature, all ordinances and resolutions
enacted or passed by the council.
(d)   He shall provide and maintain in his office a supply of forms for all
petitions required to be filed for any purpose by the provisions of this
Charter.
(e)   He shall be responsible for the maintenance of a system of accounts of
the city, which shall conform to any uniform system required by law and by the
Council and to generally accepted principles and procedures of governmental
accounting. He shall make monthly financial statements to the Council. The
Council may, however, provide for the responsibility of the maintenance of
accounts of the City by some officer other than the Clerk.
State Law References: Mandatory that Charter provide for a system of accounts
that conforms to a uniform system of accounts as required by law, MCL 117.3(n).
(f)   He shall have power to administer oaths of office.
(g)   He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by State
law, this Charter, or by the Council.
Sec. 4.8. Treasurer; functions and duties.
(a)   The Treasurer shall have the custody of all moneys of the City and all
evidences of indebtedness belonging to the City or held in trust by the City.
(b)   He shall collect all moneys of the City, the collection of which is not
provided for elsewhere by Charter or ordinance. He shall receive from other
officers and employees of the City all money belonging to and receivable by the
City that may be collected by such officers and employees, including fines,
license fees, taxes, assessments, and all other charges.
All money shall be turned over to the Treasurer after collection or receipt,
and he shall, in all cases, give a receipt therefor. He shall disburse all city
funds in accordance with the provisions of State law, this Charter and
procedures to be established by the Council. Each check or warrant disbursing
money of the City shall be signed by the Treasurer and countersigned by the
Clerk or the Mayor or the person performing the duties of the Mayor.
(c)   He shall keep and deposit all money or funds of the City in such manner
and only in such places as the Council may determine and shall report the same
in detail to the Clerk.
(d)   He shall have such powers, duties, and prerogatives in regard to the
collection and custody of state, county, school district, and city taxes and
moneys as are conferred by law, upon township treasurers in connection with
state, county, township, and school district taxes upon real and personal
property.
(e)   He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this
Charter or by the Council.
State Law References: Depositories, MCL 129.11 et seq., 211.43b.
Sec. 4.9. Assessor; functions and duties.
The Assessor shall possess all the powers vested in, and shall be charged with
all the duties imposed upon, assessing officers by the general laws of the
State. He shall prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the manner
prescribed by this Charter, by ordinance, or resolution of the Council, and by
the general laws of the State.
He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter
or by the Council.
State Law References: Assessments, MCL 211.10 et seq.
Sec. 4.10. Attorney; functions and duties.
(a)   The Attorney shall act as legal advisor to, and attorney and counsel for,
the Council. He shall advise any officer or department head of the City in
matters relating to his official duties when so requested by the Council, and
shall file with the Clerk, a copy of all written opinions given by him.
(b)   He shall conduct for the City such cases in court and before other
legally constituted tribunals as the Council may request. He shall file with
the Clerk copies of such records and files relating thereto as the Council may
direct, and a copy of all written opinions given by him.
(c)   He shall prepare or review all ordinances, contracts, bonds, and other
written instruments which are submitted to him by the Council and shall
promptly give his opinion as to the legality and form thereof.
(d)   He shall call to the attention of the Council all matters of law, and
changes or developments therein, affecting the City.
(e)   He shall attend the meetings of the Council and he shall perform such
other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter or by the Council.
(f)   Upon the recommendation of the Attorney, or upon its own initiative, the
Council may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the City
has an interest, or to assist and counsel with the Attorney therein.
(g)   Such duties, except for the conduct of cases in courts, other than the
Justice Court, and before other legally constituted tribunals, shall constitute
the normal duties of the Attorney.
Editor's Note: The reference in Charter § 4.10(g) to the justice court is
obsolete. See MCL 600.9921 et seq.
Sec. 4.11. Attorney; compensation.
The compensation set by the Council for the Attorney shall be in contemplation
of the normal duties of that office. Special compensation may be provided at
the discretion of the Council in cases of appeals to, or litigation commenced
in, the Federal Courts, the Circuit Court or State Supreme Court, work
requiring extensive hearings before quasi-judicial or administrative tribunals,
for legal work in connection with the issuance of bonds of the City, for
condemnation proceedings, or for other matters outside the scope of his normal
duties. No such special compensation shall be paid, except in accordance with
an agreement between the city and the Attorney made before the service for
which such special compensation is to be paid has been rendered.
Sec. 4.12. City police.
The police officers of the City shall have and exercise all the immunities,
privileges, and powers of police officers under the common law and statutes of
the State for the preservation of quiet, good order, and for the safety of
persons and property within the City. They shall arrest upon view, and with or
without process, any person found in the act of committing any offense against
the ordinances of the City amounting to a breach of the peace and shall,
forthwith, take such person before the proper magistrate, or court for
examination or trial.
They shall perform such other duties as may be required of them by this Charter
or by the city Council.
Sec. 4.13. Fire-fighting and prevention.
The fire-fighting and prevention forces of the City shall beresponsible for the
use, care, and management of the City's fire-fighting apparatus and property
and shall conduct such supervisory and educational programs within the City and
with its inhabitants and industrial and business interests as will diminish the
risk and potentiality of fires within the City. The Fire Chief, or any person
lawfully acting in his stead, shall have concurrent powers with city police
officers in the enforcement of violations of state fire laws, violations of
city ordinances relative to fire protection, fire zones, and fire prevention.
The Fire Chief, or any person lawfully acting in his stead, may command any
person, present at a fire, to aid in the extinguishment thereof and to assist
in the protection of property thereat. If any person shall willfully disobey
any such lawful requirement or other lawful order of such officer, he shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this Charter, which Charter constitutes the
governing law of the City of Mason, and shall be subject to punishment therefor
as in this Charter provided. The Fire Chief, or any person lawfully acting in
his stead, with the concurrence of any two Councilmen, may cause any building
to be pulled down or destroyed when deemed necessary in order to arrest the
progress of fire. Reimbursement by the City for the cost of any such building
to persons having an interest therein shall be made in the manner provided by
Section 11, Chapter 29 of Act 215 of the Public Acts of 1895 (MCL 129.11),
which section, insofar as it establishes the procedure for such reimbursement,
is hereby adopted and made a part of this Charter by reference.
Chapter 5.
General Provisions Regarding Officers and Personnel of the City
Sec. 5.1. Eligibility for office in city.
No person shall be eligible for any elective office of the City unless he or
she shall be a qualified elector of the City and shall have been a resident of
the City for at least two years immediately prior to the date of the election
at which he or she is a candidate for office.
All administrative officers of the City shall be citizens of the United States.
No person shall be eligible for any elective or appointive office of the City
who is in default to the City or to a school district within the City; or to
the County of Ingham. The holding of office by any person who is in such
default shall create a vacancy, unless such default shall be cured within 30
days after the giving of written notice thereof by the Clerk or unless such
person shall, in good faith, be contesting the liability for the default.
Except as may be specifically permitted in this Charter, no elected city
official may be appointed to any city office, or employed by the City during
the term of office for which he or she was elected.
This section shall not prohibit any elected city official from serving the City
with compensation as emergency medical services personnel or as a fire fighter,
if that fire fighter is not a full-time fire fighter, a Fire Chief, or a person
who negotiates with the City on behalf of the fire fighters.
of 6-2-1993)
State Law References: City prohibited from making a contract with, or giving an
official position to, one who is in default to the city, MCL 117.5(f).
Sec. 5.2. Vacancies in office.
Any city office shall be declared vacant by the Council upon the occurrence of
one or more or the following events before the expiration of the term or such
office:
   (1)   For any reason specified by statute or this Charter as creating a
vacancy in office;
   (2)   If the officer shall absent himself continuously from the City for
more than sixty days without the permission of the Council;
   (3)   In the case of any member of the Council, if such officer shall miss
four consecutive regular meetings of the Council, or twenty-five per cent of
such meetings in any fiscal year of the City, unless such absences shall be
excused by the Council, at the time of each absence;
   (4)   Assumption by the officer of any office which is incompatible with the
city office held by him.
Sec. 5.3. Removals by council.
After notice and the giving of an opportunity to be heard by the holder of any
city office such city office shall be declared vacant by the Council upon the
occurrence of one or more of the following events before the expiration of the
term of such office:
   (1)   If such officer has failed to perform the duties of his office for
ninety days because of physical or mental disability;
   (2)   If such officer has been found guilty of any act constituting
misconduct in office under the provisions of this Charter by any court, or if
such officer shall be found guilty of any act constituting misconduct in office
under the provisions of this Charter, or wilful neglect of, or gross
inefficiency in, the performance of his duties as officer of the City by the
vote of four or more members of the Council at or following the time set for
such hearing.
For the purpose of this Section, notice shall be given to the officer at least
ten days before the hearing. Such notice shall be given personally or by
delivering the same at his last known place of residence. Such notice shall
include a statement of reasons for the proposed removal. The hearing shall
afford an opportunity to the officer, in person or by attorney, to cross-
examine witnesses and to present testimony in his own defense.
Sec. 5.4. Resignations.
Resignations of elective officers shall be made in writing and filed with the
Clerk and shall be immediately effective. Resignations of appointive officers
shall be made in writing to the appointing officer or body and shall be
immediately effective.
Sec. 5.5. Filling vacancies in elective offices.
If any vacancy occurs on the Council more than 182 days prior to the next
regular city election and the office would not otherwise be filled at such
election, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the majority of the
remaining members of the Council until the first meeting following the city
election, and the balance of the unexpired term shall be filled by that person
who receives the next highest number of votes cast for Council candidates after
all regular four-year terms are filled. When any such vacancy is to be filled
at a regular city election, the Council shall nominate such additional
candidates as required by Section 3.13 of this Charter to make the total number
of candidates equal to the number of offices to be filled at such election. Any
other vacancy to elective offices shall be filled by appointment by a majority
vote of the Council for the unexpired term. All vacancies to be filled by
appointment under this Section shall be so filled within thirty days after such
vacancy occurs.
If three or more vacancies in the Council exist simultaneously the Clerk shall
forthwith call a special election to be held within sixty-five days thereafter
to fill such vacancies for the unexpired terms of the individuals whose offices
have become vacant.
Any vacancy which occurs as a result of the recall of an elective officer as
provided in Section 3.19 shall be filled by a special election.
In connection with any special election to fill a vacancy or vacancies in any
elective office, no primary election shall be held. Candidates shall be
nominated by petitions in a manner identical to that provided in Section 3.10
to 3.14 of this Charter, inclusive; the names of all qualified candidates who
file sufficient valid nomination petitions twenty days before such special
election shall be certified to the election commission and placed on the
ballot.
If at any special election to be held pursuant to Section 5.4 of this Chapter,
all vacancies to be filled are in offices having the same unexpired term, the
number of candidates equal to the number of such vacancies who shall have the
highest number of votes shall be elected.
If at any special election to be held pursuant to Section 5.4. of this Chapter,
there are vacancies to be filled in offices having different unexpired terms,
the number of candidates equal to the number of vacancies in the offices having
the longer unexpired terms who shall receive the highest number of votes at
such election shall be elected to fill the vacancies in the offices having the
longer unexpired terms and candidates equal to the number of vacancies in the
offices having the shorter unexpired terms who receive the next highest number
of votes in order shall be elected to fill the vacancies in the offices having
the shorter unexpired terms.
(Amendment of 8-5-2003)
State Law References: Special elections to fill vacancy on governing body, MCL
168.321.
Sec. 5.6. Change in term of office or compensation.
Except by procedures provided in this Charter, the terms of officeof the
elective officers and of members of boards and commissions appointed for a
definite term shall not be shortened. The terms of elective officers shall not
be extended beyond the period for which any such officer was elected or
appointed, except that an elective officer shall, after his term has expired,
continue to hold office until his successor is elected and has qualified. The
Council shall not grant or authorize extra compensation to any officer or
employee after his service has been rendered.
The compensation of any elective officer shall not be increased or decreased
from the time of his election until the end of the term of office for which he
was elected.
State Law References: Establishment of the local officers compensation
commission, MCL 117.5c. See Code, ch. 2, art. VI, div. 2.
Sec. 5.7. Oath of office and bond.
Every officer, elective or appointive, before entering upon the duties of his
office, shall qualify by taking the oath of office prescribed for public
officers by the Constitution of the State and by filing the oath with the
Clerk, together with any bond required by statute, this Charter or by the
Council. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this Section,
within ten days from the date he is notified in writing of his election or
appointment, such officer shall be deemed to have declined the office and such
office shall thereupon become vacant, unless the Council shall, by resolution,
extend the time in which such officer may qualify as above set forth.
State Law References: Oath, Mich. Const. art XI, § 1.
Sec. 5.8. Surety bonds.
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all officers of theCity whose
duties involve the custody of or accountability for public property or public
funds, either by way of receipt or disbursement, or both, and all other
officers and employees so required by the Council shall file with the City an
official bond, in such form as the Council shall direct and approve, before
they enter upon the duties of their respective offices. Such official bond of
every officer and employee shall be conditioned that he will faithfully perform
the duties of his office, and will on demand deliver over to his successor in
office, or other proper officer or an agent of the city, all books, papers,
moneys, effects, and property belonging thereto, or appertaining to his office,
which may be in his custody as an officer or employee; and such bonds may be
further conditioned as the Council shall prescribe. The official bond of every
officer or employee of the City whose duty it may be to receive or pay out
money, besides being conditioned as above required, shall be further
conditioned that he will, on demand, pay over or account to the City, or any
proper officer or agent thereof, for all money received by him as such officer
or employee. The requirements of this paragraph may be met by the purchase of
one or more appropriate blanket surety bonds covering all, or a group of, city
employees and officers.
All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums thereon
shall be paid by the City. The bonds required by this Section shall not be
renewed upon the expiration of the terms for which issued, but, in each case, a
new bond shall be furnished. No official bond shall be issued for a term
exceeding one year. All bonds of all officers or employees shall be filed with
the Clerk, except that the bond of the Clerk shall be filed with such officer
as the Council may direct.
Sec. 5.9. Delivery of office.
Whenever any officer or employee shall cease to hold such office or employment
for any reason whatsoever, he shall, within five days, and sooner on demand,
deliver to his successor in office or to his superior all the books, papers,
money, and effects in his custody as such officer or employee.
Any officer violating this provision may be proceeded against in the same
manner as public officers generally for a like offense under statute. Any
employee found guilty of violating this provision by a court of competent
jurisdiction may be punished by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or
imprisonment for not to exceed ninety days or both in the discretion of the
court.
Sec. 5.10. Financial interest prohibited.
(a)   Except as permitted by this Section, no contract or purchase involving an
expenditure in excess of one thousand dollars shall be made by the City in
which any officer or any member of his family has any financial interest direct
or indirect, other than the common public interest. A "contract" shall for the
purposes of this Section include any arrangement or agreement pursuant to which
any material, service, or other thing of value is to be furnished to the City
for a valuable consideration to be paid by the City, except the furnishing of
personal services as an officer or employee of the City. The term "member of
his family" shall include only spouse, child, grandchild, father, mother,
sister, brother, and the spouse of any of them.
(b)   Without limiting the generality of paragraph (a) of this Section, an
officer shall be deemed to have a financial interest in a contract if he or any
member of his family is an employee, partner, officer, director, or sales
representative of the person, firm, or corporation with which such contract is
made. Ownership, individually or in a fiduciary capacity, by an officer or
member of his family of securities, or of any beneficial interest in
securities, of any corporation with which a contract is made or which is a
sales representative of any person, firm, or corporation with which such
contract is made, shall not be deemed to create a financial interest in such
contract, unless the aggregate amount of such securities, or interest in such
securities, so owned by such officer and the members of his family, shall
amount to ten per cent of all classes of the securities of such corporation
then outstanding.
(c)   A contract, in which an officer or member of his family has a financial
interest, may be made by the City if the members of the Council having no such
interest shall unanimously determine that the best interest of the City will be
served by the making of such contract and if either such contract is made after
competitive bidding or if the members of the Council having no such interest
shall unanimously determine that competitive bidding is not feasible in such
particular case.
(d)   Any officer who knowingly permits the City to enter into any contract in
which he has a financial interest without disclosing such interest to the
Council prior to the action of the Council in authorizing such contract, shall
be guilty of misconduct in office. Except in the instances specified in
paragraph (b) of this Section, the unanimous determination, by vote or written
instrument, of all members of the Council that, in a particular case, an
officer or member of his family will not have a financial interest in any
contract to be entered into by the City shall be final and conclusive, in the
absences of fraud or misrepresentation.
(e)   No officer of the City shall stand as surety on any bond to the City or
give any bail for any other person which may be required by the Charter or any
ordinance of the City. Any officer of the City who violates the provisions of
this paragraph shall be guilty of misconduct in office.
Editor's Note: The provisions of Charter § 5.10 are preempted by MCL 15.321 et
seq. See MCL 15.328.
Sec. 5.11. Compensation of employees and officers.
The compensation of all employees and officers of the City whosecompensation is
not provided for herein shall be fixed by the appointing officer or body within
the limits of budget appropriations and in accordance with any over-all pay
plan adopted by the Council.
The respective salaries and compensation of officers and employees, as fixed
pursuant to this Charter, shall be in full for all official services of such
officers or employees and shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions, and other
compensation receivable by such officers or employees for their services.
Such fees, commissions, and other compensation shall belong to the City and
shall be collected and accounted for by such officers or employees, and be paid
into the city treasury and a statement thereof filed periodically with the
Clerk. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to fees, commissions,
or other compensation paid by the County of Ingham to any officer or employee
serving as a city representative on the Board of Supervisors, nor shall it
apply to statutory fees allowed Constables.
Sec. 5.12. Social security benefits and retirement.
The Council shall have power to make available to theadministrative officers
and employees of the City and its departments and boards Federal Social
Security, if available, and recognized standard plans of group life, hospital,
health, and accident insurance.
The Council may maintain for the benefit of the administrative officers and
employees of the City and its departments and boards, a sound pension and
retirement plan, which plan may be either a plan provided by the State of
Michigan or a plan provided by the City.
Editor's Note: The last sentence of Charter § 5.12 is obsolete. See MCL 46.401
et seq., 600.9921 et seq.
State Law References: Social security for public employees, MCL 38.851 et seq.
Chapter 6.
The Council
Sec. 6.1. Procedure and miscellaneous powers and duties; regular meetings.
The Council shall provide by resolution for the time and place of its regular
meetings and shall hold at least two regular meetings each month.
(Amendment of 8-5-2003)
Sec. 6.2. Special meetings.
Special meetings shall be called by the Clerk on the written request of the
Mayor or any two members of the Council on at least six hours' written notice
to each member of the Council, served personally or left at his usual place of
residence; but any special meeting at which all members of the Council are
present or for which absent members have waived the requirement of six hours
notice thereof in writing shall be a legal meeting.
State Law References: Public notice of special meetings, MCL 15.265.
Sec. 6.3. Business of special meetings.
No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the Council, unless
the same has been stated in the notice of such meeting. However, if all the
members of the Council are present at any special meeting of the Council and
consent thereto, any business which might lawfully come before a regular
meeting of the Council may be transacted at such special meeting.
Sec. 6.4. Meetings to be public.
All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public,
and the rules of order of the Council shall provide that citizens shall have a
reasonable opportunity to be heard.
Editor's Note: Insofar as Charter § 6.4 requires open meetings, it is
superseded by MCL 15.261 et seq. See MCL 15.261.
State Law References: Mandatory that Charter provide that the business of
legislative body be conducted at a public meeting held in compliance with the
Open Meetings Act, MCL 117.3(l).
Sec. 6.5. Quorum; adjournment of meeting.
Four members of the Council shall be a quorum for the transaction of business
at all meetings of the Council. In the absence of a quorum, a lesser number may
adjourn any meeting to a later date. In the absence of all members, the Clerk
may adjourn any meeting to a date not later than one week thence.
Sec. 6.6. Compulsory attendance and conduct at meetings.
The Council may, by majority vote of those present, compel the attendance of
its members and other officers of the City at its meetings and enforce orderly
conduct and procedure therein. A police officer designated by the presiding
officer of the Council shall serve as the sergeant-at-arms in the enforcement
of the provisions of this Section.
Sec. 6.7. Rules of the council.
The Council shall determine its own rules and order of business, subject to the
following provisions:
   (1)   A journal of the proceedings of each meeting shall be kept by the
Clerk in the English language and shall be signed by the presiding officer and
Clerk of the meeting.
State Law References: Mandatory that Charter provide for keeping in the English
language a written or printed journal of each session of the legislative body,
MCL 117.3(m).
   (2)   The vote upon all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by a "Yes"
and "No" vote and entered upon the records, except that, where the vote is
unanimous, it shall only be necessary to so state.
   (3)   No Councilman shall vote on any question in which he has a financial
interest, other than the common public interest, or on any question concerning
his own conduct, but, on all other questions, each member who is present shall
vote, unless excused by unanimous consent of the remaining members present.
   (4)   Each standing committee of the Council shall be composed of at least
three members. In the event that the office of City Administrator is created as
provided for in Section 4.6, supra, the Council shall not have any standing
committee. The Council shall not assign the administration of any department of
the City to any member or committee of the Council.
(Amendment of 8-5-2003)
Sec. 6.8. Providing for public health and safety.
Through the departments and agencies of the city government, the Council shall
provide for the public peace and health and for the safety of persons and
property. The Council shall constitute the Board of Health of the City and it
and its officers shall possess all powers, privileges and immunities granted to
boards of health by State law.
Editor's Note: The reference in the provisions of Charter § 6.8 to a board of
health are obsolete. See MCL 324.2411 et seq.
Sec. 6.9. Investigations.
The Council, or any person or committee authorized by it for thepurpose, shall
have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office, or officer
and to make investigations as to municipal affairs. For such purpose, the
Council may summon witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of books, papers, and other evidences. Failure on
the part of any officer or employee to obey such summons or to produce books,
papers, or other evidence, as ordered under the provisions of this Section,
shall constitute a violation of this Charter and such officer or employee, when
found guilty of such violation by a court of competent jurisdiction, may be
punished by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment for
not to exceed ninety days, or both, in discretion of the court.
Chapter 7.
Legislation*
*State Law References: Mandatory that Charter provide for adopting, continuing,
amending, and repealing the city ordinances and for the publication of each
ordinance before it becomes operative, MCL 117.3(k).
Sec. 7.1. Status of Charter.
This Charter shall constitute the basic law of the City of Mason, subject only
to the constitution and general laws of the State of Michigan and of the United
States of America.
Sec. 7.2. Prior ordinances and regulations.
All by-laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City of
Mason, which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, in force
and effect at the time of the adoption of this Charter, shall continue in full
force as by-laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City
of Mason, until repealed or amended by action of the proper authorities.
Sec. 7.3. Ordinances and resolutions.
All official action of the Council shall be by ordinance or byresolution,
motion, or order. Action by resolution, motion, or order shall be limited to
matters required or permitted to be so done by this Charter or by state or
federal law or pertaining to the internal affairs or concerns of the city
government. All other acts of the Council, and all acts carrying a penalty for
the violation thereof, shall be by ordinance. Each ordinance shall be
identified by a serial number and a short title. Each ordinance shall also be
given a number indicating its position in the compilation or codification of
ordinances, provided for in Section 7.9 of this Charter, excepting that each
ordinance need not be given a number indicating its position in the compilation
or codification or ordinances until after the publication of the compilation or
codification of ordinances. Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in
written or printed form. The style of all ordinances enacted by the Council
shall be, "The City of Mason Ordains."
Sec. 7.4. Enactment, amendment, repeal and effective date of ordinances.
Subject to the exceptions which follow, (1) ordinances may be enacted, amended,
or repealed by the affirmative vote of not less than four Councilmen, (2) no
ordinance shall be finally enacted by the Council until after publication of
the proceedings, or summary thereof, of the meeting at which it was introduced,
and (3) the effective date of all ordinances shall be prescribed therein, but
the effective date shall not be earlier than twenty days after the enactment
nor before publication thereof. It is provided, however, that an ordinance
which is declared therein to be immediately necessary for the preservation of
the public peace, health, or safety may be enacted before publication of the
proceedings of the meeting at which it is introduced, or may be given earlier
effect than twenty days after the enactment, or both, by the affirmative votes
of not less than five Councilmen if six or seven Councilmen are present at the
meeting at which it is enacted, or by the affirmative vote of not less than
four Councilmen if four or five Councilmen are present at the meeting at which
it is enacted. In case an ordinance is given effect earlier than twenty days
after its enactment, the requirements for publication before such ordinance
becomes operative may be met by posting copies thereof in conspicuous locations
in ten public places in the city; and the Clerk shall, immediately after such
posting, enter in the Ordinance Book under the record of the ordinance a
certificate under his hand stating the time and place of such publication by
posting of the ordinance. Such ordinance shall also be published in accordance
with Section 7.5 of this Charter, but not as a requirement for the
effectiveness thereof.
Unless by the affirmative vote of four Councilmen, no office shall be created
or abolished, no tax or assessment shall be imposed, no street, alley, or
public ground shall be vacated, no real estate or any interest therein shall be
sold or disposed of, no money shall be appropriated, nor shall any vote of the
Council be reconsidered or rescinded.
No ordinance granting any public utility franchise shall be enacted except in
accordance with the provisions of Section 13.2 of this Charter.
No ordinance shall be revised, altered, or amended by reference to the title
only, but the section or sections of the ordinance revised, altered, or amended
shall be reenacted and published. However, an ordinance may be repealed by
reference to its title and number only.
Sec. 7.5. Penalties for violation of ordinances.
The Council may provide in any ordinance for the punishment of those who
violate its provisions. The punishment for the violation of any city ordinance
which is designated a misdemeanor shall not exceed a fine of five hundred
dollars or imprisonment for ninety days, or both, except that if the violation
substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for
which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days, such violation shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $500, imprisonment for a term of not more
than 93 days, or both. The maximum penalty for a violation of any ordinance
which is designated as a municipal civil infraction violation shall be
established by City Council by ordinance.
(Amendment of 8-5-2003)
Sec. 7.6. Publication and recording of ordinances.
Each ordinance enacted by the Council shall be published at leastonce, within
fifteen days after its enactment, either separately or as a part of the
published proceedings of the Council. All ordinances and amendments thereof
shall be recorded by the Clerk in a book to be called "The Ordinance Book" and
it shall be the duty of the Mayor and Clerk to authenticate such records by
their official signatures thereon. The Clerk shall enter in such book, after
the publication of each ordinance, the date and method of publication, which
entry shall be prima facie evidence of such publication.
Sec. 7.7. Vacating of public places.
Council action to vacate, discontinue, or abolish any highway, street, lane,
alley, or other public place or part thereof, shall be by resolution. After the
introduction of such resolution, and before its final adoption, the Council
shall appoint a time when it shall meet and hear objections thereto. Notice of
the time, place, and purpose of such meeting shall be published, either
separately or as part of the proceedings of the Council. Objections to any such
proposed resolution may be filed with the Clerk in writing, and, if any
objections shall be filed, the highway, street, lane, alley, or other public
place, or part thereof, shall not be vacated, discontinued, or abolished except
by a vote of five of the members of the Council.
Sec. 7.8. Enactment of codes by reference.
The Council may adopt, as a city ordinance, any provision of state law or any
detailed technical code or set of regulations which has been promulgated by the
State or Michigan, or by any department, board, or agency thereof, or by any
organization or association which is organized and conducted for the purpose of
developing any such code or set of regulations, by reference thereto in an
adopting ordinance and without publishing such technical code or set of
regulations in full: Provided, That such code or set of regulations is fully
identified in said ordinance and that the purpose of said code or set of
regulations shall be published with the adopting ordinances and that printed
copies thereof are kept in the office of the Clerk, available for distribution
to the public at all times. Such publication shall contain notice to the effect
that a complete copy of said code or set of regulations is available for public
use and inspection in the office of the Clerk.
Editor's Note: The provisions of Charter § 7.8 are superseded by MCL 117.3(k).
Sec. 7.9. Severability of ordinances.
All ordinances of the City are hereby declared to be severable. Unless an
ordinance shall expressly provide to the contrary, if any portion of an
ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be
found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining
portions of the ordinance which can be given effect without invalid portion,
provided such remaining portions are not determined by the Court to be
inoperable.
Sec. 7.10. Compilation or codification of ordinances.
Within ninety days after the adoption of this Charter the Council shall direct
and commence, and within one year after the adoption of this Charter the
Council shall complete the compilation or the codification of all ordinances of
the City then in force, in printed loose-leaf form, and shall cause such
compilation or codification to be maintained thereafter in current form.
The Council shall provide for the printing of copies of the compilation or
codification and distribution thereof and may provide for a reasonable charge
therefor. Such printing shall constitute publication of any such compilation or
codification, the provision of Section 17.7 notwithstanding.
The copies of the ordinances and of the compilation or codification thereof,
and of codes adopted by reference in accordance with Section 7.8 of this
Charter may be certified by the Clerk and, when so certified, shall be
competent evidence in all Courts and other legally established tribunals as to
the matter contained therein.
(Amendment of 8-2-2005)
State Law References: Ordinance codification, MCL 117.5b.
Sec. 7.11. Initiative and referendum.
An ordinance may be initiated by petition, or a referendum on an ordinance
enacted by the Council may be had, by petition as hereinafter provided.
Sec. 7.12. Initiatory and referendary petitions.
An initiatory or a referendary petition shall be signed by not less than
fifteen per cent of the vote cast in the City for Governor at the most recent
election for that office. All signatures on any such petition shall be obtained
within thirty days before the date of filing the petition with the Clerk.
Before being circulated for signatures, all such petitions shall be approved as
to form by the City Attorney. Each such petition shall be addressed to the
Council. No such petition need be on one paper, but may be the aggregate of two
or more petition papers which are identical as to contents, except as to the
signatures thereon. An initiatory petition shall set forth, in full, the
ordinance it proposes to initiate. No petition shall propose to initiate more
than one ordinance.
A referendary petition shall identify the ordinance it proposes to have
repealed.
Each signer of a petition shall sign his name and shall place thereon, after
his name, the date and his place of residence by street and number or by other
customary designation. To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn
affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating the number of signers thereof,
that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name
it purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. Such
petition shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall, within ten days, canvass the
signatures thereon. If the petitions do not contain a sufficient number of
signatures of registered electors of the City, the Clerk shall notify the
person filing such petitions forthwith, and ten days from the date of such
notification shall be allowed for the filing of supplemental petition papers.
When petitions with sufficient signatures have been filed within the time
allowed by this Section, the Clerk shall present the petition to the Council at
its next regular meeting.
Sec. 7.13. Council procedure on initiatory and referendary petitions.
Upon receiving any initiatory or referendary petition from the Clerk, the
Council shall, within thirty days, unless otherwise provided by law, either,
   (1)   Enact the ordinance as submitted by such initiatory petition;
   (2)   Repeal the ordinance referred to by a referendary petition; or
   (3)   Determine to submit the proposal provided for in the petition to the
electors.
Sec. 7.14. Submission of initiatory and referendary petitions to electors.
Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be
submitted at the next election held in the City for any other purpose, or, in
the discretion of the Council, at a special election. The result shall be
determined by a majority vote of the electors of the City voting thereon,
except in cases where otherwise required by the Constitution or laws of the
State of Michigan.
Sec. 7.15. Effect of a referendary petition.
The presentation to the Council, by the Clerk, of a referendarypetition within
thirty days after the passage of the ordinance to which such petition refers,
shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question, pending
repeal by the Council or final determination by the electors.
An ordinance adopted through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or
repealed by the Council for a period of one year after the election at which it
was adopted. An ordinance repealed by referendary proceedings may not be
reenacted by the Council for a period of one year after the date of the
election at which it was repealed.
If two or more initatory ordinances, adopted at the same election, should have
conflicting provisions, the provisions in the ordinance receiving the highest
number of affirmative votes shall govern.
Chapter 8.
General Finance Purchasing*
*State Law References: Uniform Budget and Accounting Act, MCL 141.421 et seq.;
Revised Municipal Finance Act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.
Sec. 8.1. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the City and of all its agencies shall begin on the first
day of July in each year and shall end on the thirtieth day of June of the
following year.
Sec. 8.2. Budget procedures.
The Council shall designate one of the administrative officers of the City as
Budget Officer. Each board, commission, officer, and department head shall
submit an estimate of his financial requirements, with supporting explanation
thereof, for the next fiscal year to the Budget Officer on or before March 1 in
each year.
The Budget Officer shall prepare and submit to the Council, on or before the
first regular meeting in April of each year, a budget document covering the
next fiscal year, tabulating the recommendations of the several department
heads, boards, commissions, and officials, and shall include therein at least
the following information:
   (1)   Detailed estimates of all proposed expenditures for each department
and office of the City, showing the expenditures for corresponding items for
the current fiscal year to February 1 and for the last preceding fiscal year,
with reasons for increases and decreases recommended, as compared with
appropriations for the current year;
   (2)   Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the City, showing
the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and
unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any;
   (3)   An inventory of supplies and materials on hand at the date of the
preparation of the estimates, with the value thereof, except office supplies
and other minor items;
   (4)   Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues of the City from
sources other than taxes and borrowing, with a comparative statement of the
amounts received by the City from each of the same or similar sources for the
last preceding fiscal year and for the current fiscal year, to February 1;
   (5)   A statement of the estimated balance or deficit for the end of the
current fiscal year;
   (6)   An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and
delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together
with any available unappropriated surplus and any anticipated revenues from
other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures; and
   (7)   Such other supporting information as the Council may request.
Sec. 8.3. Budget hearing.
A public hearing on the proposed budget shall be held before its final
adoption, at such time and place as the Council shall direct. Notice of such
public hearing, a summary of the proposed budget and of the fact that the
proposed budget is on file in the office of the Clerk shall be published at
least one week in advance of the hearing. The complete proposed budget shall be
on file for public inspection during office hours at the office of the Clerk
for a period of not less than one week prior to such public hearing.
Sec. 8.4. Adoption of budget.
Not later than the third Monday in May, the Council shall, by resolution, adopt
the budget for the next fiscal year and shall, in such resolution, make an
appropriation of the money needed for municipal purposes for the next fiscal
year of the City and provide for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by
taxes upon real and personal property for municipal purposes, which levy shall
not exceed two percent of the assessed valuation of all real and personal
property in the City.
The budget resolution shall include a minimum appropriation of money for the
street construction program equal to 2/5 of one percent of the taxable
valuation of all non-exempt real and personal property in the City. If
recommended by the City Administrator and approved by a 5/7 vote of the
Council, the Council may appropriate less money for the street construction
program than the minimum required by this section for no more than two of any
five consecutive fiscal years.
(Amendment of 8-15-1995; Amendment of 8-5-2003: Amendment of 8-2-2005)
   State law reference–Mandatory that Charter provided for annual appropriation
of money for municipal purposes, MCL 117.4(h).
Sec. 8.5. Budget control.
Except for purposes which are to be financed by a method notrequiring a budget
appropriation, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the City without
such an appropriation, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be
incurred without an appropriation covering all payments which will be due under
such obligation during the current fiscal year. To meet the requirements of
this Section, the Council may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance,
or any portion thereof, from one department, fund, or agency to another.
In case of emergency arising from fire, flood, or other calamity, the Council
may make additional appropriations to cover unanticipated expenditures required
of the City because of such emergency.
The balance in any appropriation, which has not been encumbered at the end of
the fiscal year, shall revert to the general fund and be reappropriated during
the next fiscal year.
At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more
often if required by the Council, the officer responsible for the maintenance
of the City's accounting system shall submit to the Council data showing the
relation between the estimated and actual revenues and expenditures to date. If
it shall appear that the revenues are less than anticipated, the Council may
reduce appropriations, except amounts required for debt and interest charges,
to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the revenues
of the City.
Sec. 8.6. Depository.
The Council shall designate a depository or depositories for city funds, and
shall provide for the regular deposit of city moneys therein. The Council shall
provide for such security for city deposits as is authorized or permitted by
the general laws of the state, except that personal surety bonds shall not be
deemed proper security.
State Law References: Depositories, MCL 129.11 et seq., 211.43b.
Sec. 8.7. Independent audit; annual report.
An independent audit shall be made of all city accounts, at least annually, and
more frequently if deemed necessary by the Council. Such audit shall be made by
certified public accountants selected by the Council.
The Clerk, or such other officer as the Council may designate, shall prepare an
annual report of the affairs of the City, including a financial report which
shall be available for inspection at the office of the Clerk.
Sec. 8.8. Purchase and sale of property.
The Council shall designate one of the administrative officers of the City as
Purchasing Agent. Such officer shall be responsible for the purchase and sale
of all city property. Competitive prices for all purchases and public
improvements shall be obtained, except when no advantage to the City would
result from such procedure. All purchases and sales shall be evidenced by
written contract, purchase order, or bill of sale. The Council shall establish
detailed procedures for purchases and sales. It may authorize the purchasing
agent to make purchases and sales within a prescribed dollar limit without
prior approval of the Council. In all sales or purchases in excess of ten
thousand dollars, the sale or purchase shall be submitted to, and approved by
the Council. In all such cases, formal sealed bids shall be obtained and, in
all sales or purchases in excess of ten thousand dollars, compliance shall be
had with the requirements of Section
13.6 of this Charter. The Council may authorize the making of public
improvements, or the performing of any other city work, by any city agency or
department without competitive bidding. The City may not sell any park, or any
part thereof, unless approved by three-fifths of the electors of the City
voting thereon at any general or special election.
(Amendment of 8-7-2001(1); Amendment of 11-2-2010)
Chapter 9.
Taxation*
*State Law References: Mandatory that Charter provide for levy, collection, and
return of taxes, MCL 117.4 (f).
Sec. 9.1. Power to tax; tax limits.
The City shall have the power to annually levy and collect rents,tolls, and
taxes for municipal purposes.
Exclusive of any levy for the payment of principal and interest on outstanding
general obligation bonds, and exclusive of any other levies authorized by
statute to be made beyond Charter tax rate limitations, such levy shall not
exceed two per cent of the assessed value of all real and personal property in
the city.
State Law References: Mandatory that Charter provide for annual laying and
collecting of taxes, MCL 117.4(g).
Sec. 9.2. Subjects of taxation.
The subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state,
county, and school purposes under the general laws of the State. Except as
otherwise provided by this Charter, city taxes shall be levied, collected, and
returned in the manner provided bystatute.
State Law References: Mandatory Charter provisions, MCL 117.4(f), (i).
Sec. 9.3. Exemptions.
No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed, except as expressly required or
permitted by statute. In the case of exemptions made to persons who, in the
opinion of the Assessor and Board of Review, by reason of poverty, are unable
to contribute towards the public charges, the Assessor or Board of Review may
require, as a condition to the grant of exemption, a trust deed or assignment
to the City of all or any part of the real or personal property or insurance of
the beneficiary of such exemption. No such trust deed or assignment shall
deprive the owner of the property to whom tax exemption is granted of his right
to occupy and use the property, but shall give the City, in the event that the
ownership of such property is transferred to another in any manner whatsoever,
such an interest therein as will provide for the payment to the City of an
amount equal to all taxes which would have been assessed and levied by the City
against the property of such owner had the exemption not been granted. Such
deed shall be in proper form for recording in the office of the Register of
Deeds of Ingham County.
Editor's Note: The provisions of Charter § 9.3 are superseded by MCL 211.7u.
State Law References: Exemptions, MCL 211.7 et seq.
Sec. 9.4. Tax day.
Subject to the exceptions provided or permitted by statute, the taxable status
of persons and property shall be determined as of the first day of January of
each year, which shall be deemed to be the tax day, as defined by State law,
for all taxes levied in the City during the calendar year in which such date
occurs.
Editor's Note: Tax day is now is December 31 of the immediately preceding year.
See MCL 211.2(2).
Sec. 9.5. Preparation of the assessment roll.
On or before the first Monday in March in each year, the Assessorshall prepare
and certify an assessment roll of all property in the City, in the manner and
form required by State law and this Charter. Values of all property listed on
such assessment roll shall be estimated according to recognized methods of
systematic assessment. The assessment rolls of the City shall show separate
figures for the value of the land and of the improvements thereon. On or before
the first Monday in March in each year, the Assessor shall give notice of any
increase or decrease in the assessed value of any property on, or of the
addition of any property to, the assessment roll. Such notice shall be given to
the owner thereof, as shown by such assessment roll, by first class mail. The
failure to give any such notice or of the owner to receive it, shall not
invalidate any assessment roll or of any assessment or levy of taxes thereon.
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 211.24.
Sec. 9.6. Board of review.
The Board of Review shall be composed of three free-holders of property located
within the City, who are qualified and registered electors of the City. Members
of the Board of Review shall not, during their term of office, be city
officers, employees of the City, or nominees or candidates for any elective
city office. The filing by a member of the Board of Review of a petition for an
elective city office, or the filing of a consent to the filing of such a
petition on his behalf, shall constitute a resignation from the Board of
Review. One member of the Board shall be appointed by the Council annually in
January for a term of three years, to replace the member whose term expires
during that year. The Council shall fix the compensation of the members of the
Board. The Board of Review shall, annually in February, select its own chairman
for the ensuing year. The Assessor shall be clerk of the Board and shall be
entitled to be heard at its sessions but shall not be entitled to vote on any
question before the Board. A majority of the members of the Board shall
constitute a quorum.
State Law References: Composition of board of review, MCL 211.107(3).
Sec. 9.7. Meetings of board of review.
The Board of Review shall convene in its first session on the Tuesday following
the second Monday in March of each year at such time of the day and place as
shall be designated by the Council and shall continue in session for at least
one day for the purpose of considering and correcting the assessment roll
prepared and presented to it by the Assessor. In each case where the assessed
value of any property is increased or any property is added to the roll by the
Board, or the Board has resolved to consider at its second session the
increasing of an assessment or the adding of any property to the roll, the
Assessor shall give notice thereof to the owner of such property, as shown by
such roll, by first class letter, mailed not later than the day following the
end of the first session of the Board. Such notice shall state the date, time,
place, and purpose of the second session of the Board. The failure to give any
such notice, or of the owner to receive it, shall not invalidate any assessment
roll or of any assessment or levy of taxes thereon.
The Board of Review shall convene in its second session on the Tuesday
following the fourth Monday in March of each year, at such time of the day and
place as shall be designated by the Council and shall continue in session until
all interested persons have had an opportunity to be heard, but in no case for
less than six hours. At such second session, the Board may not increase any
assessment, except in these cases with respect to which the Board resolved at
its first session, to consider such increase at its second session. This
provision shall not apply to the addition of any omitted property to the roll.
Editor's Note: The provisions of Charter § 9.7 are superseded by MCL 211.29 et
seq. See MCL 211.107.
Sec. 9.8. Notice of meetings.
The Clerk shall publish notice of the time and place of meetings of the Board
of Review not less than ten days immediately preceding the first meeting
thereof in each year.
Editor's Note: The provisions of Charter § 9.8 are superseded by MCL 211.29(6).
See MCL 211.107.
Sec. 9.9. Duties and functions of board of review.
For the purpose of reviewing and correcting assessments upon theassessment roll
of the City, the Board of Review shall have the same powers and perform like
duties, in all respects, as are conferred upon and required of Boards of Review
in townships by the general tax laws of the State, except as otherwise provided
in this Charter. It shall hear the complaints of all persons considering
themselves aggrieved by assessments, and, if it shall appear that any person or
property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll, the Board shall
correct the roll in such manner as it deems just. In all cases, the roll shall
be reviewed according to the facts existing on the tax day of the year to which
they apply and no change of the status of any property after said day shall be
considered by the Board in making its decisions. Except as otherwise provided
by statute, no person, other than the Board of Review, shall make or authorize
any change upon, or additions or corrections to the assessment roll. It shall
be the duty of the Assessor to keep a permanent record of all proceedings and
to enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the Board.
State Law References: Actions of board of review, MCL 211.29 et seq., MCL
211.107.
Sec. 9.10. Endorsement of roll.
After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, and
not later than the first Monday in April, a majority of its members shall
endorse thereon and sign a statement to the effect that the same is the
assessment roll of the City for the year in which it has been prepared. The
omission of such endorsement or statement shall not affect the validity of such
roll.
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 211.30, 211.107.
Sec. 9.11. Clerk to certify tax levy.
Within three days after the Council has adopted the budget for the ensuing
fiscal year of the City, the Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the total
amount which the Council has determined shall be raised by general tax. He
shall also certify all amounts of current or delinquent special assessments and
all other amounts which the Council requires to be assessed, reassessed, or
charged upon such roll upon any property or against any person.
State Law References: Tax roll, MCL 211.42 et seq., MCL 211.107.
Sec. 9.12. City tax roll.
After the Board of Review has completed its review of theassessment roll, the
Assessor shall prepare a copy of the assessment roll, to be known as the "City
Tax Roll." Upon receiving the certification of the several amounts to be
raised, or to be assessed, reassessed, or charged, as provided in Section 9.11
of this Charter, the Assessor shall spread upon said tax roll the several
amounts determined by the Council to be raised, charged, assessed, or
reassessed against persons and property. He shall also spread the amount to be
raised by general city tax, according to and in proportion to the several
valuations set forth in said roll. To avoid fractions in computation on any tax
roll, the Assessor may add to the amount of the several taxes to be raised
thereon not more than the amount prescribed by statute. Any excess created
thereby on any tax roll, for the levy and collection of taxes in the City,
shall belong to the City.
Sec. 9.13. Tax roll certified for collection.
After spreading the said taxes and any assessments, reassessments, and charges,
the Assessor shall certify the tax roll, and the Mayor shall annex his warrant
thereto, directing and requiring the Treasurer to collect from the several
persons named in said roll the several sums mentioned therein opposite their
respective names as a tax, assessment, or charge and granting to him, for the
purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments, and charges on such roll, all of
the statutory powers and immunities possessed by township treasurers for the
collecting of taxes. On or before June 15th the city tax roll shall be
delivered to the Treasurer for collection.
Sec. 9.14. Tax lien.
The city taxes thus assessed shall become at once a debt due to the City from
the persons to whom they are assessed, and the amounts assessed on any interest
in real property shall on the first day of July become a lien upon such real
property, and the lien for such amounts and for all interest and other charges
thereon shall continue until payment thereof. All personal taxes shall also be
a first lien, prior, superior, and paramount, upon all personal property of the
persons so assessed from and after the first day of July in each year and shall
so remain until paid, which said tax liens shall take precedence over all other
claims, encumbrances and liens upon said personal property whatsoever, whether
created by chattel mortgage, execution, levy, judgment, or otherwise, and
whether arising before or after the assessment of said personal taxes, and no
transfer of personal property assessed for taxes thereon shall operate to
divest or destroy such lien, except where such personal property is actually
sold in the regular course ofretail trade.
Editor's Note: The provisions of Charter § 9.14 are superseded by MCL 211.40.
See MCL 211.107.
Sec. 9.15. Taxes due; notification thereof.
City taxes shall be due on the first day of July of the year whenlevied and
shall be payable as stated in the warrant of the Mayor annexed to said roll.
The Treasurer shall not be required to call upon the persons named in the city
tax roll, nor to make personal demand for the payment of taxes, but he shall
give notice to the taxpayers of the City, at least six days prior to the first
day of July in each year, of the time when said taxes will be due for
collection, by publication, at least once, in one or more of the newspapers
published or circulated in the City, or shall give such notice by first class
mail, addressed to the owners of the property upon which taxes are assessed,
according to the names of such owners and their addresses as indicated on the
tax roll. Said notice shall be deemed sufficient for the payment of all taxes
on said tax roll. Failure on the part of the Treasurer to give said notice
shall not invalidate the taxes on said tax roll nor release any person or
property assessed thereon from the penalty provided in this Chapter, in case of
non-payment of the same.
Editor's Note: The provisions of Charter § 9.15 appear superseded by MCL
211.44. See MCL 211.107.
Sec. 9.16. Collection fees and interest.
All city taxes which are paid on or before August 31 of each yearshall be
collected by the Treasurer without collection fee. On September 1 and after he
shall add to each tax, assessment, and charge upon the City tax roll a
collection fee of four per cent of the amount of said taxes, assessments, and
charges. Such collection fees shall belong to the City, shall constitute a
charge, and shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes,
assessments, and charges themselves apply, collectible in the same manner as
the taxes to which they are added.
Editor's Note: The provisions of Charter § 9.16 are superseded by MCL 211.44.
See MCL 211.107.
Sec. 9.17. Failure or refusal to pay tax.
If any person, firm, or corporation shall neglect or refuse to payany tax
assessed to him, the Treasurer shall collect the same by seizing the personal
property of such person, firm, or corporation, to an amount sufficient to pay
such tax, assessment, fees, and charges for subsequent sale, wherever the same
may be found in the State. No property shall be exempt from any such seizure.
He may sell the property seized to an amount sufficient to pay the taxes,
assessments, and all charges and fees, in accordance with statutory provisions
therefor. The Treasurer may, if otherwise unable to collect a tax on personal
property, sue the person, firm, or corporation to whom it is assessed, in
accordance with statute.
State Law References: Seizure of personal property for unpaid taxes, MCL
211.47.
Sec. 9.18. Delinquent tax roll to county treasurer.
If the Treasurer has been unable to collect any of the City taxes on said roll
on real property before the first day of March following the date when said
roll was received by him, it shall be his duty to return all such unpaid taxes
on real property to the county treasurer, in the same manner and with like
effect as returns by township treasurers of township, school, and county taxes.
Such returns shall be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be prepared by the
Treasurer and shall include all additional charges and fees hereinbefore
provided. Such charges shall, in each return, be added to the amount assessed
or charged in said tax roll against each description of property. The taxes
thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to
the county treasurer are collected under the provisions of the general laws of
the State and shall be and remain a lien upon the lands against which they are
assessed, until paid.
Editor's Note: The provisions of Charter § 9.18 appear obsolete in light of MCL
211.44 et seq. See MCL 211.107.
Sec. 9.19. State, county and school taxes.
For the purposes of assessing and collecting the taxes for state, county, and
school purposes, the City shall be considered the same as a township, and all
provisions of State law relative to the collection of and accounting for such
taxes shall apply. For these purposes the Treasurer shall perform the same
duties and have the same powers as township Treasurers under State law.
Sec. 9.20. Protection of city lien.
The City shall have power to acquire, by purchase, any premises within the City
at any tax or other public sale, or by direct purchase from the State of
Michigan or the fee owner, when such purchase is necessary to protect the lien
of the City for taxes or special assessments, or both, on said premises and may
hold, lease, or sell the same for the purpose of securing therefrom the amount
of such taxes or special assessments, or both, together with any incidental
expenses incurred in connection with the exercise of this power. Any such
procedure exercised by the City in the protection of its tax lien shall be
deemed to be for a public purpose.
Chapter 10.
Borrowing Power
Sec. 10.1. Grant of authority to borrow.
Subject to the applicable provisions of law and this Charter, theCouncil may,
by ordinance or by resolution, authorize the borrowing of money for any purpose
within the scope of powers vested in the City and permitted by law, and may
authorize the issuance of bonds or other evidences of indebtedness therefor.
Such bonds or other evidences of indebtedness shall include but not be limited
to the following types:
   (1)   General obligations which pledge the full faith, credit, and resources
of the City for the payment of such obligations;
   (2)   Notes issued in anticipation of the collection of taxes;
   (3)   In case of fire, flood, or other calamity, emergency loans, due in not
more than five years, for the relief of the inhabitants of the City and for the
preservation of municipal property;
   (4)   Mortgage bonds, for the acquiring, owning, purchasing, constructing,
improving, or operating of any public utility which the City has been or may be
authorized by the electors of the City to acquire or operate;
   (5)   Bonds issued at a rate of interest not to exceed six per cent per
annum, to refund money advanced or paid on special assessments imposed for
water main extensions;
   (6)   Bonds for the refunding of the funded indebtedness of the City;
   (7)   Revenue bonds, as authorized by statute, which are secured only by the
revenues from a public improvement and do not constitute a general obligation
of the City;
   (8)   Court order bonds, as required by a court of competent jurisdiction;
   (9)   Special assessment bonds, issued in anticipation of the payment of
special assessments made for the purpose of defraying the cost of any public
improvement, or in anticipation of the payment of any combination of such
special assessments. Such special assessment bonds may be an obligation of the
special assessment district or districts to which they apply or may be both an
obligation of the special assessment district or districts and a general
obligation of the City.
The mortgage bonds authorized by this Section shall not impose any liability
upon the City but shall be secured only upon the property and revenues of such
public utility, including a franchise stating the terms upon which, in case of
foreclosure, the purchaser may operate the same. No such franchise shall extend
for a longer period than twenty years from the date of the sale of such utility
and franchise on foreclosure. A sinking fund shall be created, in the event of
the issuance of such bonds, by setting aside such percentage of the gross or
net earnings of the public utility as may be deemed sufficient for the payment
of the mortgage bonds at maturity, unless serial bonds are issued of such a
nature that no sinking fund is required.
State Law References: Permissable Charter provisions, MCL 117.4a; Revenue Bond
Act of 1933, MCL 141.101 et seq.
Sec. 10.2. Authorization of electors required.
(a)   Bonds provided in Section 10.1(1) shall be issued only with the approval
of three-fifths of the electors of the City voting thereon at any general or
special election.
Editor's Note: The three-fifths vote requirement of Charter § 10.2(a) has been
modified to a majority vote by MCL 117.5 as amended by 1966 PA 350, Michigan
Supreme Court, Lansing v. Board of Canvassers, 380 Mich 496 (1968).
(b)   All other bonds may be issued without the approval of the electorate,
unless such approval is required by statute.
(c)   Whenever any question is submitted to the vote of the electors of the
City, which involves the direct expenditure of public money for the issue of
bonds, only such persons having the qualifications of electors who have
property assessed for taxes in any part of the district or territory to be
affected by the result of such election or the lawful husbands or wives of such
persons shall be entitled to vote thereon.
Editor's Note: The provisions of Charter § 10.2(c) are obsolete per mandate of
the United States Supreme Court, Kramer v. Union Free School District, 395 US
621 (1969) and Phoenix v. Kolodziejski, 399 US 204 (1970).
Sec. 10.3. Limits of borrowing powers.
The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shallnot at any
time exceed ten per cent of the assessed value of all the real and personal
property in the City: Provided, That, in computing such net bonded
indebtedness, there shall be excluded money borrowed under the following
sections of this Charter: 10.1(2) (tax anticipation notes), 10.1(3) (emergency
loans), 10.1(4) (mortgage bonds), 10.1(5) (special assessment refunding bonds),
10.1(7) (revenue bonds), 10.1(8) (Court Order bonds), 10.1(9) (special
assessment bonds even though they are also a general obligation of the City),
and other bonds which are not to be included within the debt limitation of the
City under the provisions of State law.
The amount of emergency loans which the Council may make under the provisions
of Section 10.1(3) of this Charter may not exceed three-eighths of one per cent
of the assessed value of all the real and personal property in the City.
The total amount of bonds issued under 10.1(6) shall at no time exceed two per
cent of the assessed value of all the real and personal property in the City.
The total amount of special assessment bonds pledging the full faith and credit
of the City shall at no time exceed five per cent of the assessed value of all
the real and personal property in the City, nor shall such bonds be issued in
any calendar year in excess of one per cent of such assessed value unless
authorized by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon at any general or
special election.
Editor's Note: The provisions of Charter 10.3 are largely superseded by (but
not completely inconsistent with) MCL 117.4a.
Sec. 10.4. Preparation and record of bonds.
Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a
statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued. It shall be
unlawful for any officer of the City to use the proceeds thereof for any other
purpose. Any officer who shall violate this provision shall be deemed guilty of
misconduct in office. All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by
the City shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk, under the
seal of the City. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile
signatures of the Mayor and Clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds
and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the City shall be kept by the
Clerk. Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same
shall be clearly marked or perforated with the word "Cancelled."
Sec. 10.5. Unissued bonds.
No unissued bonds of the City shall be issued or sold to secure funds for any
purpose other then that for which they were specifically authorized, and, if
any such bonds are not sold within three years after authorization, such
authorization shall, as to such bonds, be null and void, and such bonds, if
printed, shall be cancelled.
Chapter 11.
Special Assessments
Sec. 11.1. General power relative to special assessments.
The Council shall have the power to determine, by resolution, that the whole or
any part of the expense of any public improvement shall be defrayed by special
assessment upon the property especially benefited.
State Law References: Permissible Charter provisions, MCL 117.4d(1)(a).
Sec. 11.2. Special assessment procedure.
The Council shall prescribe, by ordinance, the complete specialassessment
procedure governing the initiation of projects, preparation of plans and cost
estimates, creation of districts, making and confirming of assessment rolls,
correction of errors in the rolls, collection of assessments, and any other
matters concerning the making of improvements by the special assessment method.
Such ordinance shall provide for the enforcement of the following restrictions:
   (1)   No resolution finally determining to proceed with establishing any
special assessment district for the making of any public improvement shall be
made until cost estimates have been prepared and a public hearing has been held
on the advisability of so proceeding, which hearing shall be held not less than
ten days after notice thereof has been published and sent by registered mail to
all property owners in the proposed special assessment district, as shown by
the current assessment roll of the City; Failure of any owner to receive such
notice shall not invalidate any such special assessment or special assessment
roll;
Editor's Note: The notice requirements in Charter § 11.2(1) are superseded by
MCL 211.741.
   (2)   No special assessment roll shall be finally confirmed until after a
meeting of the Council has been held for the purpose of reviewing such roll,
which meeting shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof has
been published;
   (3)   No original special assessment roll shall be finally confirmed, except
by the affirmative vote of five of the members of the Council, if, prior to
such confirmation, written objections to the proposed improvements have been
filed, either by the owners of property which will be required to bear more
than fifty per cent of the amount of such special assessment, or by more than
fifty per cent of the number of owners of property which is to be assessed;
   (4)   No public improvement to be financed, in whole or in part, by special
assessment shall be made before the confirmation of the special assessment roll
for such improvement.
Sec. 11.3. Special assessment powers.
The Council shall, in the exercise of its powers of special assessment, have
power to provide for the following, but this list shall not be exclusive:
   (1)   For the construction of public parking facilities as a public
improvement financed, in whole or in part, by the special assessment method;
   (2)   For installing a boulevard lighting system on any street as a public
improvement to be financed, in whole or in part, by special assessment upon the
lands abutting thereupon; provided, that, before any such improvement may be
made, the property owners of a majority of the frontage of such street or part
thereof to be so improved shall petition therefor;
State Law References: Permissible Charter provisions, MCL 117.4d(1)(b).
   (3)   For the payment of special assessments in annual installments, not to
exceed twenty in number, the first such installment to be due, either upon
confirmation of the special assessment roll, or on the following July 1, and
subsequent installments to be due on July 1 of succeeding years;
   (4)   Each installment, which shall be due on July 1 of any year, shall be
placed upon the annual city tax roll, and in the case of deferred installments,
an interest charge shall be added thereto at a rate to be determined by the
Council, which rate shall not exceed the greater of six per cent per year or
the interest rate on any special assessment bonds sold for such improvement
plus one percent (1%). Any person shall have the right to make advance payment
of such installment with interest only to the date of payment;
   (5)   For making additional pro rata assessments when any special assessment
roll proves insufficient to pay for the improvement for which it was levied and
the expenses incident thereto; provided, that the additional pro rata
assessment shall not exceed twenty-five per cent of the assessment, as
originally confirmed, unless a meeting of the Council be held to review such
additional assessment. Notice of any such meeting shall be published as
provided in the case of review of the original special assessment roll.
(Amendment of 8-5-2003; Amendment of 8-2-2005)
Sec. 11.4. Disposition of excessive special assessments.
In the event that any special assessment proves larger than theactual cost of
the improvement and expenses incidental thereto, such excess may be placed in
the general fund of the City if such excess is five per cent or less of the
assessment, but should the assessment prove larger than necessary by more than
five per cent, the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the
then owners of the property assessed. Such refund may be made by credit against
future unpaid installments to the extent such installments then exist, and the
balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which
contravene the provisions of any outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured
in whole or part by such special assessment.
Sec. 11.5. Correction of invalid special assessments.
Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of theCouncil, be invalid
by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any court of
competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment be illegal, the Council
shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the
assessments have been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be
made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All
proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be
conducted in the same manner as provided for the original assessment, except
that it shall not again be necessary to prepare plans and estimates of cost,
nor to hold any hearing on the necessity of the improvement, unless and to the
extent that the cause of the irregularity arose in such proceedings. Whenever
any sum or part thereof, levied upon any property for the assessment so set
aside, has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied
upon the reassessment, or, if the payments exceed the amount of the
reassessment, refunds shall be made in the manner prescribed in Section 11.4 of
this Charter.
No judgment or decree, nor any act of the Council, vacating a special
assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the City upon the premises
assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against
the same had such charge been lawfully assessed thereupon in accordance with
the procedure established or authorized herein.
Sec. 11.6. Contested assessments.
No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose
of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment, (1)
unless, within thirty days after the confirmation of the special assessment
roll, written notice is given to the Council of intention to file such suit or
action, stating the ground on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal,
and (2) unless such suit or action shall be commenced within sixty days after
confirmation of the roll for such assessment.
Sec. 11.7. Collection of special assessments.
Upon the confirmation of each special assessment roll the special assessments
thereon shall become a debt to the City from the persons to whom they are
assessed and shall, until paid, be a lien upon the property assessed for the
amount of such assessment and all interest and charges thereon. Such lien shall
be of the same character and effect as created by this Charter for city taxes.
Such assessments shall become due upon confirmation of the special assessment
roll, except as may be provided by the Council pursuant to Section 11.3(3).
Each special assessment, or each installment of such assessment, when
installment payments are provided for, shall be collected by the Treasurer
without collection fee for a period ending on the last day of the second month
following the due date of such assessment or installment. On the first day of
the third month following each such due date the Treasurer shall add to all
assessments or installments paid thereafter a collection fee of four per cent
of the amount of the assessment. All collection fees shall belong to the City
and be collectible in the same manner as the collection fee on city taxes.
Special assessments, or installments thereof, which become due on July 1 of any
year shall be collected in all respects as are city taxes which are due on such
date, and, if uncollected on the following first day of March, shall be
returned to the County Treasurer with unpaid taxes as provided in Section 9.18.
Special assessments which become due other than on July 1 shall, if unpaid for
ninety days or more on April 1 of any year, be certified as delinquent to the
Council by the Treasurer and the Council shall order such delinquent
assessments to be placed on the tax roll of the City for that year, together
with accrued collection fees. Thereafter, the total amount of such assessment
and fees shall be collected in all respects as are city taxes due on July 1 of
that year, and such total amounts shall be subject to the same fees and
penalties as are city taxes due on that date, and, if uncollected on the
following first day of March, shall be returned to the County Treasurer with
unpaid taxes, as provided in Section 9.18.
Sec. 11.8. Special assessments accounts.
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, moneys raised by special
assessment for any public improvement shall be segregated in a special fund or
account and may be used only to pay for the costs of the improvement for which
the assessment was levied, and expenses incidental thereto, and to repay any
money borrowed therefor together with interest which has accrued thereon.
Sec. 11.9. Assessments for sidewalks and abatement of hazards or nuisance.
The assessment for the cost of the construction or maintenance of any sidewalk,
or the abatement of any hazard or nuisance, to be made pursuant to Section
2.2(18) or Section
2.2(19) shall be made by resolution of the Council. Notice of the time at which
the Council will act thereon shall be given by publication, and sent by
registered mail to all property owners of the property, constituting or
creating such nuisance or hazard, as shown by the current tax roll of the City,
but failure of any owner to receive such notice shall not invalidate any such
assessment. For the purposes of collection of such assessment, the adoption of
such resolution shall be equivalent to the confirmation of a special assessment
roll. The amount of any such assessment shall become a debt due to the City
upon adoption of such resolution, be payable and subject to the collection
fees, and shall become a lien, all as provided in Section
11.7. 
Every such assessment shall also be subject to Section
11.5 and
11.6 of the Chapter.
Chapter 12.
Municipally Owned Utilities
Sec. 12.1. General powers respecting utilities.
The City shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers granted to
cities by law to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend,
repair, and maintain, either within or without its corporate limits, including,
but not by the way of limitation, public utilities for supplying water, light,
heat, power, gas, sewage treatment, and garbage disposal facilities, or any of
them, to the municipality and the inhabitants thereof; and also to sell and
deliver water, light, heat, power, gas, and other public utility services
without its corporate limits to an amount not to exceed the limitations set by
law.
Sec. 12.2. Management of municipal utilities.
Municipally owned utilities shall be administered as departments of the city
government.
Sec. 12.3. Rates.
The Council shall have the power to fix, from time to time, such just and
reasonable rates as may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants of
the City and others with such utility services as the City may provide.
State Law References: Public hearings for rate increases, MCL 117.5e.
Sec. 12.4. Utility rates and charges; collection.
The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for the collection of allpublic
utility rates and charges of the City. Such ordinance shall provide:
   (1)   That the city shall have as security for the collection of such
utility rates and charges a lien upon the real property supplied by such
utility, which lien shall become effective immediately upon the supplying of
such utility service and shall be enforced in the manner provided in such
ordinance;
   (2)   The terms and conditions under which utility services may be
discontinued in case of delinquency in paying such rates or charges;
   (3)   That suit may be instituted by the City in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the collection of such rates or charges.
With respect to water, the City shall have all the powers granted to cities by
Act 178 of the Public Acts of 1939, of the State of Michigan (MCL 123.161 et
seq.).
State Law References: Permissible Charter provisions, MCL 117.4c.
Sec. 12.5. Disposal of utility plants and property.
Unless approved by a three-fifth majority vote of the electorsvoting thereon at
a regular or special election, the City shall not sell, exchange, lease, or in
any way dispose of any property, easement, equipment, privilege, or asset
belonging to and appertaining to any municipally owned utility. All contracts,
negotiations, licenses, grants, leases, or other forms of transfer in violation
of this Section shall be void and of no effect as against the City. The
restrictions of this Section shall not apply to the sale or exchange of any
particles of machinery or equipment of any city-owned utility which are worn
out, or useless, or which have been, or which, with advantage to the service,
could be replaced by new and improved machinery or equipment.
Sec. 12.6. Utility accounts.
Transactions pertaining to the ownership and operation by the City of each
public utility shall be recorded in a separate group of accounts under an
appropriate fund caption, which accounts shall be classified in accordance with
generally accepted utility accounting practice. Charges for all service
furnished to, or rendered by, other city departments or agencies shall be
recorded. An annual report shall be prepared to show fairly the financial
position of the utility and the results of its operation, which report shall be
available for inspection at the office of the Clerk.
Chapter 13.
Franchises; Regulation of Utilities; Contracts; Leases*
*State Law References: Franchises, MCL 117.4c, 117.4f, 117.5(i).
Sec. 13.1. Franchises, contracts and leases remain in effect.
All franchises, contracts, and leases to which the City is a party, when this
Charter became effective, shall remain in full force and effect in accordance
with their respective terms and conditions.
Sec. 13.2. Granting of public utility franchise.
Public utility franchises, and all renewals and extensions thereof and
amendments thereto, shall be granted by ordinance only. No exclusive franchise
or grant of privilege with respect to any utility shall ever be granted. No
franchise shall be granted for a longer period than thirty years.
No franchise ordinance which is not subject to revocation at the will of the
Council shall be enacted nor become operative, until the same shall have first
been referred to the people at a regular or special election and received the
affirmative vote of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon. No such
franchise ordinance shall be approved by the Council for referral to the
electorate before thirty days after application therefor has been filed with
the Council, nor until a public hearing has been held thereon, nor until the
grantee named therein has filed with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of
all terms of such franchise. No special election for such purpose shall be
ordered by the Council, unless the expense of holding such election, as
determined by the Council, shall have first been paid to the Treasurer by the
grantee.
A franchise ordinance which is subject to revocation at the will of the City
may be enacted by the Council without referral to the voters, but shall not be
enacted nor become operative, unless it shall have been complete in the form in
which it is finally enacted and has remained on file with the Clerk for public
inspection for at least four weeks before the final enactment thereof.
State Law References: Submittal of irrevocable franchises to electors required,
Mich. Const. art. VII, § 25; franchises limited to 30 years, Mich. Const. art.
VII, § 30.
Sec. 13.3. Conditions of public utility franchise.
All public utility franchises granted, after the adoption of this Charter,
whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to
the following rights of the City:
   (1)   To repeal the same for misuse, non-use, or failure to comply with the
provisions thereof;
   (2)   To require reasonable and adequate extension of plant and service and
the maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency;
   (3)   To establish reasonable and practicable standards of service and
quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates;
   (4)   To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in
accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period
thereof;
   (5)   To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council
to be conducive to the health, safety, welfare, and accommodations of the
public;
   (6)   To use, control, and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges,
and public places and the space above and beneath them.
The above enumeration shall not be exclusive or impair the right of the Council
to insert in such franchise any provision within the power of the City to
impose or require.
Sec. 13.4. Regulation of rates.
All public utility franchises shall make provision therein for fixing rates,
fares, and charges and may provide for readjustments thereof at periodic
intervals. The value of the property of the utility used as a basis for fixing
such rates, fares, and charges shall in no event include a value predicated
upon the value of the franchise, or goodwill.
Sec. 13.5. Use of public places by utilities.
Every public utility, whether it has a franchise or not, shall pay such part of
the cost of improvement or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges, and public
places as shall arise from all its use thereof and shall protect and save the
City harmless from all damages and expenses arising from said use. Every such
public utility may be required by the City to permit joint use of its property
and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, and other public places of
the City by the City and by other utilities, insofar as such joint use may be
reasonably practicable, and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor. In the
absence of agreement, and upon application by any public utility, the Council
shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and
the compensation to be paid therefor, and the arbitration award shall be final.
Sec. 13.6. Contracts.
The authority to contract on behalf of the City is vested in the Council and
shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. The
Council shall establish procedures for the letting and making of contracts, but
no contract, except an agreement of employment or an agreement for the purchase
or sale of goods, wares, or merchandise in an amount of one thousand dollars or
less, shall be made unless the same shall have first been submitted to the
Attorney and his opinion obtained with respect to its legality and form, and
unless the officer charged with maintenance of the City's accounting system
shall first have certified that sufficient funds are available or that an
appropriation has been made for the payment thereof. In the case of a contract
obligating the City for periodic payments in future fiscal years for the
furnishing of a continuing service or the leasing or purchase of property, such
certification need not cover payments on the contract which will be due in
future fiscal years, but this exception shall not apply to a contract for the
construction of a public improvement. A copy of all contracts requiring such
opinion and certification shall be filed in the office of the Clerk.
No exclusive contract shall be made with any person, firm, association, or
corporation, except such as may be necessary for the normal purchasing of
supplies and equipment for the City, the making and acquisition of public
improvements, and such as may be authorized or permitted by this Charter.
No contract shall be amended after the same has been made except upon the
authority of the Council.
No compensation shall be paid to any contractor except in accordance with the
terms of the contract.
No contract shall be made with any person, association, firm, or corporation
who is in default to the City.
Sec. 13.7. Leases.
No lease of public property to any person, firm, or corporation which is not
subject to revocation by the Council upon thirty days notice to the lessee
shall be made or become operative until the same shall have first been referred
to the people at a regular or special election and received the affirmative
vote of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon. No such lease shall be
approved by the Council for referral to the electorate before thirty days after
application therefor has been filed with the Council, nor until a public
hearing has been held thereon, nor until the lessee named therein has filed
with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all terms of such lease. No
special election for such purpose shall be ordered by the Council, unless the
expense of holding such election, as determined by the Council, shall have
first been paid to the Treasurer by the lessee.
Chapter 14.
Supervisors*
*Editor's Note: Charter chapter 14 has not been published, as it is superseded
by MCL 46.401 et seq.
Chapter 15.
Justice Court*
*Editor's Note: Charter chapter 15 has not been published, as it is superseded
by MCL 600.9921 et seq.
Chapter 16.
Cemeteries*
*State Law References: Cemetery Regulation Act, MCL 456.521 et seq.; authority
relative to cemeteries, MCL 128.1 et seq.
Sec. 16.1. Ownership and use.
The City may acquire, hold, and own such cemetery or public burial place or
places, either within or without the limits of the City, as in the opinion of
the Council shall be necessary for the public welfare and suitable for the
convenience of the inhabitants. The Council may establish standards of burial;
may prohibit the interment of the dead within the City, or may limit such
interments therein to such cemetery or burial places as the Council may
prescribe; and the Council may cause any bodies buried within the City in
violation of any rule or ordinance made in respect to such burials, to be taken
up and reburied properly or to be buried elsewhere.
Sec. 16.2. Purchase and care.
The Council may, within the limitations of this Charter, raise and appropriate
such sums as may be necessary for the purchase of cemetery grounds, and for the
improvements, adornment, protection, and care thereof.
Sec. 16.3. Board of cemetery trustees.
Whenever the City shall own, purchase, or otherwise acquire any cemetery or
cemetery grounds, the Council shall appoint three Trustees who shall be
electors of the City, and who, with the City Clerk, shall constitute the Board
of Cemetery Trustees. The three Trustees so appointed shall hold office for the
term of three years, from the first Monday in May of the year when appointed.
One Trustee shall annually be appointed by the Council each year. The Council
may remove any Trustee so appointed for inattention to his duties or other good
cause. The Trustees shall serve without compensation.
(Amendment of 8-5-2003)
Sec. 16.4. Board of cemetery trustees; organization, powers and duties.
(a)   The Board of Cemetery Trustees shall appoint one of theirnumber chairman,
and the City Clerk shall be clerk of the Board. The Council may, by ordinance,
invest the Board with such powers and authority as may be necessary for the
care, management, and preservation of such cemetery and grounds, the tombs and
monuments therein, and the appurtenances thereof; and, in addition to the
duties herein mentioned, the Board shall perform such other duties as the
Council may prescribe;
(b)   Said Board, subject to the directions and ordinances of the Council,
shall have the care and management of such cemetery or burial place or places,
and shall direct the improvements and embellishments of the grounds; cause such
grounds to be laid out into lots, avenues, and walks. The lots in such cemetery
shall be numbered and the avenues and walks named, and plats thereof shall be
made and recorded in the office of the City Clerk. The Board shall fix the
price of lots, and make the sales thereof. The conveyances of such lots shall
be executed on behalf of the City by the Clerk, and be recorded in his office
at the expense of the purchasers;
(c)   Said Board shall expend the money provided for the care and improvements
of the grounds; and make such regulations for the burial of the dead, the care
and protection of the grounds, monuments, and appurtenances of the cemetery,
and the orderly conduct of persons visiting the grounds, as may be consistent
with the ordinances of the City and the laws of the State of Michigan;
(d)   All moneys raised for any public cemetery established under authority of
this Charter, and all moneys received from the sale of lots therein, or from
any other source, shall be paid into the city treasurer, and shall constitute a
fund to be denominated the "cemetery fund." Said fund shall not be devoted or
applied to any other purpose, except the purposes of such cemetery. The Board
of Trustees shall annually report to the Council the amount of all moneys
received into and owing to the cemetery fund, and from what source, and from
whom; and the date, amount, and purpose of all expenditures and liabilities
incurred, to whom paid, and to whom incurred; which report shall be certified
by the clerk of the board.
(Amendment of 8-5-2003)
Sec. 16.5. Duties of the superintendent of cemetery.
The Superintendent of the Cemetery shall be the Director of Public Works or
such other person as designated by the City Administrator and he shall perform
such duties as are required for the proper care and management of the Cemetery.
The City Administrator shall hire and discharge such employees as may be
necessary for the care and management of the cemetery and the compensation of
such employees shall be at rates established by the City.
(Amendment of 8-5-2003)
Sec. 16.6. Regulatory powers of the council.
The Council may, by ordinance, make regulations necessary to carry into effect
the provisions of this Chapter to control or regulate any such cemetery or
burial place, and the improvement thereof, to protect the same and the
appurtenances thereof from injury, and to punish violations of any lawful
orders and regulations made by the Board of Cemetery Trustees.
Sec. 16.7. Other cemeteries, council powers to regulate.
The Council may by ordinance make any regulations necessary for the
preservation and protection of any cemetery or burial place within the City,
belonging to or under the control of any church, religious society,
corporation, company, or association, and for the protection and preservation
of the tombs, monuments and improvements thereof, and the appurtenances
thereto.
Chapter 17.
Miscellaneous
Sec. 17.1. City liability.
The City shall not be liable for damages sustained by any person either to his
person or property by reason of the negligence of the City, its officers or
employees, nor by reason of any defective condition of or obstruction in any
public place, unless such person shall serve or cause to be served upon the
Clerk, within sixty days after the injury resulting in such damages shall have
occurred, a notice in writing, which notice shall set forth substantially the
time and place of such injury, the manner in which it occurred, the extent of
such damages as far as the same has become known, the names and addresses of
the witnesses known at the time by the claimant, and a statement that the
person sustaining such damages intends to hold the City liable for such damages
as may have been sustained by him. Further, the City shall not be liable for
any damages to person or property arising out of any such injury unless there
shall have been first presented to the Clerk a claim in writing and under oath
setting forth particularly the time, place, nature, and extent of such injury
and the amount of damages claimed by reason thereof. No person shall bring any
action against the City for any such damages until such claim shall have been
filed with the Clerk and until the Council shall have been given opportunity to
act thereon either by allowing or refusing to allow the claim.
It shall be a sufficient bar and answer in any court to any action or
proceeding for the collection of any demand or claim against the City under
this Section that the notice of injury and the verified proof of claim, as in
this Section required, were not presented and filed within the time and in the
manner as herein provided.
Editor's Note: The provisions of Charter § 17.1 are superseded by MCL 691.1401
et seq.
Sec. 17.2. No estoppel; by representation.
No official of the City shall have power to make any representation or recital
of fact in, or which way be deemed to constitute a part of, any franchise,
contract, document, or agreement contrary to any record of the City. Any such
representation shall be void and of no effect against the City.
Sec. 17.3. Vested rights continued.
After the effective date of the Charter, the City shall be vested with all
property, moneys, contracts, rights, credits, effects, and the records, files,
books and papers belonging to it under and by virtue of the previous Charter.
No right or liability, either in favor of or against the city, existing at the
time of this Charter became effective, and no suit or prosecution of any
character, shall in any manner be affected by any change resulting from the
adoption of this Charter, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no change
had been made. All debts and liabilities of the City shall continue to be its
debts and liabilities, and all fines and penalties imposed at the time of such
change shall be collected.
Sec. 17.4. Trusts.
All trusts established for any municipal purpose shall be used and continued in
accordance with the terms of such trust, subject to the cy pres doctrine. The
Council may, in its discretion, receive and hold any property in trust for any
municipal purpose and shall apply the same to the execution of such trust and
for no other purposes except in cases where the cy pres doctrine shall apply.
Sec. 17.5. Vacancies in appointive boards and commissions.
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, if a vacancy occurs in the
membership of any appointive board or commission, the authority responsible for
the appointment of the person whose position has become vacant shall fill such
vacancy by appointment of a qualified person for the unexpired term of such
person.
Sec. 17.6. Records to be public.
All records of the City shall be public and shall be available for inspection
at all reasonable times.
State Law References: Mandatory Charter provisions, MCL 117.4(l).
Sec. 17.7. Definition of publication; mailing of notices.
The requirement contained in this Charter for the publishing or publication of
notices, ordinances, or proceedings shall be met by publishing an appropriate
insertion in a newspaper published in the English language for the
dissemination of news of a general character which newspaper shall have had a
general circulation at regular intervals in the City for at least two years
immediately preceding the time that it is used for such publication purposes.
The affidavit of the printer or publisher of such newspaper, or of his foreman
or principal clerk, annexed to a printed copy of such notice, ordinance, or
proceeding, taken from the paper in which it was published and specifying the
times of publication, shall be prima facie evidence of such publication. This
provision shall not apply to the publication required in Sections 7.8 and 7.10
of this Charter.
In any case in which this Charter requires the mailing of notices, the
affidavit of the officer or employee responsible for such mailing that such
notice was mailed shall be prima facie evidence of such mailing.
Sec. 17.8. Sundays and holidays.
Whenever the date fixed by this Charter for the doing or completion of any act
falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, such act shall be done or completed on the
next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or legal holiday.
Sec. 17.9. Chapter and section headings.
The chapter, section, and sub-section headings used in this Charter are for
convenience only and shall not be considered as part of the Charter.
Sec. 17.10. Interpretations.
Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by thecontext:
   (1)   All words used in this Charter indicating the present tense shall not
be limited to the time of the adoption of this Charter but shall extend to and
include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which
provision is made herein;
   (2)   The singular number shall include the plural and the plural number
shall include the singular and the masculine gender shall extend to and include
the feminine and neuter genders;
   (3)   The word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic and
corporate and to partnerships as well as to individuals;
   (4)   The words "printed" and "printing" shall include reproductions by
printing, typewriting, engraving, stencil duplicating, lithographing, or any
similar method;
   (5)   Except in reference to signatures, the words "written" and "in
writing" shall include printing and typewriting, and telegraphic communications
as well as hand written script;
   (6)   The word "officer" shall include the members of the Council, the
administrative officers, the Justices of the Peace, Associate Justices of the
Peace, and the Constables.
   (7)   All references to Section numbers shall refer to Section numbers of
this Charter.
   (8)   The words "statute," "law," or "general laws of the state" shall
denote the Constitution and the Public Acts of the State of Michigan, in effect
at the time the provision of the Charter containing the words "statute," "law,"
or "general laws of the state" is to be applied, and the applicable common law.
Sec. 17.11. Penalties for violations of Charter.
Any officer of the City found guilty by a court of competentjurisdiction of any
act, declared by this Charter to constitute misconduct in office, may be
punished by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment for
not to exceed ninety days, or both, in the discretion of the court. The
punishment provided in this Section shall be in addition to that of having the
office declared vacant as provided in Section 5.3.
Sec. 17.12. Amendments.
This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided bystatute.
Should two or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting
provisions, the provisions in the amendment receiving the greatest number of
affirmative votes shall govern.
State Law References: Charter amendments, MCL 117.21.
Sec. 17.13. Severability of Charter provisions.
If any provision, section, article, or clause of this Charter, or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall be found to be
invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or
application of the Charter, which can be given effect without the invalid
portion or application, provided such remaining portions are not determined by
the court to be inoperable, and, to this end, this Charter is declared to be
severable.
Sec. 17.14. Processes against city.
All processes against the City shall run against the City in the corporate name
thereof, and may be served by leaving a certified copy with the Mayor, Clerk,
or Attorney.
Schedule
Sec. 1. Election to adopt this Charter. This Charter shall be submitted to a
vote of the qualified electors of the City of Mason at a special election to be
held on Tuesday, June 12, 1951. This election shall be conducted by the
officers under the existing Charter, who are charged with the conduct and
supervision of elections, and shall follow the election procedure and be
canvassed in the manner provided in the existing City Charter.
Sec. 2. Form of ballot. The form of the ballot for the submission of this
Charter is as follows:
Instructions: A cross (X) in the square before the word "YES" is in favor of
the proposed Charter, and a cross (X) in the square before the word "NO" is
against the proposed Charter.
Shall the proposed Charter of the City of Mason drafted by the Charter
Commission elected on the 7th day of November, 1950, be adopted?
Yes
No
Sec. 3. Effective date of this Charter. For all purposes not otherwise provided
for in this Chapter, this Charter shall take effect on June 26, 1951, at 7:30
P.M. Eastern Standard Time.
Sec. 4. First elections under this Charter.
   (a)   The first election of officers under this Charter shall be held on the
first Monday in April, 1952, at which election there shall be elected four
Councilmen, who shall hold office for terms specified in Section 3.5 in this
Charter, commencing on and dating from the Monday next following such election.
The second election of officers under this Charter shall be held on the first
Monday in April, 1953, at which election there shall be elected three
Councilmen who shall serve for the terms specified in Section 3.5 of this
Charter, commencing on and dating from the Monday next following such election.
The nomination and election of officers at the above specified elections shall
be in accordance with the provisions of this Charter.
   (b)   The first election of a Justice of the Peace under this Charter shall
be held on the first Monday in April, 1953, at which election there shall be
elected one Justice of the Peace, who shall assume office on the fourth day of
July, 1953, for a term of two years. The second election of a Justice of the
Peace under this Charter shall be held on the first Monday in April, 1955, at
which election there shall be elected the Justice of the Peace and the
Associate Justice of the Peace who shall assume office on July 4, 1955, and
hold their office for the term specified in Section 3.5. of this Charter.
   (c)   Thereafter, all city elections for the election of officers of the
City shall be held upon the dates specified therefor in this Charter. The terms
specified in this Section are for the purpose of bridging the transition from
the schedule of terms of office in the prior Charter of the City and those
provided in this Charter.
Sec. 5. Holdover elected officers. The Mayor and Aldermen whose terms of office
would expire in November, 1951, shall serve as Councilmen until their
successors are elected at the City election held in April, 1952, and have
qualified. The Aldermen whose terms of office would expire in November, 1952,
shall serve as Councilmen until their successors are elected at the city
election held in April, 1953, and have qualified. The persons holding the
office of Mayor and Aldermen, respectively, at the time that this Charter
became effective as the Charter of the City of Mason shall constitute the
Council under this Charter and, in the performance of their duties as such,
shall be subject to the provisions thereof.
The Constables holding office at the time this Charter became effective shall
continue to hold such offices until such date as the term to which they were
respectively elected under the former Charter would have expired. At the
expiration of each such term of office, the successor to such office shall be
appointed by the Council under the provisions of Section 15.14 of this Charter.
Sec. 6. Administrative and other officers. If this Charter is adopted at the
election thereon, the terms of office of the City Clerk, City Treasurer, City
Assessor, and of each Supervisor, shall terminate at the time that this Charter
becomes effective as the Charter of the City of Mason. The persons holding the
first three such offices under the former Charter of the City shall assume the
office of the Clerk, Treasurer, and Assessor, respectively, under this Charter
and shall hold such offices on the same basis as though they had been appointed
thereto in the manner provided in this Charter, except that said three
appointive officials shall not be removed from office by the Council or any
City Administrator, until such date as the terms for which they were
respectively elected under the former Charter would have expired, unless for
misconduct in office. All other administrative officers and employees of the
City shall continue in the respective offices and employment held by them at
the time this Charter became effective and shall be subject to the provisions
thereof.
Sec. 7. Interim finance and taxation provisions. The appropriations and tax
levy required to be made by the Council in September, 1950, under the
provisions of the previously existing Charter, shall remain in full force and
shall continue until the third Monday in March, 1952, as though this Charter
had not become effective. However, all future budget appropriations and tax
levies shall be made in accordance with this Charter.
In order to accomplish the transition from the fiscal year as existing at the
time this Charter became effective to the fiscal year provided for in this
Charter, the period from the third Monday in March, 1952, to June 30, 1952,
shall constitute a special three-months interim fiscal budget and tax period. A
special budget for this three-month period shall be prepared and adopted in
accordance with the provisions of this Charter, except that the administrative
officer designated by the Council as the Budget Officer shall submit the budget
to the Council on or before the first regular meeting in September, 1951, and
the Council shall adopt a budget not later than its second regular meeting in
October, and at the same time shall appropriate the money needed for municipal
purposes for the three-months period and shall provide a tax levy of the amount
necessary to be raised by taxes for such purposes. Such levy shall not exceed
three-twelfths of the annual limit of two per cent of the assessed value of all
real and personal property subject to taxation in the City. Such levy shall be
spread on the December, 1951, tax roll and shall be collected in all respects
as city taxes were collected prior to the adoption of this Charter.
There shall be an audit of the interim fiscal period in accordance with the
provisions of Section 8.7. of this Charter.
Sec. 8. First board of review. The terms of all members ofthe Board of Review
existing under the previous Charter of the City shall expire as soon as the
members of the Board of Review herein provided for have been appointed and
qualified, but in no case before January 1, 1952. In January, 1952, the Council
shall appoint a Board of Review of freeholders who meet the qualifications for
such office provided in this Charter, and shall fix their compensation. One
such member shall be designated to serve for a term expiring January 31, 1953,
one for a term expiring January 31, 1954, and one for a term expiring, January
31, 1955.
Sec. 9. Status of schedule chapter. The purpose of this schedule chapter is to
inaugurate the government of the City under this Charter and to accomplish the
transition from the old to the new Charter of the City and it shall constitute
a part of this Charter only to the extent and for the time required to
accomplish this end.
Resolution of adoption 
At a meeting of the Charter Commission of the City of Mason, held in the
Council Chamber of the City of Mason, the usual meeting place of the Charter
Commission, on April 10, 1951, the following members of the Charter Commission
were present: Messrs. Glen Coon, Frank W. Dakin, Leo H. Harrison, D. R.
Lethbridge, S. A. Morrison, Howard McCowan, John Shepard, and James H.
VanderVen, a quorum.
At such meeting, the following resolution was offered by Commissioner Morrison
and seconded by Commissioner Harrison:
RESOLVED, That the Charter Commission of the City of Mason does hereby adopt
the foregoing instrument as the proposed revised Charter of the City of Mason
and the Clerk of this Commission is hereby instructed to transmit the same to
the Governor of the State of Michigan, in accordance with the provisions of the
statute, for his approval.
The vote on the adoption of said resolution was as follows:
Ayes: 8
Nays: None
Absent: Commissioner Parsons
GEORGE KELLOGG,
____________________
Clerk of the Charter Commissionof the City of Mason
Countersigned by the following Commissioners:
GLEN COON
FRANK W. DAKIN
LEO H. HARRISON
S. A. MORRISON
HOWARD McCOWAN
GERALD A. PARSONS
JOHN SHEPARD
JAMES H. VANDER VEN
D. R. LETHBRIDGE, Chairman
All of the Commissioners having attested as to said resolution as above and
also having attested the copy to be signed by the Governor, the meeting
adjourned, subject to the call of the chairman.
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE AMENDMENTS
Date of Charter Amendment Section of Charter
11- 6-1973                3.5
11- 6-1990                3.13
6- 2-1993                 5.1
8-15-1995                 8.4
8- 7-2001                 4.4
8- 7-2001(1)              8.8
 
PART II
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec.
1-1.    How Code designated and cited.
Sec.
1-2.    Definitions.
Sec.
1-3.    Rules of construction.
Sec.
1-4.    Catchlines of sections; history notes; references.
Sec.
1-5.    Effect of repeal of ordinances.
Sec.
1-6.    Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language.
Sec.
1-7.    Supplementation of Code.
Sec.
1-8.    General penalty; continuing violations.
Sec.
1-9.    Severability.
Sec.
1-10.    Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances.
Sec.
1-11.    Code does not affect prior offenses or rights.
Sec.
1-12.    Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
Sec.
1-13.    Municipal civil infractions.
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and
be designated the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Mason, Michigan," and may
be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Mason City Code."
Charter References: Ordinance codification, § 7.10.
State Law References: Authority to codify ordinances, MCL 117.5b.
Sec. 1-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances and
resolutions unless the context requires otherwise. When provisions conflict,
the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally
construed so that the intent of the council may be effectuated. Words and
phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the
language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that
have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed
according to such meanings.
Abandoned vehicle means, a vehicle which has remained on private property for a
period of 48 continuous hours without the consent of the owner or occupant of
the property, or a vehicle which has remained on public or private property for
a period of 48 continuous hours after a police agency or other governmental
agency has affixed a written notice to the vehicle.
Accessory structure means a structure located on the same lot as the principal
structure, the use of which is customarily incidental or secondary to the
principal structure or use.
Accessory use means a use of land or of a structure or portion thereof which is
customarily and naturally incidental to, subordinate to, and devoted
exclusively to the principal use of the land or building and located on the
same lot with the principal use.
Aggregate means an inert material used as a component of concrete, mortar,
plasters, and bituminous pavements. Sand, gravel or crushed stone are the most
common aggregates.
Agricultural land means substantially undeveloped land devoted to the
production of plants and animals useful to humans including, but not limited
to, forage and sod crops, grains, feed crops, field crops, dairy products,
poultry and poultry products, livestock, herbs, flowers, seeds, grasses,
nursery stock, fruits, vegetables, Christmas trees, and other similar uses and
activities.
Agricultural land use is characterized by the act or business of cultivating or
using agricultural land and soil for the production of animals, crops and
plants useful to animals or humans, and includes purposes related to
agriculture, farming, dairying, pasturage, nursery, horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture, aquaculture, animal and poultry husbandry, and other similar uses
and activities producing food, seed, fiber or fur. See "farm" and "prime
agricultural land".
Airport approach plan and airport layout plan mean a plan, or an amendment to a
plan, filed with the Mason planning commission under section 151 of the
Aeronautics Code of the state of Michigan, 1945 PA 327 (MCL 259.151).
Alcoholic liquor means alcoholic liquor as defined by the Michigan Liquor
Control Code of 1998.
Alley means a public or private right-of-way shown on a plat which provides
secondary access to a lot, block or parcel of land.
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(2).
Alteration means any modification, remodeling, change or rearrangement in a
structural or supporting member such as footings, bearing walls, columns, or
girders, as well as any change in the doors, windows, roof or exterior walls
which affect the means of egress which is undertaken without adding to the
floor area, height, or physical size of the building or structure.
Alternative tower structure means any manmade trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
Ambient noise means background noise or noise that cannot be identified as
coming from any particular source.
Animal clinic means a building where animal patients, who may or may not be
lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by a veterinarian
or similar professionals.
Animal unit means a number of animals based upon animal type under tables
published by the Michigan Commission of Agriculture which are generally
calculated as 1,000 pounds live weight equals one animal unit.
Antenna means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower,
building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communication signals.
Apartment means a room or group of rooms that is designed to function as a
single, complete dwelling unit and is located in a multiple-family dwelling or
a multiple use building.
Appraised value means the value of property as determined by an individual
qualified to appraise that type of property.
Aquifer means subsurface rock or other materials capable of holding a
significant amount of water in their crevices. Certain types of material such
as course sands, gravel and limestone, are more likely to produce aquifers.
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within the city
subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Automobile repair garage means a premises where the following services may be
carried out in a completely enclosed building: General repairs, engine
rebuilding, collision repair, painting, and undercoating of vehicles.
Automobile service station means structures and premises used or designed to be
used for the retail sale of fuels, lubricants, and other operating commodities
for motor vehicles, including the customary space and facilities for the
installation of such commodities; and including space for minor vehicle repairs
or service such as polishing, washing, cleaning, and greasing, but not
including bumping, painting, or refinishing.
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, often referred to as a 100-year flood.
Base flood level means the highest elevation of a flood having a one percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Commonly referred to as
the 100-year flood level. See "floodplain".
Basement means the portion of a building which is partly below and partly above
grade where greater than one-half of the height of that portion is below grade.
A basement shall not be counted as a story.
Bathroom is a room containing plumbing fixtures including a toilet, bathtub or
shower, or any other combination thereof.
Bed and breakfast means an owner-occupied residential structure that meets the
provisions of section
94-192(7) of this chapter.
Bedroom is any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes.
Berm means an earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen
undesirable views, and/or decrease noise.
Bicycle facilities means a public way designated for the use of cyclists.
Bicycle way means a bicycle facility parallel and adjacent to but separate from
the roadway.
Blighted structure means, without limitation, any dwelling, garage, or
outbuilding, or any factory, shop, store, warehouse, or any other structure or
part of a structure which, because of fire, wind, or other natural disaster, or
physical deterioration, is no longer habitable as a dwelling, nor useful for
the purpose for which it may have been intended.
Block means a piece of or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public
highways, streets, streams, railroads, rights-of-way, a park, etc., or a
combination thereof.
Bond means a form of insurance required of an individual or firm to secure the
performance of an obligation. (See "performance guarantee").
Buffer means a strip of land or space, including a specified type and amount of
planting or structures intended to protect or screen one type of land use from
another, or minimize or eliminate off-site ecological degradation.
Buildable acre means an acre of land remaining after excluding land classified
as a wetland or regulated water body.
Building means a combination of materials, whether portable or fixed, forming a
structure affording a facility or shelter for use or occupancy by persons,
animals or property. The term does not include a building incidental to the use
for agricultural purposes of the land on which the building is located if it is
not used in the business of retail trade. The term shall be construed as though
followed by the words "or part or parts of the building and all equipment in
the building" unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
Building area means the area included within surrounding exterior walls
(including fire walls) exclusive of vents, shafts and courts. Areas of the
building not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be included in the
building area if underneath the vertical projection of the roof or floor above.
Building envelope means the area of a condominium unit within which the
principal building or structure may be constructed, together with any accessory
structures, as described in the master deed for the site condominium project
(See figure 100-104 in ch. 100).
Building line means a line established on a parcel parallel to an adjacent
public right-of-way or adjacent property line for the purpose of prohibiting
construction of a structure between such line and the right-of-way or property
lines. Building line is commonly referred to as the setback line.
Building materials means lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing
materials, electric wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles,
mortar, concrete, or cement, nails, screws or any other materials used in
constructing any structure.
Business districts means, the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts.
Business sign means a sign which directs attention to a business or profession
conducted or to a commodity, product, service or entertainment sold,
manufactured or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
Caliper means a measure of the size of vegetation defined as the average
diameter of the main trunk measured at a point five feet from the ground at the
base of the vegetation.
Call box stand means a place alongside a street, or elsewhere where the police
chief has authorized a holder of a taxicab certificate of public convenience
and necessity to install a telephone or call box for the taking of calls and
the dispatching of taxicabs.
Camper means a vehicular portable structure which is mounted or built upon a
chassis, is less than 35 feet in length and is of such a width and weight as
not to require special highway movement permits when moved or drawn by a
vehicle.
Campground is as defined in Public Health Code (MCL 331.12501 et seq.).
Carport means a partially open structure intended to shelter one or more
vehicles. Such structures shall comply with all yard requirements applicable to
a private garage.
Casino means a facility licensed and operating under the Michigan Gaming
Control and Revenue Act, initiated law of 1996, MCL 432.201 as defined by
Section 2(g) of the Act, MCL 432.202(g).
Cellar. See "basement".
Change in use means a use of a building, structure or parcel of land, or
portion thereof which is different from the previous use as classified in this
chapter or in the building code.
Charter means the Charter of the City of Mason, Michigan.
Church use. See "religious institution".
City means the City of Mason, Michigan.
Clear vision area means the unobstructed view across a corner space which is
created by the intersection of two vehicular ways that allows a motorist to see
on-coming traffic or pedestrians (See figure 100-103 in ch. 100). This vision
area shall be clear of any opaque obstructions within a specified distance
along or from the right-of-way line(s) of all streets and drives.
Cluster development means a development where structures are arranged in
closely related groups, typically of the same type or character of design thus
creating greater densities in certain areas of a site while preserving the
natural features in other areas on the same site.
Code means the Mason City Code, as designated in section 1-1.
Cold storage means the keeping of farm produce or goods under climate
controlled conditions.
Collocation means the shared use by more than one licensed carrier of a single
tower or other useable antenna support structure.
Commercial garage. See "automobile repair garage".
Commercial recreation facility means a recreational facility including
campgrounds, athletic fields, golf courses, race tracks, or other spectator/
participatory facilities that charge a fee for use.
Commercial use means an activity carried out for financial gain including
retail sales, repair service, salvage operations, business offices, food
service, entertainment and brokerages.
Commercial vehicle means any motor vehicle registered as a commercial vehicle
under the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.) or which is used for the
transportation of passengers for hire, or constructed or used for
transportation of goods, wares, or merchandise, and/or all motor vehicles
designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry
any load thereon either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or
loads so drawn.
Common land means a parcel or parcels of land together with the improvements
thereon, the use, maintenance and enjoyment of which are intended to be shared
by the owners and occupants of the individual building units in a particular
development.
Common open space means a parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or
combination of land and water dedicated for the use or enjoyment of the
residents in a particular development or of the general public. Common open
space does not include any proposed street right-of-way, open parking areas, or
commercial areas. Common open space may contain accessory structures and
improvements necessary or desirable for religious, educational, non-commercial,
recreational, or cultural uses.
Community commercial center means a shopping center containing more than one
use relating to wholesale and/or retail services and utilizing shared vehicular
ingress and egress and on-site parking.
Compensation means any money, property, thing of value or benefit received by
any person in return for services rendered.
Concessionaire means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, who
receives a license under the provisions of this article to sell or offer for
sale goods, services or merchandise from a temporary or portable structure or
fixture at a specified location within a business district.
Condominium means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided
interest in common with other purchasers in a portion of a parcel of real
property, together with a separate interest in space in a building. A
condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of
such real property.
Condominium Act as defined in Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.).
Condominium documents means the master deed, recorded pursuant to the
Condominium Act, and any other instrument referred to in the master deed or
bylaws which affects the rights and obligations of a co-owner of the
condominium.
Condominium lot means the condominium unit and the limited common area reserved
for the exclusive use of the co-owner of an adjacent condominium unit together
in a site condominium development. A condominium lot is considered the
functional equivalent of a standard subdivision lot and the boundaries thereof
shall be the functional equivalent of the boundaries of a platted lot.
Condominium project means a project developed under the Michigan Condominium
Act (MCL 559.101 et seq.) consisting of more than one condominium unit which is
not subject to the provisions of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.).
Condominium structure means the principal building or structure intended for or
constructed upon a lot or development site together with any attached accessory
structures; e.g., in a residential development, the condominium structure would
refer to the house and any attached garage. A condominium structure can also be
a building envelope.
Condominium subdivision plan means the drawings and information prepared in
accordance with Section 66 of the Condominium Act (MCL 559.166) and filed with
the register of deeds as an exhibit to the condominium master deed.
Condominium unit means an area of land or volume of space separately described
in a condominium master deed and intended for separate ownership or use.
Conflict of interest means either a personal interest or a duty or loyalty to a
third party that competes with or is adverse to the duty of a city official or
city employee to the public interest in the exercise of official duties or
official actions.
Congregate housing means a structure containing two or more rooming units
limited in occupancy and occupied by persons 60 years and older, their spouses,
or surviving spouses, except for rooms or units occupied by resident staff
personnel, providing indoor, conveniently located, shared food preparation
service and major dining areas, and common recreation, social, and service
facilities for the exclusive use of all residents.
Construction contractors establishment means a parcel of land, building, or
structure, or a portion thereof used to store trucks, excavating equipment,
supplies, tools, or materials utilized by a construction contractor,
subcontractor, or builder.
Contiguous parcels means, as used in this chapter shall mean two or more
parcels of property which have one or more common property lines.
Contractible condominium means a condominium project from which any portion of
the submitted land or building may be withdrawn in accordance with this chapter
and the Condominium Act MCL 559.101 et seq.).
Convalescent home means a residential nursing facility other than a hospital,
that is designed to provide a range of personal and medical care services to
aged, chronically ill or disabled individuals and which is licensed by the
State of Michigan.
Convenience retail means establishments which sell primarily goods which are
edible or disposable in small quantities directly to the consumer.
Conversion condominium means a condominium project containing units, some or
all of which were occupied before filing of a notice of taking reservations
under Section 71 of the Condominium Act (MCL 559.171), as defined by Subsection
5(2) of the Condominium Act (MCL 559.105(2)).
Corner lot means a lot that is situated at the junction of at least two streets
at which the angle of interception is no greater than 135 degrees and defined
as having one front yard, one rear yard and two side yards.
Council and city council mean the Council of the City of Mason, Michigan.
County means Ingham County, Michigan.
Cul-de-sac means a minor street of short length having one end open to traffic
and being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular turn around.
Customary agricultural operation means an agricultural land use, condition or
activity which occurs on land in connection with the commercial production of
farm products and includes but is not limited to noise, odors, dust, fumes,
operation of machinery and irrigation pumps, ground and aerial seeding and
spraying, application of chemical fertilizers, insecticides and herbicides, and
employment of labor when such conditions or activities are conducted in
accordance with generally accepted agricultural and management practices. (See
"farm").
Cyclist means a person who is not afoot and is driving or is in actual physical
control of a bicycle.
Dangerous building means any building, dwelling, structure, or dwelling unit
that has one or more of the following defects or is in one or more of the
following conditions:
   (1)   A door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit does not
conform to the applicable fire code of the city, or is not so arranged as to
provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic for all
persons housed or assembled therein who would be required to or might use such
door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit.
   (2)   A portion of the building or structure is damaged by fire, wind,
flood, or other cause so that the structural strength or stability of the
building or structure is appreciably less than it was before the catastrophe
and does not meet the minimum requirements of this article or the applicable
building code of the city.
   (3)   A part of the building or structure is likely to fall, become detached
or dislodged, or collapse and injure persons or damage property.
   (4)   A portion of the building or structure has settled to such an extent
that walls or other structural portions of the building or structure have
materially less resistance to wind than is required in the case of new
construction by this article or the applicable building code of the city.
   (5)   The building or structure, or a part of the building or structure,
because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or the
removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or
for other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some
portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is
likely to fall or give way.
   (6)   The building, structure, or a part of the building or structure is
manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used.
   (7)   The building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, or flood, or is
dilapidated or deteriorated and becomes an attractive nuisance to children who
might play in the building or structure to their danger, or becomes a harbor
for vagrants, criminals, or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to
the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful or immoral
act.
   (8)   A building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, including the adjoining grounds, because of dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, or otherwise, is unsanitary or
unfit for human habitation, is in a condition that the health officer
determines is likely to cause sickness or disease, or is likely to injure the
health, safety, or general welfare of people living in the dwelling.
   (9)   A building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and open at door or
window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or
accessible to entrance by trespassers.
   (10)   A building or structure remains unoccupied for a period of 180
consecutive days or longer, and is not listed as being available for sale,
lease, or rent with a real estate broker licensed under Article 25 of the
Occupational Code, MCL 339.2501 et seq. For purposes of this subdivision,
"building or structure" includes, but is not limited to, a commercial building
or structure. This subdivision does not apply to either of the following:
      a.   A building or structure as to which the owner or agent does both of
the following:
         1.   Notifies the police department that the building or structure
will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days. The notice shall
be given to the police department by the owner or agent not more than 30 days
after the building or structure becomes unoccupied.
         2.   Maintains the exterior of the building or structure and adjoining
grounds in accordance with this article and the applicable building code of the
city.
      b.   A secondary dwelling of the owner that is regularly unoccupied for a
period of 180 days or longer each year, if the owner notifies the police
department that the dwelling will remain unoccupied for a period of 180
consecutive days or more each year. An owner who has given the notice
prescribed by this subsection shall notify the police department not more than
30 days after the dwelling no longer qualifies for this exception. As used in
this subsection, "secondary dwelling" means a dwelling such as a vacation home,
hunting cabin, or summer home, that is occupied by the owner or a member of the
owner's family during part of a year.
   (11)   Is in such a condition as to constitute a nuisance.
   (12)   Is otherwise a "dangerous building" as described and defined in
Section 139 of the Housing Law of Michigan (MCL 125.539).
Day care facility means a state licensed facility receiving more than six
preschool or school age children for group care for periods of less than 24
hours per day, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available
to the child. It includes a facility which provides care for not less than two
consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. A child/
day care facility is regulated by Public Act No. 116 of 1973 (MCL 722.111 et
seq.).
Density means the number of dwelling units situated on or to be developed per
acre of land. Refer to "gross density" and "net density".
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the
area of special flood hazard.
Development site means a parcel meeting the requirements of Sections 108 and
109 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.108, 560.109) and chapter 74, article III
of this Code; a platted lot meeting the requirements of the Land Division Act
(MCL 560.101 et seq.) and chapter 74, article II of this Code; or a condominium
lot on which exists, or which is intended for, building development.
Development site shall not include the following:
   (1)   Agricultural use involving the production of plants and animals useful
to humans, including forages and sod crops; grains, feed crops, and field
crops; dairy and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock,
including breeding and grazing of cattle, swine, and similar animals; berries;
herbs; flowers; seeds; grasses; nursery stock; fruits; vegetables; Christmas
trees; and other similar uses and activities.
   (2)   Forestry use involving the planting, management, or harvesting of
timber.
District/zoning district means the zoning districts described in chapter 94 of
this Code.
Disturbed land means a parcel of land which is graded, filled, excavated,
mined, or stripped of its natural vegetative cover or grass for a purpose other
than agriculture land use.
Divided or division means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of
land by the proprietor or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal
representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale or lease of more
than one year, or of building development, that results in one or more parcels
of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and satisfies the requirements of
Sections 108 and 109 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.108, 560.109).
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(d).
Drive-in facility means commercial enterprises that permit the consumer to
transact business, receive a service, or be entertained while remaining in a
motor vehicle.
Drive-thru facility. See "drive-in facility".
Driveway means a path of travel connected to a public or private street over
which a vehicle may be driven to access one or more parcels of land.
Dump means a disposal site on which solid wastes are placed and left and which
is not licensed under Part 115 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 325.11501 et
seq.) as a solid waste disposal site.
Duplex. See "two-family dwelling".
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, utilities, and sanitation.
Easement means a grant by the owner of the use of a strip of land by the
public, or persons, for specific uses or purposes, and shall be designated as
public or private depending on the nature of the user and in conformance with
the Land DivisionAct (MCL 560.101 et seq.).
Efficiency unit means a dwelling unit comprised of one combined living and
sleeping room and a separate room containing sanitary facilities, and that may
have a separate room containing kitchen facilities.
Equestrian center means an enclosed or unenclosed facility which provides
public instruction, training or practice in the equestrian arts, including
public exhibitions or competition in such skills.
Excavation means the removal or recovery of exposed or submerged soil, rock,
sand, gravel, peat, muck, marrow, shale, limestone, clay, or other mineral or
organic substances except vegetation, from water or land, whether exposed or
submerged.
Exempt split or exempt division means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel
or tract of land by the proprietor or by his heirs, executors, administrators,
legal representatives, successors or assigns that does not result in one or
more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent provided all resulting
parcels are accessible for vehicular travel and utilities from existing public
roads through existing adequate roads or easements, or through areas owned by
the owner of the parcel that can provide such access.
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(e).
Expandable condominium means a condominium project to which additional land may
be added in accordance with this chapter and the State Condominium Act (MCL
559.101 et seq.).
Explosive means a chemical compound or mechanical mixture commonly used, or
intended, for the purpose of producing an explosion, that contains any
oxidizing and combustible units, or other ingredients, in such proportions,
quantities, or packing, that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion,
by percussion or by detonation of any part of the compound or mixture may cause
such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous
pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects or
destroying life and limb.
Exterior property is the open space on the premises and on adjoining property
under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or
by any other approved pest elimination methods.
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.
Family means one or more persons living together in a dwelling unit as a single
domestic housekeeping unit. Where there are more than two persons living in a
dwelling unit, a family shall be comprised of individuals in accordance with
one of the following standards. Anyone seeking the rights and privileges
afforded a member of a family by this chapter shall have the burden of proof by
clear and convincing evidence of compliance with this definition.
   (1)   A domestic family comprised of persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption with the addition of not more than one unrelated person.
   (2)   The functional equivalent of a domestic family comprised of persons
living together whose relationship is of a regular and permanent nature and has
a distinct domestic character, or a demonstrable and recognizable bond, where
each person is responsible for the basic material needs of the others and all
persons are living and cooking as a single housekeeping unit. The functional
equivalent of a domestic family shall not include any society, club,
fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, combine, federation, group, coterie
or organization, nor include a group of persons whose association is temporary
or seasonal in character or nature or for the limited duration of their
education, nor a group whose sharing of a house is not to function as a
domestic family, but merely for convenience and economics.
Farm means a parcel of land containing at least ten acres which is utilized for
an agricultural land use, including necessary farm structures and equipment,
but not including the raising of fur bearing animals, livery or boarding
stables and dog kennels.
Fee simple title refers to the broadest, most extensive and unconditional
estate in land that can be enjoyed. A fee simple estate is unlimited as to
duration, disposition and descendibility, subject to the sovereign power of
eminent domain, and may be conveyed by its owner either during his life or upon
his death.
Feedlot means a premises used to feed livestock in preparation for market and
slaughter.
Fence means any wall (except a retaining wall or lawful sign), screen,
partition or similar structure that encloses land, divides land into distinct
portions, separates contiguous properties, prevents intrusion from without or
straying from within, obstructs the passage of light or air into adjacent land,
or obstructs the view of property.
Filing date means the date upon which any properly completed application
pursuant to this chapter is submitted and the required filing fee is paid.
Filling means the depositing or dumping of any matter, except common household
gardening or general yard maintenance refuse, into or onto the ground.
Financial benefit means a financial benefit which accrues to a greater extent
than any benefit which could reasonably be expected to accrue from the proposed
action to the general public or to the general business, occupation or
profession taken as agroup.
Fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a
flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or
audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of
consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display
fireworks, and special effects as defined by Public Act 256 of 2011.
   (1)   Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to
produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the
construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the
United States consumer product safety commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and
1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1 3.1.2, 3.1.3 or 3.5. Consumer
fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks.
    (2)   Articles pyrotechnic means pyrotechnic devices for professional use
that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction
but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer
fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or
UN0432 under 24 CFR 172.101.
   (3)   Display fireworks means large fireworks devices that are explosive
materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designated to produce
visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as
provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standard 87-1, 4.1.
   (4)   Special effects means a combination of chemical elements or chemical
components capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and
designed and intended to produce an audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal
effect as an integral part of a motion picture, radio, television, theatrical,
or opera production or live entertainment.
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 750.243a(1).
Flood or flooding means a rise in the water level of a water body, or the rapid
accumulation of water from runoff or other sources, so that land that is
normally dry is temporarily inundated by water. For the purpose of the National
Flood Insurance Program, flooding is also defined to include mud slides
connected with accumulation of water, and land subsidence along water bodies.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the risk premium zones applicable to the city.
Flood insurance study means the official report provided in which the Federal
Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the flood
boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Floodplain means that area of land adjoining a channel of a river, stream,
watercourse, lake, or similar body of water which will be inundated by a flood
which can reasonably be expected for the region.
Floodproofing means any combinations of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Floor area ratio means the ratio between the total amount of floor area of all
floors permitted to be constructed on a development site and the area of the
site.
Foster care facility means the provision of supervision, personal care and
protection, in addition to room and board, for 24 hours a day and five or more
days per week for two or more consecutive weeks, with or without compensation.
Forty acres or the equivalent means either 40 acres, a quarter-quarter section
containing not less than 30 acres, or a government lot containing not less than
30 acres.
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(l).
Front yard means an open, unoccupied space extending the full width of the lot
between the front lot line and the nearest line of the principal building on
the lot (See figure 100-101 in ch. 100). The depth of the front yard shall be
measured at right angles to the property line in the case of a straight
property line and radial to the property line in the case of a curved property
line. On a corner lot, the front yard shall be the yard fronting on a street
with the largest setback.
Garage means an accessory building used for parking or storage of vehicles in
connection with the permitted use of the principal building.
Garage sale means the public sale of any new or used tangible personal property
which is conducted at a private residence in a residentially zoned district and
which is advertised by any means, and shall include by example and not by way
of limitation all sales entitled "garage sale," "yard sale," "lawn sale,"
"attic sale" or "rummage sale," when conducted on a private residence, and
shall exclude auctions that are presided over by a licensed auctioneer.
Garbage is the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
Guard is a building component or a system of building components located at or
near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility
of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
General common elements means the land area other than the limited common
element of the site condominium development that are held in common by all co-
owners and used for parks, streets, open space, or other common activities.
(See figure 100-104 in ch. 100).
General retail means stores which sell dry goods, package foods, hardware,
appliances, computers, jewelry and other similar merchandise and services
directly to the public.
Generally accepted agricultural and management practices means practices
adopted by the Michigan Commission of Agriculture pursuant to the Michigan
Right to Farm Act (MCL 286.471 et seq.).
Gift means any thing of value, money, loan of money, goods, or services given
without due consideration. "Gift" does not include:
   (1)   Information-gathering trips paid for by a person or entity seeking
approval of a proposal from a decision-making body of the city, provided that
the decision-making body, prior to the trip, makes all of the following
determinations: (a) the information will be useful and material; (b) the trip
will improve and not unduly influence the decisional process; and (c) the
decision-making body designates the official(s) who will participate.
   (2)   Small items of a nominal value and any reportable campaign
contributions pursuant to state law.
Government building. See "public building".
Grade means a reference plane representing the average of finished ground level
adjoining the building at all exterior walls.
Grading means any stripping, excavating, filling, stockpiling, or any
combination of such activities, and shall include the land in its excavated or
filled condition.
Gross acre means an acre of land inclusive of all amenities and features.
Gross density means a figure which equals the total number of dwelling units on
a development site divided by the total number of acres included in the
development site.
Gross floor area means the area within the perimeter of the outside walls of
the building under consideration, without deduction for hallways, stairs,
elevator shafts, closets, thickness of walls, columns, or other features.
Ground cover means grasses or other plant growth or plant material sufficient
to prevent soil erosion.
G.V.W.R. means gross vehicle weight rating, a measure of vehicle weight.
Habitable floor area means any floor area usable for living purposes, which
includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination of
such activities. A floor area used only for storage purposes is not a habitable
floor.
Hazardous material means any material, waste, or a combination of waste and
material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous material,
which, because of its quantity, quality, concentration or other physical,
chemical or general characteristics pose a substantial present or potential
hazard to human health or the environment if improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
Hazardous substance/waste, as defined by Section 101(14) of the United States
Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA),
means:
   (1)   Any substance designated pursuant to Section 311(B)(2)(A) of the
federal Water Pollution Control Act;
   (2)   Any element, compound, mixture, solution or substance designated
pursuant to Section 102 of CERCLA;
   (3)   Any hazardous waste having characteristics identified under or listed
pursuant to Section 3001 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (not including waste
regulation suspended by acts of Congress);
   (4)   Any toxic pollutant listed under Section 307(a) of the federal Water
Pollution Control Act;
   (5)   Any hazardous air pollutant listed under Section 102 of the Clean Air
Act; and
   (6)   Any hazardous chemical substance or mixture with respect to which the
administrator has taken action pursuant to Section 7 of the Toxic Substance
Control Act.
Height means the vertical distance measured from the average finished ground
level at the front of the structure to the highest point of the structure.
Home occupation means an accessory use of a dwelling unit by the residents
thereof for gainful employment on a reoccurring basis involving the
manufacture, sale, or provision of goods, materials, or services.
Hotel means a building containing six or more individual guest rooms or suites,
intended to be rented or hired out for sleeping purposes by transient guests.
Household pet means a animal that is customarily kept for personal use or
enjoyment and is not restricted by other local, state, or federal regulations.
Household pets shall include but not be limited to domestic dogs, domestic
cats, domestic tropical birds, and rodents.
Housekeeping unit is a room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space
equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which
does not contain, within such a unit, a toiler; lavatory and bathtub or shower.
Immediate family means a spouse, child, parent, sister or brother, and parent-
in-law, sister-in-law or brother-in-law wherever residing, or any relative
sharing the same household. All relationships shall include individuals in a
step or adoptive relationship.
Imminent danger means, a condition which could cause serious or life-
threatening injury or death at any time.
Improvements means those features and actions associated with a project that
are considered necessary by the body or official granting zoning approval to
protect natural resources or the health, safety, and welfare of the residents
of the city and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project
area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening, and
drainage. Improvements do not include the entire project that is the subject of
zoning approval.
Incite a riot means but is not limited to urging or instigating other persons
to riot; but the term shall not be deemed to mean the mere oral or written
advocacy of ideas or expression of belief not involving advocacy of any act of
violence or assertion of the rightness of or the right to commit any such act.
Industrial park means the development of a parcel in a unified manner in which
multiple lots or similar building sites are created to accommodate separate
industrial facilities, all of which are accessed by a road or drive constructed
as an integral part of the development, and which include open spaces and
landscape features to enhance the visual setting of the development.
Industrial use means a structure, building, or parcel of land, or portion
thereof, utilized or inherently designed to be utilized for the purpose of
production, manufacturing, processing, cleaning, testing, rebuilding, assembly,
distribution, finishing, construction or printing of goods or products and
related research and development facilities.
Infestation is the presence, within or contiguous to, a styructure or premises
of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
Inoperable motor vehicle means a motor vehicle, as defined in the Michigan
Vehicle Code, (MCL 257.1 et seq.) which by reason of dismantling, disrepair,
accident, or other cause is incapable of being propelled under its own power,
or is in such an unsafe condition as to endanger a person in violation of
Section 683 of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.683), and which condition
exists and continues for a period of seven days or which has no current State
of Michigan license or registration properly attached in the manner required by
law.
Intensity of land use means the amount of activity associated with a specific
land use based upon the following criteria:
   (1)   Amount of vehicular traffic generated (including parking);
   (2)   Amount of pedestrian traffic generated;
   (3)   Noise, odor and air pollution generated;
   (4)   Potential for litter;
   (5)   Type and quantity of materials stored in connection with the
operation;
   (6)   Total residential units and density, where applicable; and
   (7)   Total coverage and height of structures on the parcel.
Junk means dry solid waste material resulting from housekeeping, construction,
mercantile and manufacturing enterprises and other solid waste producing
enterprise, including scrap metals, wood, rubber, paper, plastics, cloth,
abandoned, wrecked, unlicensed or inoperable motor vehicles, rags, bottles, tin
cans, and comparable items. Junk shall include unlicensed and inoperable travel
trailers and campers, as well as include unused furniture and appliances.
Junk automobiles means, without limitation, any motor vehicle which is not
licensed for use upon the highways of the State of Michigan for a period in
excess of 20 days, and shall also include, whether licensed or not, any motor
vehicle which is inoperative for any reason for a period in excess of ten days,
provided that there is excepted from this definition unlicensed, but operative,
vehicles which are kept as the stock in trade of a regularly licensed and
established new or used automobile dealer.
Junk yard means any land, enclosure, or building with a minimum of 200 square
feet in area used for the abandonment, disposal, storage, keeping, collecting,
processing, or baling of paper, rags, scrap metals, wood, rubber, plastics,
other scrap or discarded materials, or for abandonment, demolition,
dismantling, storage or salvaging of automobiles, trailers, other vehicles,
machinery, or parts thereof.
Kennel means any lot or premises used for the commercial sale, boarding, or
treatment of dogs, cats or other domestic animals and which has a license from
the Ingham County Animal Control Office.
Landscaping means an arrangement of elements which may include plant materials
such as trees, shrubs, ground covers, perennial and annual plants; landscape
materials such as rocks, water features, fences, screens, walls, pedestrian
walks, paving products, and site lighting; and site furnishings and ornamental
objects such as statuary, sculpture, benches, drinking fountains, trash
receptacles, and planters for aesthetic and functional purposes.
Let for occupancy or let is to permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy
of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or structure by a
person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a
written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or
unrecorded agreement or contract for the sale of land.
Limited common elements means a portion of the general common element reserved
in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners.
(See figure 100-104 in ch. 100).
Livestock feeding operation means a premises used to feed livestock in
preparation for market.
Livestock production facility means a facility where farm animals as defined in
the Michigan Right to Farm Act, Public Act No. 93 of 1981; MCL 286.471, are
confined with the capacity of 50 animal units or greater and the associated
manure storage facilities.
Loading space means an off-street space on the same lot with a building, or
group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while
loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
Lot. See "development site".
Lot area means the area of land within the boundary of a lot excluding any part
within a regulated waterway.
Lot coverage means the part of a lot, expressed as a percentage, occupied by
buildings or structures, including accessory buildings or structures, but
excluding drives and uncovered surface parking areas.
Lot depth shall be measured on a straight line which connects the mid-point of
the front lot line with the lot line mid-point which is located farthest from
the mid-point of the front lot line. (See figure 100-102 in chapter 100).
Lot frontage shall be measured along the front property line from the
intersection point with one side lot line to the intersection point with the
opposite side lot line (see figure 100-102 in chapter 100). If the front
property line is a curved line the frontage shall be thelineal distance along
this curved line.
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision and is shown on a map
thereof which has been recorded in the office of the county register of deeds.
Lot width. Lot width shall be measured as follows. (See figure 100-102 in ch.
100):
   (1)   Lot width with parallel side lot lines. Lot width shall be measured on
a straight line which is perpendicular to the side lot lines.
   (2)   Lot width with non-parallel side lot line. The width shall be measured
on a straight line, which shall be a measuring line, which is parallel to a
straight line which connects the side lot lines where they intersect the front
property line. The measuring line shall be located the distance of the minimum
front yard setback from the front property line. The lot width shall be
measured on a straight line between the intersection points of the measuring
line with the side lot lines. If the measuring line is located behind the rear
line of the required front yard, the measuring line shall be the front building
line.
Marquee sign means a sign which identifies the business and/or owner and which
is attached to a legally established marquee, canopy or awning projecting from
and supported by the building. If suspended, it shall not exceed a depth of 12
inches nor be less than eight feet above sidewalk level.
Master deed means the recorded document establishing a condominium project, as
required by the Condominium Act (MCL 559.10 et seq.).
Medical clinic means a building where human patients, who are not lodged
overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by physicians, dentists,
or other health care professionals.
Mini-warehouse means a building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively
for storing personal property of an individual or family when such is not
located on the lot with their residence.
Mobile home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without
permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities and includes the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the
structure. A mobile home does not include a motor home.
Mobile home park means any lot, parcel or tract of land under the control or
management of any person upon which is located or which is designed for
occupancy by three or more mobile homes on a continual non-recreational basis
and including any accessory buildings, structures or enclosures comprising
facilities used by the park residents. Such parks shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter and Public Act No. 496 of 1987 (MCL 125.2301 et
seq.).
Modular housing unit means an assembly of materials or products intended to
comprise all or part of a residential building or structure, that is assembled
at other than the final location of the unit of the building or structure by a
repetitive process under circumstances intended to insure uniformity of quality
and material content. The roof pitch ratio shall be a minimum of four foot
vertical rise to 12 foot horizontal run.
Month means a calendar month.
Motel. See "hotel".
Motor home means a motorized vehicle designed to be utilized as a temporary
living quarter for recreation, camping or travel purposes having self-contained
kitchen or bathroom facilities or both.
Mounted wireless communication facility means any antenna, base mount, and
associated transmission cables which are permanently affixed to the roof, wall,
or structural support of any principal building or other structure on a site.
Multiple-family dwelling means a building containing three or more dwelling
units which complies with the building code and this chapter.
Multiple-family housing. See "multiple-family dwelling".
Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant
is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice
prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in court
regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation
by the person cited.
Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice prepared by
an authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the city Municipal
Ordinance Violations Bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed
for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, as
authorized under sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the 1961 PA 236 [MCL 600.8396,
600.8707(6)].
Net acre means an acre of land remaining after excluding land used as a public
or private street, or land classified as a wetland, regulated water body, or
floodway.
Net density means a figure which equals the total number of dwelling units on a
development site divided by the total number of net acres included in the
development site.
Nonconforming lot means a lot lawfully existing on June 10, 2001 that does not
conform to the dimensional requirements of chapter 94 of this code, including
lot area or lot width. Refer to section
94-322 of this code.
Nonconforming sign means a sign lawfully existing on October 15, 2007 that does
not conform to the provision of chapter 58. Refer to section
58-131 of this code.
Nonconforming use means a use of land lawfully existing on June 10, 2001 that
does not conform to the provisions of chapter 94 of this code. Refer to section
94-323 of this code.
Noxious weeds means Canada thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any species of
Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of
Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus
arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa
incana), quackgrass (Syropyron repens), crab-grass (Digitaria sanguinalis),
poison ivy (Rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (Rhus vernix), or other plant or
grass which, in fact constitutes a nuisance or a fire hazard.
Nuisance means an activity consisting of an unreasonable, unwarranted, or
unlawful use of property by a person that causes injury or damage to or
obstructs the right of another or the public in general.
Nursing home. See "convalescent home".
Occupancy means, the purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.
Occupancy permit means a document issued by the building official certifying
that all facets of a development have complied with this chapter and the
building code and that the land, building, or structures may lawfully be
occupied for the purpose designated.
Occupant is any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.
Off-premises sign means a sign not exceeding 300 square feet in area and which
contains a message unrelated to a business or profession conducted or to a
commodity, activity, service or entertainment carried on, sold or offered upon
the premises where such sign is located.
Official duties or official actions are decisions, recommendations, approvals,
disapprovals or other actions which involve the use of discretionary authority
or the performance of ministerial duties required by law.
Official zoning map means the city map that is an integral part of this chapter
illustrating the location of the various zoning use districts described in this
chapter.
On-premises sign means a sign not exceeding 80 square feet in surface area,
relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or its
products, accommodations, services or activities on the premises.
Open space means the ground area and space above a lot which is open,
unoccupied, and unobstructed by any structure or any part thereof.
Open-space ratio means the ratio between open space on a development site and
the total site area.
Open stand means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere in
the city which has been designated by the police chief as reserved exclusively
for the use of taxicabs.
Openable area is that part of a window, skylight or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
Operator is any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
Outlot, when included within the boundary of a recorded plat, means a lot set
aside for purposes other than a building site, park, or other land dedicated to
public use or reserved for private use.
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(n).
Owner as applied to property, is any person, agent, operator, firm or
corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded
in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title
to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the
guardian or conservator of the estate of any such person, and the personal
representative of the estate of such person and includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partner ship, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety of the whole or part of such property. With respect to special
assessments, however, the owner shall be considered to be the person appearing
on the assessment roll for the purpose of giving notice and billing.
Parade means any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or
procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or
other public place in the city.
Parcel means a continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as
provided for in the Michigan Land Division Act, 1967 PA 288, MCL 560.102, et
seq. and article 3 of chapter 74 of this code.
Park means a parcel of land, building, or structures used for active or passive
recreational purposes including playgrounds, sport fields, game courts, trails,
picnicking areas and leisure time activities.
Park trees means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the
public has free access as a park.
Parking lot means an off-street, surface facility providing vehicular parking
spaces for six or more vehicles along with adequate drives and aisles for
maneuvering so as to provide for entrance and exit access.
Parking space means a clearly delineated land area exclusive of driveways and
aisles, so prepared as to be usable for the parking of a motor vehicle, and so
located as to be readily accessible to a public street or alley. A parking
space may be located in a parking lot or a parking structure.
Peddler means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, or any firm,
partnership, corporation, whether organized for profit or not, or other
business entity, who travels by foot, wagon, cart, motor vehicle, or other
conveyance, from place to place, and sells or offers for sale goods or services
from a motor vehicle, wagon, trailer, railroad car, or other vehicle or
conveyance, or from a cart, stand, booth, display case, or other temporary
portable structure or fixture. The word "peddler" shall include "hawker" and
"huckster" and shall include route salespersons selling randomly to customers
along a fixed route, but not route salespersons supplying only prior customer
orders.
Performance guarantee means a bond posted by a contractor or subcontractor that
contains the financial guarantee of a surety that a specific project will be
completed within the time and to the standards or specifications that have been
agreed upon.
Performance standard means the general criteria to ensure that a particular
structure, land use, or development will be able to meet certain minimum
standards or will not exceed set limits for impact on the surrounding property
or the surrounding areas.
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, club, joint
venture, estate, trust, limited liability company, governmental unit, and any
other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting
such group or unit.
Personal property means any property other than real property.
Personal services means uses which include accountants, dentists, physicians,
barbers, beauticians, attorneys and similar services.
Plat means a map or charge of a subdivision of land.
   (1)   Preliminary plat means a map showing the salient features of a
proposed subdivision submitted to an approving agency for the purpose of
preliminary consideration.
   (2)   Final plat means a map of all or part of a subdivision prepared and
certified as to its accuracy by a registered professional civil engineer or
registered land surveyor. The final plat map shall meet the requirements of the
Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and be acceptable for recording in
accordance with that or succeeding acts.
   (3)   Replat means the process of changing, or the map or plat which
changes, the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat. The legal dividing of
an outlot within a recorded subdivision plat without changing the exterior
boundaries of the outlot is not a replat.
Pollution incident prevention plan (PIPP) means a written procedure provided by
an owner or his agent which will be followed to prevent a potentially polluting
incident from resulting in soil or groundwater contamination.
Portable sign means a sign which by its description or nature may be or is
intended to be moved from one location to another.
Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas mean any tower or antenna for which
a building permit or special use permit has been properly issued prior to June
10, 2001.
Pre-manufactured housing unit. See "modular housing unit".
Premises is any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent public and private sidewalks and
parking strips.
Prime agricultural land means land most efficiently suited to the production of
forage, fiber, feed crops, and field crops. This land, due to inherent natural
characteristics such as level topography, good drainage, adequate moisture
supply, favorable soil depth and favorable soil texture, consistently produces
the most feed, food and fiber with the least fertilizer, labor and energy
requirements.
Principal structure means the main structure to which the premises is devoted.
Principal use means the main use to which a premises is devoted and the
principal purpose for which the premises serves or is intended to serve.
Private street means a privately owned and maintained street or road
constructed to municipal standards.
Prohibited use means a use which is not permitted within a particular zoning
district.
Proof of equitable title means a recorded land contract agreement or recorded
deed conveying to the purchaser interest in real estate and/or any assignments
of the purchaser's interest therein.
Property. The term "property" means real and personal property.
Proprietor means a person, who may hold any ownership interest in land whether
recorded or not.
Public assembly building means a structure, building or space, or a portion
thereof used by the general public to view, hear or otherwise interact for the
purposes of civic, social or religious functions, recreation, food or drink
consumption or awaiting transportation.
Public building means buildings which house public safety and municipal
services but do not serve as a residential facility.
Public event facility means a privately or publicly owned or operated facility
that is used periodically for the holding of indoor or outdoor special events
in which the public may participate or otherwise observe.
Public open space means land dedicated or reserved for public use. It includes
parks, parkways, recreation areas, school sites, community or public building
sites, and other public spaces.
Public place means any place to which the general public has access and a right
to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not
necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall
also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern
or other place of business, and also public grounds, areas or parks.
Public utility means any person or municipal authority providing such public
utilities as gas, electricity, water, steam, telephone, sewer, transportation,
and other services of a similar nature.
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(s).
Public way means any surface thoroughfare designed, constructed and maintained
for passage to or from a place or between two points open as of right to the
public and intended for travel by vehicle, on foot or in a manner limited by
statute.
Racetrack means a facility licensed and operating under a track license issued
pursuant to the Michigan Horse Racing Law of 1995, MCL 430.301 et seq.
Racing theatre means an enclosed facility licensed by the State of Michigan
where patrons may view off-track telecasting of horse races and engage in off-
track wagering on results of the telecast horse races.
Rear lot line is generally considered to be the line that is opposite from the
front lot line and also farthest in distance from the front lot line.
Rear yard means an open, unoccupied space extending the full width of the lot
between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the principal building on
the lot. (See figure 100-101 in ch. 100). The depth of the rear yard shall be
measured at right angles to the rear property line.
Refuse means the following:
   (1)   All kitchen waste, including cans, bottles, household food,
accumulations of animal food and vegetable matter attendant to the preparation,
use, cooking and serving of food.
   (2)   General household trash and refuse, including ashes, empty cartons,
crates, boxes, wrapping materials, newspapers and magazines, when neatly bound
in conveniently sized bundles, cloth material, discarded toys, discarded
clothing and similar materials.
Refuse storage space means any exterior space designated by a site plan for
containers, structures, or other receptacles intended for temporary storage of
solid waste refuse or trash materials.
Rehabilitation means the upgrading of an existing building or part thereof,
which is in a dilapidated or substandard condition.
Religious institution means churches, synagogues, mosques, church schools,
church residences, and church owned land used for related church functions as
defined by the U.S. Tax Code.
Residential care facility means a government or non-government establishment
having as its principal function foster care for more than six persons.
Residential care facility includes homeless persons, parolees, ex-offenders,
aged, emotionally disturbed, developmentally disabled or physically handicapped
persons who require supervision on an on-going basis but do not require
continuous nursing care. A residential care facility does not include a nursing
home, hospital, or facility for the developmentally disabled licensed by the
state.
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a resolution adopted by the city
council.
Restaurant means an establishment where food and/or beverages are cooked or
prepared and offered for sale and consumed on the premises whether or not
entertainment is offered, and includes establishments commonly known as bars,
grills, cafes, taverns and nightclubs permitting consumption of food on the
premises.
Restoration means the reconstruction or replication of an existing building's
original architectural features.
Right-of-way means land reserved, used or to be used for a street, alley,
walkway or other public purpose.
Riot means a public disturbance involving:
   (1)   An act of violence by one or more persons part of an assemblage of
three or more persons, which act shall constitute a clear and present danger of
or shall result in damage or injury to the property of any other person or to
the person of any other individual; or
   (2)   A threat or the commission of an act of violence by one or more
persons part of an assemblage of three or more persons having, individually or
collectively, the ability of immediate execution of such threat, where the
performance of the threatened act of violence would constitute a clear and
present danger of or would result in damage or injury to the property of any
other person or to the person of any other individual.
Roadside stand means a structure for the display and sale of agricultural/
garden products, with no space for customers within the structure itself.
Room means an area of a dwelling unit used for living purposes, not including
bathrooms, closets, kitchens, basements, cellars, or attics.
Rooming house means an owner occupied single-family dwelling, or a dwelling
unit occupied by the owner in a two-family dwelling, occupied in such a manner
that a room or certain rooms, in excess of those used and occupied as a home by
the owner, are leased or rented as a rooming unit. In the case of single and
two-family dwellings the number of such bedrooms leased or rented to roomers
shall not exceed three, unless such dwellings are made to comply in all
respects with the provisions of this code relating to multiple family
dwellings.
Rooming unit means a single room within a rooming house that is leased or
rented to adult persons not related to the owner by blood, marriage, or
adoption without any attempt to provide cooking or kitchen accommodations
within the rooming unit.
Rubbish means waste from construction or remodeling, concrete, rocks, sod,
earth, automobile or truck parts, tires, manufacturing or trade waste
accumulated by residential, commercial, individual or institutional uses and
includes all other waste products not defined in this section.
Salvage yard. See "junk yard".
Satellite dish antenna means a device incorporating a reflective surface that
is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish,
cone, horn, or cornucopia. The antenna is intended to receive signals from
orbiting satellites and other sources.
Screen means a fence, landscaping, berm, or combination thereof that obscures
the view from one site to another.
Secondhand store means a building or portion thereof in which previously owned
goods are sold.
Setback means the minimum horizontal distance between a road right-of-way line,
an easement line, or an adjacent property line and a building or structure. In
a condominium development, the minimum horizontal distance between a boundary
line of the condominium lot and a building or structure.
Setback line. See "building line".
Short-term rental consists of a legal dwelling rented for a period of less than
30 days and is non-owner occupied.
Side yard means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal
building, between the side line of the principal building and the adjacent side
line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front
line of the rear yard. (See figure
100-101 in ch. 100). The width of the side yard shall be measured at right
angles to the side property line.
Sidewalk means that portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line
of the roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
Sign means a name, identification, description, display or illustration which
is affixed to, or painted, or represented directly or indirectly upon a
building, structure or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object,
product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business and
which is visible from any public street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, park or
other public property.
Sign area means the area of the smallest square, rectangle or circle which
encompasses the face of a sign, including the copy, insignia, background and
borders. The structural supports of a sign are to be excluded in determining
the surface area except where such supports are designed to form an integral
part of the display. Where a sign has more than one face, the area shall be
computed by encompassing the maximum single surface which is visible from any
ground position.
Sign, banner means a sign made of fabric or any non-rigid material and
generally with no enclosing framework, mounted at one or more edges to a pole,
building, fence, wall or other structure.
Sign, exempted means a sign which is not required to obtain a sign permit, but
must comply with all other provisions of chapter 58 of this code.
Sign, freestanding means any sign supported by uprights, braces, or a base
placed and anchored into the ground and not attached to any building or other
structure.
Sign, marquee means a sign which identifies the business and/or owner and which
is attached to the fascia or underside of a legally established marquee, canopy
or awning projecting from and supported by the building.
Sign, off-premise means a sign which contains a message unrelated to a business
or profession conducted or to a commodity, activity, service or entertainment
carried on, sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
Sign, on-premise means a sign, relating in its subject matter to the premises
on which it is located, or its products, accommodations, services or activities
on the premises.
Sign, portable means a temporary sign which by its description or nature may be
or is intended to be moved from one location to another.
Sign, projecting means a sign affixed at an angle or perpendicularly to a wall
surface of any building or hung or suspended in such a manner as to be read
from an angle or parallel to the wall surface on which it is mounted.
Sign, reader board means a portion of a sign on which copy is changed
periodically either manually or electronically.
Sign, real estate means a temporary sign pertaining to the sale, rent, or lease
of the premises, or portion of the premises, on which the sign is located.
Sign, roof means a sign which is located above, or projects above, the lowest
point of the eaves, the roof line on a gable end wall, or parapet wall of any
building, marquee, canopy or portico, or which is painted on or fastened to a
roof, or onto any architectural feature intended to look like a roof.
Sign, suspended means a sign suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane
surface and supported by such surface, usually a canopy, awning, portico, or
marquee.
Sign, temporary means a display, information sign, banner, or other advertising
device constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, wood, or other temporary material
with or without a structural frame and intended for a limited period of
display; such signs may be supported by a mobile chassis other than a motor
vehicle.
Sign, wall means any sign attached directly to a wall, or painted lettering on
a wall or canopy parallel to a wall with the exposed face of the sign in a
plane parallel to the wall and projecting not more than 18 inches from the wall
surface to which it is affixed.
Sign, window means any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof, designed
to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale,
or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass
and is visible from the exterior of the window. Merchandise that is included in
a window display shall not be considered as part of the area of a window sign.
Flyers advertising charitable events or other similar announcements shall not
constitute a window sign.
Significant vegetation means vegetation with a caliper of six inches or
greater. (See "caliper").
Single-family dwelling means a detached building including a mobile home,
containing one dwelling unit which complies with the building code and this
chapter.
Site condominium means a development under the Michigan Condominium Act (MCL
559.10 et seq.) for uses permitted in the zoning district in which it is
located, in which each co-owner owns in common with the other owners a specific
amount of land space for common use, and in which each co-owner owns exclusive
rights to an area of land space within which a structure or structures may be
constructed, herein defined as a condominium unit, as described in the master
deed.
Site condominium subdivision project. See "condominium project".
Site plan means and includes those documents and drawings required by article 7
of chapter 94 of the Mason City Code to ensure that a proposed land use or
activity is in compliance with the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mason and
state and federal statutes.
Skateboard means a device consisting of a short oblong board with wheels at
each end intended to be ridden on a hard surface such as a floor or sidewalk.
Solicitor means any person, or any firm, partnership, profit or nonprofit
corporation, or other business entity who travels by foot, motor vehicle, or
other conveyance from place to place seeking to obtain orders for the purchase
of goods, services or subscriptions for future delivery or performance, or who,
without traveling from place to place, solicits from a motor vehicle or other
conveyance or from a stand, cart, booth, or other temporary or portable
structure or fixture, but not wholesalers or jobbers supplying only retail
establishments.
Solid waste includes garbage, rubbish, paper, cardboard, metal, yard clippings,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery, demolished building materials, ashes,
incinerator ash, incinerator residue, street cleanings, municipal and
industrial sludge, solid commercial and solid industrial waste, animal waste,
but does not include human body waste, organic waste generated in the
production of livestock and poultry, liquid or other waste regulated by
statute, ferrous products, and slag or slag products.
Special use means a use that, owing to some special characteristics attendant
to the operation of said use, such as potential danger, noise, smoke or
traffic, is only permitted in a district subject to review and approval by the
planning commission, and subject to special or conditional requirements in
addition to the general requirements for the district in which the special use
may be located.
Special use permit means a permit issued by the planning commission authorizing
the operation of a special use as allowed under the regulations for special
uses authorized by permit in the zoning district.
Stable means a building or facility with a capacity for housing more than four
horses.
Stable, riding means a stable which provides recreational or instructional
horseback riding or other equestrian skills to the public, including a riding
academy.
State. The term "state" means the State of Michigan.
State-licensed residential facility means a structure constructed for
residential purposes that is licensed by the state under the Adult Foster Care
Licensing Act, 1979 PA 218 (MCL 400.7012 to 400.7137) or under 1973 PA 116 (MCL
722.111 to 722.128) and which provides residential services for six or fewer
persons under 24-hour supervision or care.
Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the adjacent floor above, or if there is no floor
above, then the space between the floor and the ceiling above.
Street means a right-of-way dedicated to public use which provides vehicular
access to adjacent properties, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, lane, or however otherwise designated,
comprising all the land between right-of-way lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may include pavement, curbs, gutters, shoulders, sidewalks,
parking areas, lawn areas, and other areas within the right-of-way lines.
   (1)   Minor street means a street supplementary to a secondary street or
collector street intended to serve the local needs of the neighborhood and of
limited continuity used primarily as access to abutting residential properties.
   (2)   Cul-de-sac means a minor street of short length having one end open to
traffic and being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular
turnaround.
   (3)   Secondary or collector street means a street intended to serve as a
major means of access from minor streets to major thoroughfares with
considerable continuity within the framework of the master street plan.
   (4)   Major thoroughfare means an arterial street of great continuity which
is intended to serve as a large-volume trafficway for both the immediate
municipal area and the region beyond, and be designated as a major thoroughfare
on the master street plan.
   (5)   Half street means a street having lesser than the required right-of-
way width for a street of full width as required by this article.
   (6)   Marginal-access street means a minor street parallel and adjacent to a
major thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
Street clock/temperature sign means a sign which displays the current time or
outdoor temperature or both and which is not larger than 16 square feet in
surface area and projects no more than eight feet from the face of the building
and is no less than eight feet above sidewalk level.
Street trees means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways
within the city.
Structure means anything constructed or erected the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground. A structure does not include a surface parking area, driveway, steps,
patio or deck constructed at grade.
Subdivide or subdivision means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or
tract of land by the proprietor of the tract or by his heirs, executors,
administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of
sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results
in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that is not
exempted from the platting requirements by Section 108 and 109 of the Land
Division Act (MCL 560.108, 560.109). "Subdivide" or "subdivision" does not
include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels if the
property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any
resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel
conforms to the requirements of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) or
the requirements of ordinance.
Subdivider means an individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under
chapter 74, article II of this Code, to effect a subdivision of land for
himself or for another.
Swimming pool means a structure or container located either above or below
grade designed to hold water to a depth of greater than 24 inches intended for
swimming or bathing. A swimming pool shall be considered as an accessory
structure.
Taxicab means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying
passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of less than ten passengers and
not operated on a fixed route.
Taximeter means a meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which
measures mechanically the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the
fare is based.
Tenant is a person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal
owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
Thread of a stream means the average centerline of the channel of a stream with
the main current flow.
Topographical map means a map showing existing characteristics with contour
lines at sufficient intervals to permit determination of proposed grades and
drainage.
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(dd).
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio, and similar
communication purposes, including self-supporting guyed towers or monopole
towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave
towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower
structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and any support
thereto.
Tract means two or more parcels that share a common property line and are under
the same ownership.
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(h).
Transient merchant means any natural person, or any firm, partnership, profit
or nonprofit corporation, or any other business entity engaged in the retail
sale or delivery of goods or services from any lot, premises, building, room or
structure on a temporary basis where such person does not have a permanent
business location within the city which is subject to the city's real or
personal property taxes for the current year.
Trash and rubbish means any and all forms of debris not herein otherwise
classified.
Trash storage space. See "refuse storage space".
Travel trailer. See "camper".
Two-family dwelling means a building containing two dwelling units which
complies with the building code and this chapter.
Usable floor area (UFA) means the area used for or intended to be used for the
display or sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons,
clients, customers, or occupants. Such floor area which is used or intended to
be used for hallways, stairways, elevator shafts, closets, columns, thickness
of walls, utility or sanitary facilities shall be excluded from the computation
of usable floor area. For office, merchandising, or service uses, those areas
used for storage or processing merchandise or where customers, patients,
clients and the general public are denied access shall be excluded from the
computation of usable floor area. Measurement of usable floor area shall be the
sum of the horizontal areas of each story of a structure measured from the
internal faces of the exterior walls.
Usable path for bicycles means a bicycle way designated for the exclusive use
of cyclists.
Variance means a modification of the area or dimensional regulations of chapter
94 granted in specific cases in accordance with article XI of chapter 94.
Ventilation is the natural or mechanical process of supplying conditions or
unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
Warehouse means a building or portion thereof, other than a mini-warehouse,
used for storage of goods, merchandise or other property. This shall not
include a storage area in connection with a purely retail business when located
on the same property.
Watercourse means any natural or artificial stream, ditch, river, creek,
channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully or ravine in which
water flows in a definite direction, either continuously or intermittently, and
which has a definite bed channel or banks.
Week means seven consecutive days.
Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, aquatic life or a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
Workmanlike means, executed in a skilled manner; e.g. generally plumb, level,
square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
Yard is an open space on the same lot with a structure.
Year means 12 consecutive months.
Zoning means the dividing of the city into use districts of a number, type and
shape considered best suited to the city.
Zoning act means 2006 PA 110, as amended, being the Michigan Zoning Enabling
Act (MCL 125.3101, et seq.)
(Ord. No. 72, § 1, 6-5-1967; Ord. No. 73, § 5, 3-4-1968; Ord. No. 80, § 3, 7-6-
1970; Ord. No. 87, § 2, 3-4-1974; Ord. No. 88, § 2, 3-18-1974; Ord. No. 97, §
1, 2-7-1977; Ord. No. 100, § 1, 10-3-1977; Ord. No. 101, § 9, 11-21-1977; Ord.
No. 103, § 1, 6-19-1978; Ord. No. 72-A-82, § 1, 4-9-1982; Ord. No. 123, § 1,
12-17-1990; Ord. No. 51-A-96, § 2, 2-5-1996; Ord. No. 135, § 2(2.3), 5-21-2001;
Ord. No. 145, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 147, 6-6-2005; Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006; Ord.
No. 152, 5-1-2006 ; Ord. No. 156, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 157, 11-6-2006; Ord. No.
158, 2-5-2007; Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007; Ord. No. 190,
7-2-2012; Ord. No. 227, 10-7-2019; Ord. No. 230, 9-28-2020; Ord. No. 239, 11-9-
2022; Ord. No. 255, 11-18-2024; Ord. No. 259, 4-21-2025)
State Law References: Definitions and rules of construction applicable to state
statutes, MCL 8.3 et seq.
Sec. 1-3. Rules of construction.
The rules of construction established in this section apply to this Code except
when the context clearly requires otherwise:
Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded
and the last day is included. If the last day of any period or a fixed or final
day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the period or day is extended to
include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions,
provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are
connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either . . . or," the conjunction
shall be interpreted as follows:
   (1)   The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions,
provisions or events apply.
   (2)   The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions,
provisions or events apply singly or in any combination.
   (3)   The term "either . . . or" indicates that the connected terms,
conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination.
Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a city officer
or city employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer
or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates.
Gender. Words of one gender include the other genders.
Includes, including. The terms "includes" and "including" are terms of
enlargement and not of limitation or exclusive enumeration, and the use of the
terms does not create a presumption that components not expressed are excluded.
Joint authority. A grant of authority to three or more persons as a public body
confers the authority on a majority of the number of members as fixed by
statute or ordinance.
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory.
May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition.
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory.
Number. The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.
Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in
all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In similar
cases, the term "sworn" includes the term "affirmed."
Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, boards,
commissions or employees are to city officers, city departments, city boards,
city commissions and city employees.
Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and
structures.
Property, lot, parcel, real estate, premises, plot, and land shall be
interpreted to mean real property as delineated and described by legal
documents and instruments.
Public acts. References to public acts are references to the Public Acts of
Michigan. (For example, a reference to Public Act No. 279 of 1909 is a
reference to Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909.) Any reference
to a public act, whether by act number or by short title, is a reference to the
act as amended.
Real property, real estate, land, lands. The term "real property" includes
lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory.
Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a
mark when the person cannot write.
Structure. The word "structure" shall include the word building.
Swear. The term "swear" includes affirm.
Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses. The future tense
includes the present tense.
Used and occupied. When applied to any land or building shall be construed to
include the words "intended", "arranged", or "designed to be used" or
"occupied".
Written. The term "written" includes any representation of words, letters,
symbols or figures.
(Ord. No. 135, § 2(2.2), 5-21-2001)
Sec. 1-4. Catchlines of sections; history notes; references.
(a)   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface
type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section
and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless
expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including
the catchline, is amended or reenacted.
(b)   The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in
this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Charter
references, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code
after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are
provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect.
(c)   Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to
chapters or sections of this Code as amended.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Charter References: Catchlines in Charter, §
17.9.
State Law References: Catchlines in state statutes, MCL 8.4b.
Sec. 1-5. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
(a)   Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of a repealing
ordinance does not revive the ordinance originally repealed nor impair the
effect of any saving provision in it.
(b)   The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or
amendment affect any rights, privileges, suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time of the amendment or repeal.
State Law References: Effect of repeal of state statutes, MCL 8.4.
Sec. 1-6. Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language.
(a)   All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in
any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code
repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by their
omission from reprinted pages affected by such ordinances.
(b)   Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following
language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate)
of the Mason City Code is hereby amended to read as follows: . . . ."
(c)   If a new section, division, subdivision, article or chapter is to be
added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter,
article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Mason City Code is
hereby created to read as follows: . . . ."
(d)   All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specially by
section, division, subdivision, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or
by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance.
Charter References: Amendment or repeal of ordinances, §
7.10.
Sec. 1-7. Supplementation of Code.
(a)   Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all
substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made by the supplement in the Code.
The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly
into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become
obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when
they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the
adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b)   In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that
have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from
reprinted pages.
(c)   When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to
prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances
included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody
them into a unified code. For example, the person may:
   (1)   Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units.
   (2)   Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters,
articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and
make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such
catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code.
   (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions,
subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code.
   (4)   Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers
assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections.
   (5)   Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter,"
"this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or
"sections ________ to ________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the
sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance
incorporated in the Code).
   (6)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original
meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code.
Sec. 1-8. General penalty; continuing violations.
(a)   "Violation of this Code" means any of the following:
   (1)   Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an
offense, or a violation by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by
ordinance.
   (2)   Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by
ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
   (3)   Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or
declared unlawful, an offense, or a violation or by ordinance or by rule or
regulation authorized by ordinance.
(b)   Reserved. 
(c)   "Violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer
or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided
that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this
section.
(d)   Except as specifically provided otherwise by state law or city ordinance,
all violations of this Code are municipal civil infractions, punishable by a
civil fine not exceeding $500.00 and all direct and indirect costs of the
action.
State Law References: MCL 600.8727.
(e)   Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a
violation of this Code that is a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $500.00, imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or both;
provided, however, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a
violation of any of the provisions of this Code that substantially correspond
to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period
of imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$500.00, imprisonment for a term of not more than 93 days, or both. A person
convicted of a violation of this Code shall be responsible for costs.
(f)   Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance:
   (1)   As to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to
time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense.
   (2)   As to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense.
(g)   The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of
a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions.
(h)   Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a
public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The
imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief or civil or quasi-
judicial enforcement.
Charter References: Penalty for ordinance violations, § 7.5.
State Law References: Penalty for ordinance violations, MCL 117.4i(k), 117.4l.
(i)   A defendant who fails to answer a citation or notice to appear in court
for a municipal civil infraction shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(j)   In a municipal civil infraction action involving the use or occupancy of
land or a building or other structure, a copy of the citation need not be
personally served upon the alleged violator but may be served upon an owner or
occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy on the land or
attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the
citation shall be sent by first-class mail to the last known address of the
owner of the land, building or structure.
Sec. 1-9. Severability.
The provisions of this Code are severable as provided in section 7.9 of the
City's Charter.
State Law References: Severability of state statutes, MCL 8.5.
Sec. 1-10. Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as
ordinances previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter,
shall be construed as restatements and continuations of such ordinances and not
as new enactments.
State Law References: Similar provisions as to state statutes, MCL 8.3u.
Sec. 1-11. Code does not affect prior offenses or rights.
(a)   Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any
offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any
contract or right established before the effective date of this Code.
(b)   The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation
of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the
effective date of this Code.
Sec. 1-12. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
(a)   Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the
validity of any ordinance or portion of any ordinance:
   (1)   Establishing or amending the city's Charter.
   (2)   Annexing property into the city or describing the corporate limits.
   (3)   Deannexing property or excluding property from the city.
   (4)   Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness.
   (5)   Authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement.
   (6)   Granting any right or franchise.
   (7)   Making or approving any appropriation or budget.
   (8)   Creating or establishing any department of city government not
codified in this Code.
   (9)   Providing for the duties of city officers or employees not codified in
this Code.
   (10)   Providing for salaries or other employee benefits.
   (11)   Pertaining to the downtown development authority, downtown
development district, local development finance authority or local development
finance district not codified in this Code.
   (12)   Pertaining to the economic development corporation.
   (13)   Reserved.
   (14)   Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan.
   (15)   Levying or imposing any special assessment.
   (16)   Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening,
paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley.
   (17)   Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk.
   (18)   Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision.
   (19)   Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes, exemptions from
taxes and fees in lieu of taxes.
   (20)   Pertaining to cable communications not codified in this Code.
   (21)   Rezoning property.
   (22)   That is temporary, although general in effect.
   (23)   That is special, although permanent in effect.
   (24)   The purpose of which has been accomplished.
(b)   The ordinances or portions of ordinances designated in subsection (a) of
this section continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if
published at length in this Code.
Sec. 1-13. Municipal civil infractions.
(a)   Officials authorized to issue citations and violation notices.  The
following personnel of the city shall have the authority to issue municipal
civil infraction citations and municipal civil infraction violation notices and
shall be deemed an authorized city official pursuant to this article:
   (1)   Sworn police officers.
   (2)   Building official.
   (3)   City manager or his or her designee.
   (4)   Zoning and development director.
   (5)   Fire chief.
   (6)   Any person specifically designated as authorized to issue a municipal
civil infraction citation or notice by any provision of this code.
(b)   Municipal civil infraction action; commencement. A municipal civil
infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city
official of a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged
violator to appear in court or a municipal civil infraction violation notice
directing the alleged violator to appear at the city municipal ordinance
violations bureau.
(c)   Issuance, service of citation. Municipal civil infraction citations shall
be issued and served by authorized city officials as follows:
   (1)   The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a
reasonable time after the citation is issued.
   (2)   The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the 55th
District Court.
   (3)   Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form
approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed
with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the city
and issued to the alleged violator as provided by section 8705 of 1961 PA 236
(MCL 600.8705).
   (4)   A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized
city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in
the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and
if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and
signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the
statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge and belief."
   (5)   An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal
civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as
completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation.
   (6)   An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if:
      a.   Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to
believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or
      b.   Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly
witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has
reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction
and if the city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation.
   (7)   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized
city official as follows:
      a.   Except as provided by subsection (7)b of this section, an authorized
city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged
violator.
      b.   If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or
occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does
not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served
upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the
copy of the citation on the land or attaching the copy to the building or
structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class
mail to the owner of the land, building or structure at the owner's last known
address.
(d)   Contents of citation.
   (1)   A municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the name and
address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged to have
been violated, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the
telephone number of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall
be made.
   (2)   Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she
may do one of the following:
      a.   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in
person or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance.
      b.   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction, with
explanation, by mail by the time specified for appearance or in person or by
representation.
      c.   Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing
either of the following:
         1.   Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or
district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city.
         2.   Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
   (3)   The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the
following:
      a.   That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility, with
explanation, in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to
the court in person, by mail, by telephone or by representation within the time
specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an
appearance.
      b.   That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the
alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone or by
representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled
date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on
the citation.
      c.   That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing
is requested by the alleged violator or the city.
      d.   That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in
person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of
being represented by an attorney.
      e.   That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person
before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
   (4)   The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure
of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or
at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will
result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the
municipal civil infraction.
(e)   Failure to appear; penalty. Failure to appear as directed by the citation
or other notice at a scheduled hearing shall result in the entry of a default
judgment on the municipal civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007; Ord. 222, § 2, 12-3-2018)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION*
Article I. In General
Sec.
2-1. Municipal ordinance violations bureau established.
Sec.
2-2. Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations.
Sec.
2-3. Disposition of violations.
Sec.
2-4. Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility.
Sec.
2-5. Municipal civil infraction violation notices.
Sec.
2-6. Appearance; payment of fines and costs.
Sec.
2-7. Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid.
Sec.
2-8. Schedule of civil fines.
Secs. 2-9—2-30. Reserved.
Article II. City Council
Sec.
2-31. Eligibility for office.
Sec.
2-32. Residency requirement for city council.
Secs. 2-33—2-60. Reserved.
Article III. Officers and Employees
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 2-61—2-80. Reserved.
Division 2. City Administrator; City Manager
Sec.
2-81. Creation of office.
Sec.
2-82. Appointment.
Sec.
2-83. Removal.
Sec.
2-84. Powers and duties.
Sec.
2-85. Councilmembers to deal with administrative service only through city
manager.
Sec.
2-86. Emergencies.
Sec.
2-87. Bond.
Sec.
2-88. Compensation.
Sec.
2-89. Vacancy.
Sec.
2-90. Acting manager.
Secs. 2-91—2-100. Reserved.
Division 3. Code of Ethics
Sec.
2-101. Purpose.
Sec.
2-102. Definition.
Sec.
2-103. Guidelines and standards for ethical behavior.
Sec.
2-104. Disclosure.
Sec.
2-105. Board of ethics.
Sec.
2-106. Aspirational intent.
Sec.
2-107.—2-120. Reserved.
   *Cross references--Elections, ch. 18; administration and enforcement of
flood damage prevention regulations, §
30-61 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 34; planning, ch. 50; administration and
enforcement of sign regulations, § 58-36 et seq.; special assessments, ch. 66;
administration and enforcement of traffic regulations, §
78-51 et seq.; utilities, ch. 82.
   State law references--Home rule cities, MCL 117.1 et seq.
Division 4. Emergency Management
Sec.
2-121. Authorization.
Sec.
2-122. Emergency management coordinator.
Sec.
2-123. Local state of emergency.
Sec.
2-124. Limitation of authority.
Sec.
2-125. Penalty.
Secs. 2-126—2-130. Reserved.
Article IV. Departments
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 2-131—2-140. Reserved.
Division 2. Zoning and Development Department
Sec.
2-141. Established.
Sec.
2-142. Powers and duties of building and zoning officials.
Sec.
2-143. Issuance of appearance tickets authorized.
Secs. 2-144—2-150. Reserved.
Division 3. Utility Department
Sec.
2-151. Established.
Sec.
2-152. Powers and duties of utility director.
Article V. Finance
Secs. 2-153—2-205. Reserved.
Article VI. Boards and Commissions
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
2-206. Authority.
Sec.
2-207. Member eligibility.
Sec.
2-208. Organization, meetings.
Sec.
2-209. Vacancy.
Sec.
2-210. Removal.
Sec.
2-211. Compensation.
Sec. 2-212. Residency requirement for boards and commissions.
Secs. 2-213—2-225. Reserved.
Division 2. Local Officers Compensation Commission
Sec.
2-226. Created; purpose.
Sec.
2-227. Membership.
Sec.
2-228. Determination of compensation of officials of council.
Sec.
2-229. Organization.
Sec.
2-230. Open Meetings Act; compliance.
Sec.
2-231. Freedom of Information Act; compliance.
Secs. 2-232—2-250. Reserved.
Division 3. Cable Commission
Sec.
2-251. Created.
Sec.
2-252. Membership.
Sec.
2-253. Duties.
Secs. 2-254—2-270. Reserved.
Division 4. Downtown Development Authority
Sec.
2-271. Purpose.
Sec.
2-272. Definitions.
Sec.
2-273. Creation of authority.
Sec.
2-274. Governing board of authority.
Sec.
2-275. Powers and duties of authority.
Sec.
2-276. Termination.
Sec.
2-277. Effective date.
Secs. 2-278—2-290. Reserved.
Division 5. Traffic Commission
Secs.
2-291—2-310. Reserved.
Division 6. Tree Commission
Sec.
2-311. Creation and establishment.
Sec.
2-312. Term of office.
Sec.
2-313. Duties and responsibilities.
Sec.
2-314. Review by city council.
Sec.
2-315. Interference with tree commission.
Secs. 2-316—2-330. Reserved.
Division 7. Local Development Finance Authority
Sec.
2-331. Purpose.
Sec.
2-332. Definitions.
Sec.
2-333. Governing board of authority.
Sec.
2-334. Powers and duties of authority.
Secs. 2-335—2-350. Reserved.
Division 8. Utility Rate Study Commission
Secs.
2-351—2-400. Reserved.
Division 9. Other Boards and Commissions
Sec.
2-401. Board of Review.
Sec.
2-402. Building code board of appeals.
Sec.
2-403. Board of Cemetery Trustees.
Sec.
2-404. Ethics board.
Sec.
2-405. Historic district commission.
Sec.
2-406. Planning commission.
Sec.
2-407. Zoning board of appeals.
Sec.
2-408. Sign board of appeals.
ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. Municipal ordinance violations bureau established.
There is established a Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau ("Bureau") as
authorized under section 8396 of 1961 PA 236 (MCL 600.8396). The Bureau shall
accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response
to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized
city officials and collect and retain civil fines and costs pursuant to a
schedule as provided by ordinance.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Sec. 2-2. Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. 
The Bureau shall be located at city hall, and shall be under the supervision
and control of the city treasurer. The city treasurer, subject to the approval
of the city manager, shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the
bureau and appoint necessary qualified city employees to administer the Bureau.
The Bureau may be staffed by the same personnel that staff the parking
violations bureau.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007; Ord. 222, § 3, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 2-3. Disposition of violations.
The Bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for which
a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction violation
notice (as distinguished from a citation) has been issued. The fact that a fine
has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to
dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this article shall prevent
or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any
violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent
jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil
infraction violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed before
a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose
of any violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way
diminish the person's rights, privileges and protection afforded by law.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Sec. 2-4. Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. 
The scope of the bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of
responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining
civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The bureau shall not
accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the
offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event
shall the bureau determine the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating
to an alleged violation.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Sec. 2-5. Municipal civil infraction violation notices. 
Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by
authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same
persons as provided for citations in section 1-13 of Chapter 1. In addition to
any other information required by this article or other ordinance, the notice
of violation shall indicate:
   (1)   The time by which the alleged violator must appear at the bureau;
   (2)   The methods by which an appearance may be made;
   (3)   The address and telephone number of the bureau;
   (4)   The hours during which the bureau is open;
   (5)   The amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation; and
    (6)   The consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine
within the required time.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Sec. 2-6. Appearance; payment of fines and costs. 
An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice
shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the
time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation
notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person or by representation.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Sec. 2-7. Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not
paid.  
If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal ordinance
violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the
civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the
violation are not paid at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may
be filed with the district court, and a copy of the citation may be served by
first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known
address. The citation filed with the court shall comply in all particulars with
the requirements for citations as provided by sections 8705 and 8709 of 1961 PA
236 (MCL 600.8705, 600.8709), and shall consist of a sworn complaint containing
the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall
fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Sec. 2-8. Schedule of civil fines. 
(a)   A schedule of civil fines, payable to the bureau for admissions of
responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices, is
established. The municipal civil infraction fines for the violations listed
below shall be as follows. Repeat violations are those violations that are
committed within one year of a previous violation of the same provision and, if
a property violation, on the same property. The violation notice shall specify
whether the violation is charged as a repeat violation and the number of prior
violations of the same provision within the previous year.
Code Section Description First Violation First Repeat Second or Subsequent
                                         Violation    Repeat Violation
                                                 First Repeat Second or
Code Section Description         First Violation Violation    Subsequent Repeat
                                                              Violation
             Buildings and
Chapter 6    Building
             Regulations
             Failure to keep
             exterior surfaces
6-142        in good condition,  $100.00         $200.00      $400.00
             failure to provide
             protective
             treatment
             Failure to provide
6-143        premises            $25.00          $50.00       $100.00
             identification
             Structural members,
6-144        foundation walls or $100.00         $250.00      $500.00
             exterior walls in
             disrepair
             Roof, flashing or
6-145        drainage in         $50.00          $75.00       $100.00
             disrepair
             Decorative feature
6-146        or overhang         $25.00          $50.00       $75.00
             extensions in
             disrepair
             Stairway, deck,
6-147        porch or balcony in $50.00          $75.00       $100.00
             disrepair
             Chimney, cooling
             tower, smoke stack
6-148        or similar          $50.00          $75.00       $100.00
             appurtenance in
             disrepair
6-149        Handrails and       $50.00          $75.00       $100.00
             guards in disrepair
             Windows, skylight,
6-150        and door frames in  $50.00          $75.00       $100.00
             disrepair
             Insect screens
6-151        missing or in       $25.00          $50.00       $75.00
             disrepair
             Exterior door in
6-152        disrepair or not    $50.00          $75.00       $100.00
             secured
             Basement hatchway
             unsecured allowing
6-153        rodents, rain or    $50.00          $75.00       $100.00
             surface drainage to
             enter structures
6-154        Basement windows    $25.00          $50.00       $75.00
             not guarded
             Security devices
             not provided for
6-155        exterior doors,     $25.00          $50.00       $75.00
             windows or
             hatchways
Chapter 10   Businesses
10-32 (1)    Failure to present  $25.00          $50.00       $100.00
             business license
             Failure to pull
10-32 (2)    motor vehicle       $25.00          $50.00       $100.00
             parallel to curb
             Licensee Selling in
10-32 (3)    public w/           $50.00          $100.00      $200.00
             o permission
             Enter private
10-33 (1)    residence w/ false  $100.00         $200.00      $400.00
             pretenses
             Failure to leave
10-33 (2)    residence upon      $100.00         $200.00      $400.00
             request
             Soliciting prior to
10-33 (3)    9:00 a.m after 9:00 $25.00          $50.00       $100.00
             p.m.
             Soliciting by
10-33 (4)    calling or other    $25.00          $50.00       $100.00
             noise
             Occupy public space
10-33 (6)    as transient        $25.00          $50.00       $100.00
             merchant
Chapter 14   Cemeteries
14-36(1)     In cemetery after   $25.00          $50.00       $100.00
             hours
14-37(4)     Unleashed dog in    $25.00          $50.00       $100.00
             cemetery
             Fail to clean up
14-37(4)     dog feces in        $25.00          $50.00       $100.00
             cemetery
             Allow dog to
14-37(4)     trespass on marked  $50.00          $100.00      $200.00
             grave
Chapter 22   Environment - Noise
22-32 to     Any noise violation $50.00          $75.00       $100.00
36
Chapter 22   Environment - Junk
             and Junk Cars
22-82        Junk storage        $75.00          $150.00      $300.00
22-83        Dismantle           $75.00          $150.00      $300.00
             automobile
22-84        Maintain unsecured  $100.00         $200.00      $300.00
             vacant structure
             Storage of
22-85        unenclosed building $75.00          $150.00      $300.00
             materials
Chapter 26   Fire Prevention and
             Protection
26-91        Open fire - no      $100.00         $150.00      $300.00
             permit
Chapter 42   Offenses - General
42-6         Curfew violation    $25.00          $50.00       $100.00
Chapter 42  Offenses Involving Public Peace and Order
42-82       Loud & Boisterous conduct                   $50.00  $100.00 $150.00
42-86       Possession of Drug Paraphernalia            $50.00  $100.00 $150.00
42-91       Sale of Tobacco to Minor                    $100.00 $200.00 $300.00
42-92       Use or Possession of Tobacco by Minor       $50.00  $50.00  $50.00
42-94       Open alcohol in public                      $50.00  $100.00 $150.00
Chapter 42  Offenses Involving Public Safety - Weapons
42-137      Sale of slingshot, airgun or weapon to      $50.00  $100.00 $150.00
            minor
Chapter 42  Offenses Involving Schools
42-176      Drive on undesignated area - school grounds $50.00  $100.00 $150.00
Chapter 46  Parks
46-31      Failure to leave park when ordered          $50.00  $100.00 $150.00
46-32       Failure to clean park after use             $50.00  $100.00 $150.00
46-32 (2)   Pollute park waters                         $100.00 $200.00 $300.00
46-32 (3)   Dump trash or fail to use receptacle        $100.00 $200.00 $300.00
46-32 (4)   Conduct oneself so as to endanger others    $100.00 $200.00 $300.00
46-32 (7)   Violate any park rule                       $50.00  $75.00  $100.00
46-32 (8)   Interfere with others lawful use of park    $50.00  $75.00  $100.00
46-32 (9)   Swim, bathe or wade in undesignated area    $100.00 $150.00 $200.00
46-34      Present in park when closed                 $25.00  $50.00  $75.00
46-35 (a)   Picnic or lunch in undesignated area        $25.00  $50.00  $75.00
46-35 (b)   Exclude use by others for private function  $25.00  $50.00  $75.00
46-36 (a)   Activities or games in undesignated areas   $50.00  $75.00  $100.00
46-36 (b)   Dangerous animal or unsupervised dog        $75.00  $150.00 $300.00
46-36 (c)   Sell, vend or peddle wares in park          $50.00  $100.00 $150.00
46-36 (d)   Post signs or ads in or adjacent to park    $25.00  $50.00  $75.00
46-37       Drive or park in undesignated area          $25.00  $50.00  $75.00
Chapter 58  Signs
58-126(1)a  Erection of a structurally unsafe sign      $50.00  $100.00 $200.00
58-126(1)b  Erection or maintaining a hazardous sign    $50.00  $100.00 $200.00
58-126(1)c  Failure to keep sign in good repair         $50.00  $75.00  $100.00
58-126(1)d  Sign is capable of causing electrical shock $50.00  $100.00 $200.00
58-126(2)   Sign constitutes a vehicle or pedestrian    $50.00  $100.00 $200.00
            hazard
58-126(3)   Sign obstructs an egress                    $50.00  $75.00  $100.00
58-126(4)   Sign interferes with, misleads and/or       $50.00  $100.00 $200.00
            confuses traffic
58-126(5)   Unlawfully installed, erected or maintained $50.00  $100.00 $200.00
            sign
58-126(6)   Sign no longer advertises a bona fide       $50.00  $75.00  $100.00
            business, service or product
58-126(7)   Sign encroaches public right-of-way         $50.00  $75.00  $100.00
58-126(8)   Sign is moving, animated, flashing or       $50.00  $75.00  $100.00
            strobe effect
58-126(9)   Roof sign                                   $50.00  $75.00  $100.00
58-126(10)  Use of motor vehicle, trailer, boat or      $50.00  $75.00  $100.00
            other to circumvent sign requirements
58-126(11)  Off-premise sign                            $50.00  $75.00  $100.00
58-126(12)  Content of explicit sexual activities       $75.00  $150.00 $300.00
58-126(13)  Sign not of a commercial or professional    $25.00  $50.00  $75.00
            quality
58-126(14)  Sign not expressly permitted                $50.00  $75.00  $100.00
Chapter 60  Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
60-5        Failure to secure permit prior to earth     $500.00 N/A     N/A
            changes
60-8        Failure to complete work                    $250.00 $500.00 *
60-10       Modifications of approved plans without     $100.00 $200.00 *
            approval
60-13(a)    Earth changes causing accelerated soil      $500.00 N/A     N/A
            erosion and/or off-site sedimentation
60-13(b)    Earth change activity not in conformance    $500.00 N/A     N/A
            with Part 91 of Act 451
            Earth change activity causing area of
60-13(c)    disturbed land exposed longer than          $250.00 $500.00 *
            necessary
            Failure to remove sediment and/or eroded
60-13(d)    soil from runoff water prior to exiting     $500.00 N/A     N/A
            site
60-13(e)    Failure to limit water flow to a non-       $250.00 $500.00 *
            erosive velocity
            Failure to install temporary soil erosion
60-13(f)    and sedimentation measures prior to or upon $100.00 $200.00 *
            commencement of earth change activity
60-13(g)    Failure to complete permanent soil erosion  $100.00 $200.00 *
            and sedimentation control measures
60-13(h)    Failure to properly grade final grade       $500.00 N/A     N/A
* Not to exceed $2,500 as determined by the district court magistrate.
Chapter 62  Solid Waste
62-33       Fail to provide refuse collection service   $75.00  $150.00 $300.00
62-35(c)(1) Placement of refuse container in street     $25.00  $50.00  $75.00
62-35(c)(2) Refuse container out too soon or too late   $25.00  $50.00  $75.00
62-36(a)    Refuse on public property/improper storage  $100.00 $200.00 $300.00
62-36(b)    Unauthorized accumulation of refuse         $75.00  $150.00 $300.00
62-36(c)    Deposit refuse so elements can scatter it   $50.00  $75.00  $150.00
Chapter 78   Traffic & Vehicles - Skateboards
78-7 (a) (1) Skateboarding on road                      $25.00  $50.00  $75.00
78-7 (a) (2) Skateboarding in downtown area             $25.00  $50.00  $75.00
             Skateboarding on paved and non-paved lands
78-7 (a) (3) at Maple Grove Cemetery except lands       $25.00  $50.00  $75.00
             dedicated to the Hayhoe Riverwalk Trail
78-7 (b) (1) Fail to yield to pedestrian on sidewalk    $25.00  $50.00  $75.00
78-7 (b) (2) Fail to yield to pedestrian or car-        $25.00  $50.00  $75.00
             parking lot
78-7 (b) (3) Reckless or careless skateboarding         $50.00  $75.00  $100.00
78-7 (b) (4) Skateboarding in X walk > walking speed    $25.00  $50.00  $75.00
78-7 (b) (5) Skateboarding on ramps on public property  $25.00  $50.00  $75.00
Chapter 86   Vegetation
             Failure to remove, cut or trim all noxious
86-32        weeds, grass or deleterious or unhealthy   $100.00 $150.00 $200.00
             growth to six inches at all times of year
86-71(a)     Maintaining a female box elder tree        $50.00  $100.00 $150.00
86-71(b)     Maintaining a dead, diseased, hazardous or $50.00  $100.00 $150.00
             infested tree
Any municipal civil infraction not specifically         $50.00  $100.00 $150.00
identified
 
   (b)   A copy of the schedule shall be posted at the bureau.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. 178, 12-21-2009; Ord. No. 179, 2-15-2010;
Ord. No. 236, 6-21-2021; Ord. No. 238, 7-18-2022)
Secs. 2-9--2-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.  CITY COUNCIL*
Sec. 2-31.   Eligibility for office.
   (a)   Eligibility to seek or hold a position on the city council shall be
subject to the requirements of Section
5.1 of the City Charter and this article.
   (b)   No person shall be eligible to seek or hold a position on the city
council who has been convicted of a felony or is listed on the Michigan Sex
Offender Registry.
   (c)   Before assuming the duties of office, a city council member shall
qualify by taking and subscribing to the Constitutional Oath of Office.
(Ord. No. 259, 4-21-2025)
Sec. 2-32.   Residency requirement for city council.
   (a)   Pursuant to Section
4.2 of the City Charter, the residency requirement prescribed by Section
5.1 of the City Charter for a person seeking or holding an elective office of
the city shall be satisfied by documentation described in one of the following
subsections.
      (1)   A current executed lease for the property where the person seeking
or holding elective office claims residence within the city naming that person
as a tenant or resident of the property, or a written declaration signed by the
landlord and the person seeking or holding elective office that such a lease
exists, including the term covered by said lease.
      (2)   A property tax statement for the property where the person seeking
or holding elective office claims residence within the city which names as the
assessed party either the person or a trust citing the person as a trustee, and
which verifies that the principal residence exemption has been claimed for the
subject property as allowed under the General Property Tax Act, Public Act 206
of 1893, as amended.
   (b)   If the person seeking or holding an elective office is the legal
spouse, partner, child, or parent of the person named as the assessed party in
the documentation required pursuant to subsection (a)(2) above, documentation
of such legal relationship and a written declaration by the person seeking or
holding an elective office that the property is their principal residence shall
constitute compliance with the documentation requirements of this section.
   (c)   Documentation required under this section shall be provided, or
readily available, to the city clerk at the time of submitting petitions for
elective office and within 30 days of a written request by the city clerk. The
city clerk shall request documentation under this section within 14 days of a
request by the city council or a qualified elector of the city.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall require re-submission of documentation
required pursuant to this section if the subject person attests that previously
submitted documentation remains valid under this section.
   (e)   As prescribed by Section
5.1 of the City Charter, no person shall be eligible for any elective office of
the city unless he or she shall be a qualified elector of the city and shall
have been a resident of the city pursuant to this section for at least two
continuous years immediately prior to the date of the election at which the
person is a candidate for office.
(Ord. No. 259, 4-21-2025)
Secs. 2-33--2-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES*
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Secs. 2-61--2-80. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR; CITY MANAGER‡
Sec. 2-81. Creation of office.
The office of city administrator is created, which officer shall be known as
city manager. Every reference to the term city administrator in ordinances,
resolutions, notices and the City Charter shall mean city manager.
(Ord. No. 32-A-95, § 2, 12-18-1995; Ord. 222, § 1, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 2-82. Appointment.
The city manager shall be appointed by majority vote of the council for an
indefinite term. The city manager shall be chosen by the council solely on the
basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, his engineering
experience and training with special reference to his actual experience in or
his knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office. At
the time of his appointment he need not be a resident of the city or the state,
but during his tenure of office he shall reside within the city. No
councilmember shall receive such appointment during the term for which he shall
have been elected.
(Ord. No. 32-A-95, § 3, 12-18-1995; Ord. 222, § 1, 12-3-2018)
*Charter references: City council generally, § 4.1 et seq., ch. 6.
Cross references: Elections, ch. 18.
*Charter references: Administrative service, § 4.6 et seq.
Cross references: Any ordinance providing for the duties for city officers and
employees not codified in this Code saved from repeal, §
1-12(a)(9); any ordinance providing for salaries or other employee benefits
saved from repeal, §
1-12(a)(10); local officers compensation commission, §
2-226 et seq.
State law references: Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.
*Charter references: City administrator, § 4.6.
Sec. 2-83. Removal.
The city manager may be removed by the council by a majority vote of its
members. The city manager may demand written charges or a written statement of
the reasons for removal which the council shall furnish to the city manager
within 20 days after the filing of such request. During this period the city
manager may be suspended from office with pay. The action of the council in
removing the city manager shall be final.
(Ord. No. 32-A-95, § 4, 12-18-1995; Ord. 222, § 1, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 2-84. Powers and duties.
The city manager shall be the executive officer and head of the administrative
branch of the city. He shall be responsible to the city council for the proper
administration of all affairs of the city, and to that end, subject to the
personnel provisions of the Charter, he shall have power and shall be required
to:
    (1)   Recommend to the council the appointment of officers of the city who
are required by law to be elected by the city council. He shall further
recommend the removal or suspension of any such officers when such removal or
suspension shall be consistent with the best interest of the city. All such
recommendations for appointment or removal shall be based upon merit and upon
the qualifications or disqualifications of such officer without regard to any
political belief or affiliation. He shall further appoint, and when necessary
for the good of the service, suspend or remove any employee of the city except
as otherwise provided by the Charter or law, and except as he may authorize the
head of a department or office to appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in
such department or office.
    (2)   Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the council and be
responsible for its administration after adoption.
    (3)   Prepare and submit to the council as of the end of the fiscal year a
complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for
the preceding year.
    (4)   Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs
of the city, and make such recommendations as he may deem desirable.
    (5)   Recommend to the council the salaries to be paid each appointive
officer and subordinate employee of the city.
    (6)   Recommend to the council, in writing, for adoption such measures as
he may deem necessary or expedient.
    (7)   Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under
his jurisdiction, with the approval of the city council. The city manager may
be the head of one or more departments.
    (8)   Attend all meetings of the city council unless excused from such
meetings by the council, except when his removal is under consideration by the
council. The city manager shall have the privilege of taking part in the
discussion of all matters coming before the council. The city manager shall be
entitled to notice of all meetings, regular and special, of the council.
    (9)   Purchase all materials, supplies or equipment for which funds are
provided in the budget appropriation; but he may not purchase any item which
exceeds any budget appropriation until the council has increased the
appropriation. For purchases of more than $5,000.00 and less than $20,000.00,
he shall be required to receive approval of the council; for purchases of more
than $20,000.00, he shall be required to receive sealed bids and shall present
such bids to the council for approval or rejection. He may let contracts not in
excess of $5,000.00 necessary in the operation or maintenance of city services
when sufficient funds for such purposes have been appropriated in the budget,
but the city council shall let all contracts for more than $5,000.00, all
contracts for new construction and all contracts which cannot be consummated
with funds provided in the current budget. The city manager shall advise the
council as to whether or not any contract offered is desirable, or which of
several contracts offered is most desirable, for the city. The city manager may
issue such rules and regulations governing requisitions and the transaction of
the business of purchasing between himself as purchasing agent and the heads of
the departments, officers and employees of the city as the council may approve.
    (10)   See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced.
    (11)   Make investigations into the affairs of the city or any department
or division of the city. Investigate all complaints in relation to all matters
concerning the administration of the government of the city and in regard to
service maintained by the public utilities in the city, and see that all
franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed.
    (12)   Devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties.
    (13)   Perform such other duties as may be required of him by the council,
not inconsistent with the Charter, law or ordinance.
(Ord. No. 32-A-95, § 5, 12-18-1995; Ord. No. 186, 10-17-2011; Ord. 222, § 1,
12-3-2018)
Sec. 2-85. Councilmembers to deal with administrative service only through city
manager.
Individual members of the council shall not direct or request the appointment
of any person to or his removal from office by the city manager or by any of
his subordinates, or in any manner attempt to dictate the appointment or
removal of officers and employees in the administrative service of the city.
Except for the purpose of inquiry, councilmembers shall deal with the
administrative service solely through the city manager; and no councilmembers
shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager either publicly or
privately.
(Ord. No. 32-A-95, § 6, 12-18-1995; Ord. 222, § 1, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 2-86. Emergencies.
In case of accidents or other circumstances creating an emergency, the city
manager may, with the consent of the council, award contracts and make
purchases for the purpose of repairing damages caused by the accident or
meeting the public emergency; but he shall file promptly with the council a
certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such action, together
with an itemized account of all expenditures.
(Ord. No. 32-A-95, § 7, 12-18-1995; Ord. 222, § 1, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 2-87. Bond.
The city manager shall furnish a surety bond in an amount to be approved by the
council, such bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties.
The premium of the bond shall be paid by the city.
(Ord. No. 32-A-95, § 8, 12-18-1995; Ord. 222, § 1, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 2-88. Compensation.
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the council shall fix by
ordinance or resolution.
(Ord. No. 32-A-95, § 9, 12-18-1995; Ord. 222, § 1, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 2-89. Vacancy.
Any vacancy in the office of city manager shall be filled within 60 days after
the effective date of such vacancy.
(Ord. No. 32-A-95, § 10, 12-18-1995; Ord. 222, § 1, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 2-90. Acting administrator.
In the event of disability of the city manager, the council may appoint an
acting city manager.
(Ord. No. 32-A-95, § 11, 12-18-1995; Ord. 222, § 1, 12-3-2018)
Secs. 2-91--2-100. Reserved.
Secs. 2-91--2-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
CODE OF ETHICS
Sec. 2-101. Purpose.
Public officials and employees, by virtue of their positions, are trustees of
the public, chargeable with honesty, integrity, and openness in their handling
of public affairs. Loyalty to the public interest requires that all matters
shall be handled with independent, objective judgment, free from avoidable
conflicts of interest, improper influences, and competing loyalties. When
conduct inconsistent with these expectations occurs, public suspicion is
heightened and, therefore, public confidence is jeopardized. Where government
is founded upon the consent of the governed, it is critical that each citizen
have complete confidence in the integrity of the government. Each public
official and employee must endeavor to earn and honor the public trust in the
conduct of all official duties and actions. The purposes of this division are
to define standards of ethical conduct that are clearly established and
uniformly applied and to establish procedures for evaluating ethical questions.
These standards and procedures will provide the public, as well as public
officials and employees, with guidance about ethical expectations for trustees
of the public good.
(Ord. No. 132, § 2, 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 233, 3-1-2021; Ord. No. 244, 8-21-2023;
Ord. No. 248, 5-20-2024)
Sec. 2-102. Definition.
In this division "city official" means a person elected to the city council or
appointed to the planning commission, zoning board of appeals, historic
district commission, building code board of appeals, downtown development
authority, local development finance authority or board of review. City
official shall not include city manager or city attorney.
(Ord. No. 132, § 4, 9-7-1999; Ord. 222, § 4, 12-3-2018; Ord. No. 233, 3-1-2021;
Ord. No. 244, 8-21-2023; Ord. No. 248, 5-20-2024)
Sec. 2-103. Guidelines and standards for ethical behavior.
It is the public policy of this city that all city officials and city employees
shall construe and implement ethical standards and guidelines with sincerity,
integrity and commitment so as to advance the purpose of this division in
accordance with the guidelines and standards described in this section.
   (a)   Gifts. A city official shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit or
accept a gift that could influence the manner in which they perform their
official duties.
   (b)   Preferential treatment. A city official shall not use their official
position to unreasonably secure, request, or grant any privileges, exemptions,
advantages, contracts, or preferential treatment for themselves, their
immediate family, or others.
   (c)   Use of information.
      (1)   A city official who acquires information in the course of their
official duties, which by law or policy is confidential, shall not prematurely
divulge that information to an unauthorized person. Information which is deemed
exempt from disclosure under the Michigan Freedom of Information Act, (MCL
15.231 et seq.) or which is the subject of a duly called closed meeting held in
accordance with the Michigan Open Meetings Act, (MCL 15.261 et seq.) is
confidential.
      (2)   A city official shall not suppress or refuse to provide any city
report, document, or information which is publicly available.
      (3)   A city official shall not inaccurately present or describe any city
report, document, information, or public record in such a manner as to mislead
the public.
   (d)   Conflicts of interest.
      (1)   No person may be employed as a sworn police officer if such person
and/or their spouse has an interest, directly or indirectly, in any business
possessing any license issued by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission and
operated within the jurisdiction of the Mason Police Department.
      (2)   The city building official shall not do any work for hire or have
any interest, directly or indirectly, in any business doing work for hire
within the city which requires a permit pursuant to the state construction
code.
      (3)   The city assessor shall not assess for city record keeping purposes
their own property, any property owned by an immediate family member, or any
property owned by an entity for which the assessor has any interest as a
director, officer, partner, member, shareholder, or employee in or for a
corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other unincorporated
association.
      (4)   No city official shall engage in employment, render services, or
engage in any business, transaction or activity which is in direct conflict of
interest with their official duties.
      (5)   No city official may use any confidential information obtained in
the exercise of their official duties for personal gain or for the gain of
others.
      (6)   No city official shall intentionally take or refrain from taking
any official action, or induce or attempt to induce any other city official or
employee to take or refrain from taking any official action, on any matter
before the city which would result in a financial benefit for any of the
following:
         a.   The city official.
         b.   An immediate family member of the city official.
         c.   An employer of the city official.
         d.   Any person, business or other entity that has contracted with the
city, or which has received a license from the city, in the two calendar years
prior to the action, and with which the city official or an immediate family
member of the city official has one or more of the following financial
interests:
            1.   Any interest as a director, officer, partner, member,
shareholder, or employee in or for a corporation, partnership, limited
liability company, or other unincorporated association.
            2.   Any interest as a landlord or tenant.
            3.   Any interest as a beneficiary or trustee in a trust.
            4.   Legal or beneficial ownership of one percent or more of the
total outstanding stock of a company which is doing business with the city and
which is not listed on a stock exchange.
         e.   Any business with which the city official or any immediate family
member of the city official is negotiating or seeking prospective employment or
other business or professional relationship.
      (7)   An appointed city official shall not discuss any matter pending
before the body on which the appointed city official serves with the applicant
or any person to whom written notice of the matter pending is required to be
sent by city ordinance or other law except during duly called public meetings
of the body. In the case of an inadvertent discussion between the appointed
city official and the applicant or any person to whom written notice is
required to be sent as described, such discussion shall be disclosed as a
transaction in accordance with section
2-104(a).
      (8)   Except as otherwise permitted herein, no city official or any
immediate family member of a city official shall be a party, directly or
indirectly, to any contract with the city except for collective bargaining
agreements. The foregoing shall not apply if the contract is awarded after
public notice and competitive bidding, provided that the city official shall
not have participated in establishing contract specifications or awarding the
contract, shall not manage contract performance after the contract is awarded,
and shall disclose the interest of the city official or any immediate family
member in the contract in accordance with section
2-104(a).
      (9)   A city official shall not engage in a business transaction with the
city except as permitted by Public Act No. 317 of 1968 (MCL 15.231 et seq.).
Compliance with the requirements of said Act shall constitute compliance with
section
2-103(d).
   (e)   Use of city property or personnel. A city official shall not, directly
or indirectly, use or permit any other person to use, any city property or
personnel for personal gain or economic benefit. City employees may use city
property for personal use as a convenience if first approved by the city
manager or authorized by city policy.
   (f)   Political activity. No city official shall use any city time or
property for their own political benefit or for the political benefit of any
other person seeking elective office, provided that the foregoing shall not
prohibit the use of property or facilities available to the general public on
an equal basis for due consideration paid.
   (g)   Nepotism. The spouse of any elected city official, or of the city
manager, shall be disqualified from holding any appointive office. The
immediate family members of any elected city official, or of the city manager,
and the spouses of any such family members shall be disqualified from holding
full-time or permanent part-time employment exceeding ten hours per week with
the city during the term served by said elected official or during the tenure
of the city manager. This section shall in no way disqualify such relatives or
their spouses who are bona fide appointed officers or employees of the city at
the time of the election of said elected official or appointment of said city
manager.
   (h)   Retaliation. No person making a complaint or requesting an advisory
opinion or participating in any proceeding of the board of ethics, shall be
discharged or otherwise discriminated against because of such action or
participation.
   (i)   Threats. No city official shall in any way threaten the city, the city
council, a city council member, a city board or commission, a city board or
commission member, a city employee, or a person making a complaint or
requesting an advisory opinion under this division.
   (j)   Accountability. Government affairs shall be conducted in an open,
efficient, fair and honorable manner which enables citizens to make informed
judgments and to hold city officials accountable.
   (k)   Respectfulness.
      (1)   All city officials shall safeguard public confidence by being
honest, fair, impartial, and respectful toward all persons and property and by
avoiding conduct and comments which may tend to undermine respect for city
officials, for the city council, for city boards and commissions, or for the
city as an institution.
      (2)   All city officials shall honor and respect the spirit and
principles of representative democracy and will avoid conduct and comments
which may discourage citizens from participating in the democratic process,
will scrupulously observe the spirit as well as the letter of the law, and will
demonstrate appropriate respect for the actions of city council and city boards
and commissions.
(Ord. No. 244, 8-21-2023; Ord. No. 248, 5-20-2024)
Sec. 2-104. Disclosure.
   (a)   Transactional disclosure. A city official shall not participate in any
transaction which subsequently would constitute a conflict of interest under
section 2-103(d) without disclosing the interest in the transaction prior to
participating in the transaction. If the official is a member of a decision-
making or advising body, the disclosure must be made at a meeting of the body
and made part of the official record of the body. A council, board, or
commission member who abstains from a vote shall disclose the reason to the
entire body and that reason shall be made a part of the official record of the
body.
   (b)   Disclosure of gifts. Any gift received by a city official which could
influence the manner in which they enact their official duties should be
reported immediately to the board of ethics. Such gifts should be returned to
the donor, or donated to a charity, with the explanation to the donor that city
policy will not permit the acceptance of the gift.
(Ord. No. 132, § 6, 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 233, 3-1-2021; Ord. No. 244, 8-21-2023;
Ord. No. 248, 5-20-2024)
Sec. 2-105. Board of ethics.
   (a)   Creation. There is hereby created an independent body called the "
board of ethics."
   (b)   Objective. The objective of the board of ethics is to issue written
opinions regarding ethical questions pertaining to the behavior of city
officials and evaluate, conduct investigations of, and report on, complaints
regarding ethical questions pertaining to city officials, but not legal
questions, and to engage in activities which will promote ethical behavior. The
behavior of city employees shall not be subject to any review by the board.
   (c)   Board of ethics membership; terms; meetings; rules.
      (1)   The board of ethics shall consist of five members who are city
residents appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. City
officials and the immediate family of city officials shall not be eligible for
appointment to the board. No more than one member from each board or commission
listed in section 2-102 may be a member of the board of ethics.
      (2)   Members shall be appointed for terms of three years, except that of
those first appointed, two shall serve for three years, two shall serve for two
years, and one shall serve for one year. Initial nominations shall be made by
the mayor within 90 days of the effective date of this division, and
nominations to fill vacancies and subsequent terms shall be made by the mayor
within 60 days of occurrence of the vacancy or commencement of the term. The
city council shall vote on confirmation within 30 days of receipt of
nominations from the mayor. If nominations are not made within the periods
specified, the city council shall appoint the member(s). If the city council
shall not vote on confirmation within the period specified, the mayor's
nominations shall be deemed confirmed and the member(s) shall be appointed.
      (3)   The affirmative vote of three members of the board of ethics shall
be necessary for any action.
      (4)   The city clerk shall serve on an ex officio basis as secretary to
the board of ethics without the right to vote.
      (5)   The board of ethics shall meet as frequently as necessary to
promptly perform appointed duties. Meetings of the board shall be subject to
the Michigan Open Meetings Act (MCL 15.261 et seq.).
      (6)   The board of ethics may adopt interpretative rules and procedures
relating to the requirements and application of this division.
      (7)   The board of ethics shall comply with the rules of order adopted by
the city council.
   (d)   Powers and duties. The board of ethics shall have the power to:
      (1)   Receive requests for advisory opinions from city officials.
      (2)   Receive complaints concerning alleged unethical conduct by a city
official.
      (3)   Retain on file copies of advisory opinions, complaint reports, and
other materials required to be filed under this division. Advisory opinions and
complaint reports shall be retained in the office of the city clerk and shall
be available to the public upon request. Advisory opinions shall be retained
indefinitely and complaint reports shall be retained until the end of the
current term of the subject city official.
      (4)   Review a request for an advisory opinion or a complaint to
determine if the board of ethics has jurisdiction over the matter and/or
persons identified in the request or complaint.
      (5)   Review the facts of a complaint and determine if an investigation
is warranted pursuant to section
2-105(g)(6).
      (6)   Issue an advisory opinion in response to a request.
      (7)   Issue a complaint report in response to a complaint.
   (e)   Actions by the board of ethics. Action to be taken in any individual
case shall include one of the following:
      (1)   Declare that a request for advisory opinion or a complaint is
outside the jurisdiction of the board of ethics.
      (2)   Issue a written advisory opinion.
      (3)   Investigate and issue a written report of, as applicable, findings,
conclusions, and recommendations regarding a complaint.
      (4)   Deem that no action is warranted regarding a complaint.
      (5)   Refer the matter to the city attorney to determine whether legal
action may be appropriate and what form by which to take such action.
      (6)   Forward the matter with no action to the city manager forthwith if
the subject is a city employee.
   (f)   Advisory opinions.
      (1)   A request for an advisory opinion shall be submitted to the city
clerk on a form approved by the board of ethics that is in compliance with this
division. Upon receipt of a request, the board shall prepare and approve by
resolution a written advisory opinion interpreting the relevant provisions of
this division and relevant provisions of state law applicable to city officials
unless the request is deemed outside the jurisdiction of the board. Advisory
opinions shall not disclose the identities of the person making the request for
an advisory opinion or the identity of the person(s) who are the subject of an
inquiry. Advisory opinions shall be approved by the board and issued within 60
days of the meeting date at which a quorum of the board first receives the
request. If additional time is needed, the time may be extended by up to 60
additional days by action of the board. An advisory opinion shall be
distributed as required by this division within 21 days of approval by the
board.
      (2)   Advisory opinions may include guidance to city officials on
questions including, but not limited to:
         a.   Whether an identifiable conflict of interest exists between the
personal interests or obligations and official duties of a city official.
         b.   Whether participation in the official capacity of a city official
would involve discretionary judgment with significant effect on the disposition
of the matter in question.
         c.   Whether the result of a potential conflict of interest is
substantial or constitutes a real threat to the independent judgment of a city
official.
         d.   What effect participation under the circumstances would have on
the confidence of the people in the impartiality of city officials.
         e.   Whether a disclosure of the personal interests of a city official
would be advisable and, if so, how such disclosure should be made.
         f.   Whether the public interest would be best served by abstention by
a city official.
         g.   Whether undue influence is being exerted by, or on, a city
official.
      (3)   When the board of ethics issues an advisory opinion regarding
ethical questions pursuant to this division, the city clerk shall promptly send
a copy of its opinion to:
         a.   All city officials.
         b.   The city manager.
   (g)   Complaints.
      (1)   Complaint form. A complaint shall be submitted to the city clerk on
a form approved by the board of ethics that is in compliance with this
division.
      (2)   One complainant. A complaint form shall identify one person as the
complainant for purposes of notice under this section.
      (3)   Complainant standing. Only a person verified as one of the
following shall have standing to file a complaint under this section.
         a.   Resident of the city.
         b.   Owner of property within the city.
         c.   Employee of the city.
         d.   Owner of a business occupying property within the city.
      (4)   Upon receipt of a complaint, the clerk shall schedule a meeting of
the board in consultation with the chair and members of the board. The meeting
packet shall include a copy of the complaint and a declaration that all inquiry
regarding the complaint will be received only by the board during a public
meeting and in the manner approved by the board under this section, and that
the clerk will not discuss with any person or entity any information regarding
the complaint.
      (5)   Within five business days after a meeting date is selected, but no
later than the day the meeting packet is required to be sent to the board of
ethics, the clerk shall send a written notice to the complainant and the city
official who is the subject of the complaint informing them that a complaint
has been received and the date, time, and location of the board of ethics
meeting at which the complaint will be first considered by the board. The
notice to the city official who is the subject of the complaint shall include a
copy of the complaint. Both notices shall include a declaration that all
inquiry regarding the complaint will be received only by the board during a
public meeting and in the manner approved by the board under this section, and
that the clerk will not discuss with any person or entity any information
regarding the complaint.
      (6)   Upon receipt of a complaint, the board of ethics shall review the
facts of the complaint and determine if an investigation is warranted under any
relevant provisions of this division and/or any relevant provisions of state
law applicable to the subject city official.
      (7)   Upon determination that an investigation of a complaint is
initially warranted, the board of ethics shall, in accordance with this
section, investigate the circumstances surrounding the alleged unethical
conduct under any relevant provisions of this division and/or any relevant
provisions of state law applicable to the subject city official. The board may
choose to include in the investigation conduct or comments in response to the
complaint by the subject city official. While conducting an investigation, the
board is hereby authorized to exercise all of the powers granted by
Chapter 6, Section 6.9, of the City Charter, except that the board shall not
have the power to subpoena witnesses or compel the production of books, papers,
and other evidence. The board may seek the assistance and opinion of the city
attorney in the investigation of a matter.
         a.   Upon initiation of an investigation, the board of ethics shall:
            1.   Prior to beginning any significant action as part of an
investigation, notify the city official who is the subject of the complaint of
the manner by which the city official will be allowed to respond to the
complaint. The city official who is the subject of the complaint shall be
provided an opportunity to address the complaint before the board of ethics
prior to the board approving a complaint report.
            2.   Inform both the complainant and the city official who is the
subject of the complaint of all meetings where the investigation will be
considered or discussed.
         b.   The board of ethics may appoint one or two of its members to
investigate the complaint in the manner approved by the board and to provide a
report of findings to the board for consideration.
         c.   The board of ethics shall prepare and approve by resolution a
written complaint report including, as applicable, findings, conclusions, and
recommended action as relevant to the specific investigation. A complaint
report resolution shall be approved by the board within 60 days of the meeting
date at which a quorum of the board first receives the request. If additional
time is needed, the time may be extended by up to 60 additional days by action
of the board. The approved complaint report resolution, including findings,
conclusions, and recommended action, shall be sent to the city council within
21 days of approval by the board. Recommended actions shall include one of the
following:
            1.   Dismissal of the complaint as being unwarranted.
            2.   No action. A no action recommendation shall include a
supporting explanation.
            3.   Formal censure by resolution of the city council.
            4.   Removal of the city official by resolution of the city council
when such action is legally permitted.
            5.   Referral by the city council to the city attorney to determine
if legal action is appropriate.
         d.   The city council will make the final determination of whether the
complaint report warrants action and the nature of such action and, to that
end, may request clarifying or additional information from the board of ethics.
The board shall respond to any request for information by the council within 60
days of the request.
(Ord. No. 132, § 7, 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004; Ord. 222, § 6, 12-3-2018;
Ord. No. 233, 3-1-2021; Ord. No. 244, 8-21-2023; Ord. No. 248, 5-20-2024)
Sec. 2-106. Aspirational intent.
This division is intended to encourage and promote the highest standards of
ethical behavior by city officials as an aspirational objective. It is
anticipated that the issuance by the board of ethics of advisory opinions will
conclude all matters for the board originating as requests for advisory
opinions and the issuance of a complaint report will conclude all matters for
the board originating as complaints. The board is not an adjudicative body and
no finding of the board shall be deemed conclusive nor, in and of itself,
subject any city official to penalties.
(Ord. No. 244, 8-21-2023; Ord. No. 248, 5-20-2024)
Sec. 2-107--2-120. Reserved.
DIVISION 4.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Sec. 2-121. Authorization.
For purposes of this division and the Emergency Management Act, Public Act No.
390, 1976, the city manager shall be deemed the city's designated emergency
response coordinator. The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to
prepare and execute a support emergency operations plan to incorporate the city
into the County Emergency Management Program consistent with Public Act No.
390, 1976, as amended, and the emergency management rules adopted pursuant to
the Act.
(Ord. No. 140, 4-7-2003; Ord. 222, § 7, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 2-122. Emergency management coordinator.
The city manager may appoint an emergency management coordinator for the city
to act for and at the direction of the city manager in the coordination of all
matters pertaining to emergency management, disaster mitigation, preparedness,
response, and recovery activities within the city. The city manager shall
appoint such other persons as are necessary for the implementation and
management of the support emergency operations plan and shall designate the
duties and responsibilities of each individual appointed to administer the
plan.
(Ord. No. 140, 4-7-2003; Ord. 222, § 8, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 2-123. Local state of emergency.
The mayor shall have the authority to declare a local state of emergency under
the circumstances and in the manner provided by Section 10 of Public Act No.
390, 1976 (MCL 30.410). No such declaration shall be continued or renewed for a
period in excess of seven days except with the consent of the city council.
(Ord. No. 140, 4-7-2003)
Sec. 2-124. Limitation of authority.
Nothing herein nor in the support emergency operations plan adopted hereunder
shall be construed to abridge or curtail the powers of the mayor, the city
council, the city manager, or other city official or employee who is provided
independent authority to deal with any emergency situation either by charter,
statute, ordinance, or common law.
(Ord. No. 140, 4-7-2003; Ord. 222, § 9, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 2-125. Penalty.
Any person who shall willfully obstruct, resist, hinder, or delay any official
in the exercise of his or her duties pursuant to Public Act No. 390, 1976, this
chapter, or the support emergency operations plan adopted pursuant to this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided by section
1-8(e) of this Code.
(Ord. No. 140, 4-7-2003)
Secs. 2-126--2-130. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.  DEPARTMENTS*
*Charter References: Departments to be created by ordinance, § 4.6.
Cross References: Any ordinance creating or establishing any department of city
govern- ment not codified in this Code saved from repeal, §
1-12(a)(8); fire department, §
26-51 et seq.; police department, §
34-51 et seq.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Secs. 2-131--2-140. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
Sec. 2-141. Established.
A city zoning and development department under the jurisdiction of a zoning and
development director is established as a city administrative office under
Chapter 4 of the Charter. References in this Code to zoning official or zoning
administrator mean the zoning and development director established by this
section. References in the city ordinances to building inspector or building
official means a person registered under the Michigan Building Officials and
Inspectors Registration Act, Public Act No. 54, 1986, who has been designated
by the city as responsible for enforcing the provisions of the state building
code for the city. The zoning and development director shall be appointed by
the city manager, subject to the provisions of the Charter.
(Ord. No. 91-A, § 1, 11-21-1977; Ord. 222, § 10, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 2-142. Powers and duties of building and zoning officials.
(a)   The building official shall administer and enforce the provisions of the
Michigan Building Code as promulgated by rule of the State Construction Code
Commission pursuant to Section 4 of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1504),
and the city assumes responsibility for administration and enforcement of Act
230, pursuant to Section 9 of the Act (MCL 125.1509), throughout the corporate
limits of the city. The building inspector shall also administer and enforce
the provisions of chapter 6, article II (building code board of appeals), and
article IV - property maintenance.
(b)   The zoning and development director, or designee, shall administer the
provisions of the following ordinances and shall have all the powers and duties
enumerated in such ordinances, except such duties as may be specifically
delegated in any of the ordinances listed below to the city engineer or other
particular department or official.
   (1)   Chapter 6, article III (dangerous buildings);
   (2)   Chapter 22 (environment);
   (3)   Chapter 30 (floods);
   (4)   Chapter 31 (historic preservation)
   (5)   Chapter 58 (signs)
   (6)   Chapter 74 (subdivisions and other divisions of land);
   (7)   Chapter 86, article II (noxious weeds);
   (8)   Chapter 94 (zoning);
The zoning and development director shall also be impressed with those
functions as may be specifically assigned to him by any other ordinances
adopted by the city. The zoning and development director may appoint such
officers, inspectors and assistants, and other employees as shall be authorized
by the city manager.
(Ord. No. 91-A, § 2, 11-21-1977; Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006; Ord. 222, § 11, 12-3-
2018)
Sec. 2-143. Issuance of appearance tickets authorized.
(a)   The building official is authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets
with respect to violations of ordinances listed under Section
2-142a pursuant to Section 9c(2) of Public Act No. 147, 1968 (MCL 764.9c(2))
and to issue citations for violations designated a municipal civil infraction
pursuant to Chapter 87 of Public Act No. 236, 1961 (MCL 600.8707).
(b)   The zoning and development director and his appointed officers and
inspectors shall be authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with
respect to any violations of the ordinances listed under section
2-142(b) pursuant to Section 9c(2) of Public Act No. 147 of 1968, MCL 764.9c
(2). Such persons are also authorized to issue and serve municipal civil
infraction citations for such violations pursuant to Chapter 87 of 1961 PA 236,
MCL 600.8707.
(Ord. No. 91-A, § 3, 11-21-1977)
Secs. 2-144--2-2-150. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
UTILITY DEPARTMENT
Sec. 2-151. Established.
A city utility department under the jurisdiction of a utility director is
established as a city administrative officer under Chapter 4 of the Charter.
The utilities director shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to the
provisions of the Charter.
(Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 2-152. Powers and duties of utility director.
(a)   The utility director shall administer and enforce the related provisions
of the Clean Water Act and Safe Drinking Water Act, as amended, throughout the
corporate limits of the city and where utilities are authorized to be provided
by the city outside of the corporate limits.
(b)   The utility director, or designee, shall administer the provisions of the
following chapters and shall have all the powers and duties enumerated in such
chapters, except such duties as may be specifically delegated in any of the
chapters listed below to other departments or officials.
   (1)   Chapter 52 (post construction stormwater management).
   (2)   Chapter 82 (utilities).
The utility director shall also perform those functions as may be specifically
assigned to him by any other ordinances adopted by the city. The utility
director may appoint such officers, operators, assistants, and other employees
as shall be authorized by the city manager.
(Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Secs. 2-153–2-175. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.  FINANCE*
*Charter references--Finance generally, ch. 8; borrowing power, ch. 10.
Cross references--Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved
from repeal, §
1-12(a)(4); any ordinance authorizing or approving any contract, deed or
agreement saved from repeal, §
1-12(a)(5); any ordinance making or approving any appropriation or budget saved
from repeal, §
1-12(a)(7); any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessments saved
from repeal, §
1-12(a)(15); any ordinance levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes,
exemptions from taxes and fees in lieu of taxes saved from repeal, §
1-12(a)(19); cemetery trust fund, §
14-61 et seq.; collection of costs of fire runs, §
26-51 et seq.
   State law references--Revised Municipal Finance Act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.
Secs. 2-176--2-205. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS*
*Charter references--Board of cemetery trustees, § 16.3 et seq.
Cross references--Building code board of appeals, §
6-51 et seq.; local development finance authority, §
2-331 et seq.; planning commission, §
50-31 et seq.; traffic commission, §
2-291 et seq,; tree commission, §
2-311 et seq.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 2-206. Authority.
   The provisions of this division shall apply to all boards and commissions of
the city unless otherwise specified in this code or state law.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 254, 9-3-2024; Ord. No. 259, 4-21-2025)
Sec. 2-207. Member eligibility.
   (a)   Appointment to, and membership on, a board or commission shall be
subject to the relevant requirements of Section
5.1 of the City Charter.
   (b)   No person shall be appointed to, or continue membership on, a board or
commission who has been convicted of a felony or is listed on the Michigan Sex
Offender Registry.
   (c)   Appointment to, and membership on, a board or commission is subject to
the bylaws, as applicable, and the authorizing legislation for the respective
board or commission.
   (d)   Before assuming the duties of office, a member shall qualify by taking
and subscribing to the Constitutional Oath of Office.
(Ord. No. 254, 9-3-2024; Ord. No. 259, 4-21-2025)
Sec. 2-208. Organization, meetings.
   (a)   All boards and commissions shall elect a chair and vice-chair at the
first regular meeting each calendar year.
   (b)   Any member of a board or commission serving ex officio shall hold the
same right to vote as any other member of the board or commission, but an ex
officio member shall not be eligible to serve as chair or vice-chair.
   (c)   All boards and commissions may adopt rules of order for conducting
business so long as said rules are not inconsistent with the rules of order for
boards and commissions approved by the city council.
   (d)   Non-regularly scheduled meetings of any board or commission may be
called by or at the request of the city manager, or designee, the chair, or any
three members.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 235, 6-7-2021; Ord. No. 254, 9-3-2024; Ord.
No. 259, 4-21-2025)
Sec. 2-209. Vacancy.
   Any vacancy on a board or commission shall be filled by the original
appointing and approving authorities for the remainder of the unexpired term of
the vacated position.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 254, 9-3-2024; Ord. No. 259, 4-21-2025)
Sec. 2-210. Removal.
   Any member of a board or commission may be removed for cause by the original
appointing and approving authorities after being given notice and an
opportunity to be heard by the city council. Cause for removal may include
malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance.
   (1)   Failure of a member to disclose a conflict of interest and to request
permission to abstain from a vote involving the conflict of interest, may
constitute malfeasance in office.
   (2)   Excessive failure to attend meetings may constitute nonfeasance in
office.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 254, 9-3-2024; Ord. No. 259, 4-21-2025)
Sec. 2-211. Compensation.
   The members of any board or commission shall receive no compensation but
shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 254, 9-3-2024; Ord. No. 259, 4-21-2025)
Sec. 2-212. Residency requirement for boards and commissions.
   (a)   When membership on a city board or commission requires that a person
be a resident of the city, the residency requirement shall be satisfied by that
person in the same manner as required by Section
2-32 of this code except that, pursuant to Section
2-32(c) of this code, required documentation shall be provided, or readily
available, to the city clerk prior to appointment and upon written request by
the city clerk pursuant to Section
2-32(c). In the case of reappointment to a board or commission, or appointment
to a board or commission while serving on another board or commission, the
person subject to appointment will not be required to submit documentation if
they attest that previously submitted documentation remains valid.
   (b)   When membership on a city board or commission requires that a person
be a resident of the city, no person shall be eligible for appointment to a
city board or commission unless that person shall have been a resident of the
city pursuant to this section in excess of 60 days immediately prior to the
date of taking the oath of office for the board or commission.
(Ord. No. 259, 4-21-2025)
Secs. 2-213–2-225. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION*
*Cross references--Officers and employees, §
2-81 et seq.
State law references--Local officers compensation commission, MCL 117.5c.
Sec. 2-226. Created; purpose.
A local officers compensation commission is created, which shall determine the
salary of all elected officials of the city.
(Ord. No. 84, § 1, 11-20-1972; Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-227. Membership.
The local officers compensation commission shall consist of five members, who
shall be registered electors of the city and who shall be appointed by the
mayor, subject to approval by a majority of the members elected and serving on
the city council. The term of office shall be five years. Members shall be
appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. No member or employee of
the legislative, judicial or executive branch of any level of government in the
city, or members of the immediate family of such member or employee, shall be
eligible to be a member of the commission.
(Ord. No. 84, § 2, 11-20-1972; Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(a).
Sec. 2-228. Determination of compensation of officials of council.
The local officers compensation commission shall determine the compensation of
all elected officials of the city, which determination shall be the salaries of
those officials, unless the city council, by resolution adopted by two-thirds
of the members elected to and serving on the city council, reject the salaries
as so determined. The determinations of the commission shall be effective 30
days following their filing with the city clerk unless rejected by the city
council. In case of rejection, the existing salary shall prevail. Any expense
allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials, in addition to salary,
shall be for expenses incurred in the course of city business and accounted for
to the city.
(Ord. No. 84, § 3, 11-20-1972; Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(b).
Sec. 2-229. Organization.
The local officers compensation commission shall meet for not more than 15
session days in 1972 and every odd-numbered year thereafter and shall make its
determination within 45 calendar days of its first meeting. The commission
shall take no action nor make determinations without a concurrence of a
majority of the members appointed and serving on the commission. "Session days"
means any calendar day on which the commission meets and a quorum is present.
(Ord. No. 84, § 4, 11-20-1972; Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(c).
Sec. 2-230. Open Meetings Act; compliance.
The business which the local officers compensation commission may perform shall
be conducted at a public meeting of the commission held in compliance with
Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.). Public notice of the time,
date and place of the meeting of the commission shall be given in the manner
required by such Act.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(d).
Sec. 2-231. Freedom of Information Act; compliance.
A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the local
officers compensation commission in the performance of an official function
shall be made available to the public in compliance with Public Act No. 442 of
1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.).
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(e).
Secs. 2-232--2-250. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
CABLE COMMISSION*
*Cross-references–Compensation, §
2-210; removal, §
2-209; vacancy, §
2-208.
Sec. 2-251. Created.
There is hereby established a commission to be known as the Mason Cable
Communications Commission.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-252. Membership.
The commission shall consist of seven residents of the city appointed by the
city council. One member may be selected from the city council to serve ex
officio at the discretion of the city council. Each member shall serve a term
of three years, except that the term of an ex officio member shall be stated in
the resolution selecting said member but shall not extend beyond the term of
said member on the city council. No employee of, or person with ownership
interest in a cable television franchise granted by the city shall be eligible
for membership on the commission.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-253. Duties.
The commission, in addition to the functions and responsibilities that the city
council or city manager may delegate to it from time to time by resolution,
shall review plans and suggest and assist in the development of locally
originated programs. It shall also have those functions assigned to it by any
cable television franchise agreement.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004; Ord. 222, § 12, 12-3-2018)
Secs. 2-254--2-270. Reserved.
DIVISION 4.
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY*
*Cross-references–Compensation, §
2-210; removal, §
2-209; vacancy, §
2-208.
Sec. 2-271. Purpose.
The purpose of this division is to create a public body corporate to be
organized pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 197 of 1975, to be known as
the Mason Downtown Development Authority to operate for and on behalf of the
city and in cooperation with the city council in order to correct and prevent
deterioration of the downtown district of the city, to promote economic growth
and revitalization, to encourage historic preservation, to address problems of
urban decline, to strengthen existing areas and encourage new private
development in the downtown district, and in furtherance to above said purposes
to exercise all of the powers and authorities granted by Act 197.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-272. Definitions.
The words and phrases used in this division shall have the same meaning as
given by Public Act 197 of 1975, herein referred to in this division as Act
197, or as defined in this section unless the context clearly indicates to the
contrary.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-273. Creation of authority.
There is hereby created, pursuant to Act 197, the Mason Downtown Development
Authority. The authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known as
and exercise the powers granted herein under the name "Mason Downtown
Development Authority". The authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in
any Court of the State of Michigan and shall possess all the powers necessary
to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided herein and by Act
197. The enumeration of any power herein or in Act 197 shall not be considered
as a limitation upon the general powers of the authority as a public body
corporate. The boundaries of the downtown district in which the authority shall
exercise its powers as provided by this division and Act 197 shall be
established by ordinance of the council.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-274. Governing board of authority.
(a)   The authority shall be under the supervision and control of a governing
board consisting of the mayor and eight members appointed by the mayor, subject
to the approval of the council. All members other than the mayor shall serve
for a term of four years except of the first members appointed, two shall be
appointed for one year, two for two years, two for three years, and two for
four years. All members shall hold office until the member's successor is
appointed and qualified.
(b)   A majority of the members shall be persons having an interest in property
located in the downtown district. If the downtown district now or hereafter has
100 or more persons residing within it, at least one of the members shall be a
resident of the downtown district.
(c)   Before assuming the duties of office a member shall qualify by taking and
subscribing to the Constitutional Oath of Office.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-275. Powers and duties of authority.
The authority shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as provided by
and in accordance with the provisions of Act 197. The authority shall prepare a
development plan for the downtown district, and in furtherance thereof, may
prepare and propose financing plans for the downtown district or a development
plan within the downtown district. The authority shall obtain council approval
of all development and financing plans. In furtherance thereof, the authority
shall generally exercise all powers provided by Act 197 which, by way of
illustration and not by way of limitation, are set forth as follows:
   (1)   To employ and affix the compensation of an executive director, subject
to the approval of the city council. To employ and affix the compensation of a
treasurer and secretary who shall carry out the duties prescribed by Section 5
of Act 197 and such other duties as assigned to them. To retain legal counsel
to advise the board in the proper performance of its duties and to represent
the authority in all actions brought by or against the authority, and to employ
such other personnel as deemed necessary by the board.
   (2)   To study and analyze the economic factors taking place in the downtown
district; to plan and propose the construction, renovation, repair,
preservation, or reconstruction of a public facility, existing buildings,
multiple-family dwelling units, which aid in the economic growth of the
downtown district; to develop long range plans in cooperation with the planning
commission, designed to halt the deterioration of property values in the
downtown district and to promote the economic development of the district; to
implement any plan of development in the downtown district, and in connection
therewith to make and enter into contracts incidental to the exercise of its
powers and the performance of its duties including contracts to acquire, by
purchase or otherwise, lands, buildings, and personal property, to improve such
property, and to fix, charge and collect fees, rents and charges for the use of
any building or property under its control and to pledge the fees, rents and
charges for the payment of revenue bonds issued by the authority all as more
fully set forth at Section 7 of Act 197.
   (3)   To obtain financing for the activities of the authority from one or
more of the sources as set forth in Section 11 of Act 197.
   (4)   To levy, with the approval of the city council, an ad valorem tax of
not to exceed two mills on the non-exempt real and tangible personal property
in the downtown district, and to request of the city council to borrow money
and issue its tax anticipation notes therefore pursuant to the provisions of
Section 12 of Act 197.
   (5)   To issue its revenue bonds or notes, with the approval of the city
council, to finance all or part of the cost of acquiring or constructing
property in the downtown district in connection with the implementation of a
development plan all as set forth at Section 13A of Act 197. The city shall not
be liable on any bonds or notes of the authority issued pursuant to this
section and the bonds or notes shall not be a debt of the city.
   (6)   To prepare and recommend for approval by the city council a tax
increment financing plan as provided in Sections 14, 15 and 16 of Act 197.
   (7)   The authority shall annually prepare and submit for approval by the
council an annual budget for the operation of the authority for the ensuing
fiscal year. The budget shall be prepared in the manner and contain the
information required of municipal departments. Funds of the city shall not be
included in the budget of the authority except those funds authorized by Act
197 or by the city council.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-276. Termination.
Upon completion of the purposes for which it was organized, the authority shall
be dissolved by ordinance of the council. The property and assets of the
authority remaining after the satisfaction of its obligations shall revert to
the city.
Sec. 2-277. Effective date.
This division shall be in full force and effect 20 days after its adoption and
publication. The authority shall become effective upon the filing of a duly
adopted and published certified copy of this ordinance with the Michigan
Secretary of State.
Secs. 2-278–2-290. Reserved.
DIVISION 5.
TRAFFIC COMMISSION
Secs. 2-291.–2-310. Reserved.
DIVISION 6.
TREE COMMISSION*
*Cross-references–Compensation, §
2-210; removal, §
2-209; vacancy, §
2-208.
Sec. 2-311. Creation and establishment.
There is hereby created and established a city tree commission, which shall
consist of the members of the Board of Cemetery Trustees, as provided for in
Section 16.3 of the City Charter.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 224, 2-4-2019)
Sec. 2-312. Term of office.
The term of the members appointed to the tree commission shall be three years
except that the term of an ex officio member shall be stated in the resolution
selecting said member but shall not extend beyond the term of said member on
the city council.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-313. Duties and responsibilities.
It shall be the responsibility of the tree commission to study, investigate,
develop and/or update periodically, and administer a written plan for the care,
preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees
and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be
presented to the city council and upon their acceptance and approval shall
constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the city. The
commission, when requested by the city council, shall consider, investigate,
make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or question within
the scope of its work.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-314. Review by city council.
The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions
of the tree commission. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the
commission to the city council, who may hear the matter and make the final
decision.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-315. Interference with tree commission.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
tree commission, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street
trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this article.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Secs. 2-316–2-330. Reserved.
DIVISION 7.
LOCAL DEVELOPMENT FINANCE AUTHORITY*
*Cross-references–Compensation, §
2-210; removal, §
2-209; vacancy, §
2-208.
Sec. 2-331. Purpose.
A Local Development Finance Authority may be established by the city council
pursuant to Public Act 57 of 2018 (MCL 125.4401 et seq.) to operate for and on
behalf of the city and in cooperation with the city council to provide a means
to eliminate the causes of unemployment, underemployment and joblessness, to
promote economic growth, and to stabilize and strengthen the tax base.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 235, 6-7-2021)
Sec. 2-332. Definitions.
The words and phrases used in this division shall have the same meaning as
given by Public Act 57 of 2018, hereinafter referred to in this division as Act
57, or as defined in this section unless the context clearly indicates to the
contrary.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 235, 6-7-2021)
Sec. 2-333. Governing board of authority.
The authority shall be under the supervision and control of a governing board.
The membership of the board shall be established by the resolution creating the
authority in accordance with section 405 of Act 57 and this division. The mayor
shall be a member of the board and shall appoint four board members
representing the city subject to the approval of the city council. All members
other than the mayor shall serve for a term of four years, or until a successor
is appointed and qualified, except that the initial terms of some of the
members shall be staggered so that subsequent appointments shall not recur at
the same time. The board shall also include one member appointed by the Ingham
County Board of Commissioners. The board shall include one member representing
a community or junior college in whose district the authority is located
appointed by the chief executive officer of that community or junior college.
Before assuming the duties of office a member shall qualify by taking and
subscribing to the Constitutional Oath of Office. An appointment to fill an
unexpired term shall be for the unexpired portion of the term only. Members of
the board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual
and necessary expenses.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 235, 6-7-2021)
Sec. 2-334. Powers and duties of authority.
The authority shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as provided by
and in accordance with the provisions of Act 57.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 235, 6-7-2021)
Secs. 2-335–2-350. Reserved.
DIVISION 8.
UTILITY RATE STUDY COMMISSION
Secs. 2-351–2-400. Reserved.
DIVISION 9.
OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS*
*Cross-references–Compensation, §
2-210; removal, §
2-209; vacancy, §
2-208.
Sec. 2-401. Board of Review.
Refer to chapter 9 of the city charter. The board shall keep a record of its
resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations as minutes in accordance
with the Michigan Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.26 et seq.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-402. Building code board of appeals.
Refer to chapter 6, article II, division 2 of this code.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-403. Board of Cemetery Trustees.
Refer to chapter 16 of the city charter.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-404. Ethics board.
Refer to chapter 2, article III, division 3 of this code.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-405. Historic district commission.
Refer to chapter 32, sections
32-3 through
32-4 of this code.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-406. Planning commission.
Refer to chapter 50, article II of this code.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-407. Zoning board of appeals.
Refer to chapter 94, article XI of this code.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 2-408. Sign board of appeals.
Refer to chapter 58, division 3 of this code.
(Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Chapters 3--5
RESERVED
Chapter 6
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS*
*Cross references Environment, ch. 22; fire prevention and protection, ch. 26;
floods, ch. 30; natural resources, ch. 38; planning, ch. 50; signs, ch. 58;
solid waste, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70;
subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 82;
vegetation, ch. 86.
Article I. In General
Secs. 6-16-30. Reserved.
Article II. State Construction Code
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
6-31.    Fees.
Secs. 6-32--6-50. Reserved.
Division 2. Building Code Board of Appeals
Sec.
6-51.    Created.
Sec.
6-52.    Jurisdiction and authority.
Secs. 6-53--6-70. Reserved.
Article III. Dangerous Buildings
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
6-71.   Definitions.
Sec.
6-72.   Maintenance of dangerous building prohibited; penalty; public nuisance.
Sec.
6-73.   Inspections; right of entry.
Sec.
6-74.   Notice to owners.
Sec.
6-75.   Notice of hearing.
Sec.
6-76.   Appointment of hearing officer.
Sec.
6-77.   Hearing.
Sec.
6-78.   Action by city council.
Sec.
6-79.   Appeal from decision or order of city council.
Sec.
6-80.   Placarding and vacating: abatement of rent.
Sec.
6-81.   Demolition or repair by city.
Sec.
6-82.   Fees for actions.
Sec.
6-83.   Boarding up of buildings on notice by building official.
Sec.
6-84.   Demolition or correction without prior notice or hearing.
Article IV. Property Maintenance
Division 1. Intent and Purpose
Sec.
6-100.   Scope.
Sec.
6-101.   Responsibility.
Sec.
6-102.   Vacant structures and land.
Secs. 6-103—6-120. Reserved.
Division 2. Exterior Property Areas
Sec.
6-121.   Sanitation.
Sec.
6-122.   Sidewalks and driveways.
Sec.
6-123.   Rodent harborage.
Secs. 6-124—6-140. Reserved.
Division 3. Exterior Structure
Sec.
6-141.   General.
Sec.
6-142.   Protective treatment.
Sec.
6-143.   Premises identification.
Sec.
6-144.   Structural members, foundation walls, and exterior walls.
Sec.
6-145.   Roofs and drainage.
Sec.
6-146.   Decorative features, overhand extensions.
Sec.
6-147.   Stairways, decks, porches and balconies.
Sec.
6-148.   Chimneys and towers.
Sec.
6-149.   Handrails and guards.
Sec.
6-150.   Window, skylight and door frames.
Sec.
6-151.   Insect screens.
Sec.
6-152.   Doors.
Sec.
6-153.   Basement hatchways.
Sec.
6-154.   Guards for basement windows.
Sec.
6-155.   Building security.
Secs. 6-156—6-160. Reserved.
Division 4. Rental Units
Sec.
6-161.   Doors; rental units.
Sec.
6-162.   Windows; rental units.
Sec.
6-163.   Basement hatchways; rental units.
Secs. 6-164—6-180. Reserved.
Division 5. Extermination
Sec.
6-181.   Infestation.
Sec.
6-182.   Owner.
Sec.
6-183.   Single occupant.
Sec.
6-184.   Multiple-occupant.
Sec.
6-185.   Occupant.
Secs. 6-166—6-190. Reserved.
Division 6. Appeals
Sec.
6-191.   Application for appeal.
 
Article V. Nuisance Abatement
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
6-210.   Public nuisance defined and prohibited.
Sec.
6-211.   Enumeration of nuisances.
Secs. 6-212—6-220. Reserved.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 6-1--6-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE*
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 6-31. Fees.
(a)   Fees for all actions and services performed in the administration and
enforcement of the building code, including without limitation the costs of
overhead, inspection of plans and specifications, fees for inspection of
construction, building permits, certificate of use and occupancy, and other
costs and related expense in the administration and enforcement of the building
code shall be established by resolution.
(b)   All fees received shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. All
expenses shall be paid in accordance with the accounting practices of the city,
and the council shall appropriate such funds as it deems necessary to properly
administer and enforce the state construction code.
(Ord. No. 92, §§ 2(c), 3, 10-21-1974; Ord. No. 92-A-82, § 2, 12-20-1982)
Secs. 6-32--6-50. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS
Sec. 6-51. Created.
There is created a building code board of appeals consisting of three members,
appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council, for a term of
three years. Members of the board of appeals shall be qualified by experience
or training to perform the duties of the office.
(Ord. No. 92, § 1, 10-21-1974; Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 6-52. Jurisdiction and authority.
(a)   When an enforcing agency refuses to grant an application for a building
permit, or when the enforcing agency makes any other decision pursuant or
related to this article, or the building code, an interested person, or his
authorized agent, may appeal in writing to the building code board of appeals.
The board of appeals shall hear the appeal and render and file its decision
with a statement of reasons with the enforcing agency from whom the appeal was
taken not later than 30 days after submission of the appeal. Failure by the
board of appeals to hear an appeal and file a decision within the time limit is
deemed a denial of the appeal for purposes of authorizing the institution of an
appeal to the commission. A copy of the decision and statement of the reasons
therefor shall be delivered or mailed, before such filing, to the party taking
the appeal. A record of decisions made by the board of appeals, properly
indexed, shall be kept by the enforcing agency and be open to public inspection
during business hours. 
(b)   Variances may be granted in accordance with the building code; and the
board may attach, in writing, any condition to a variance granted, which in its
jurisdiction is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
public.
(c)   The board of appeals shall establish the general building limitations for
fire districts as required under the code. Until the board acts on this matter,
such districts shall be as follows:
    (1)   Fire district number 1 shall consist of those areas in zoned
commercial, light and heavy manufacturing.
    (2)   Fire district number 2 shall consist of those areas in zoned multiple
family and containing three or more dwelling units.
    (3)   Fire district number 3 shall consist of any structure or building
outside of fire districts 1 and 2.
(d)   The board of appeals shall comply with the administrative procedures
under the state construction code, but may establish its own rules of procedure
supplementary to and not inconsistent with such procedures or the rules of
order for boards and commissions approved by the city council. A member of the
board of appeals who has a pecuniary interest in any matter before the board
shall disclose that interest prior to the board's taking any action, which
disclosure shall be made a matter of record in the official proceedings.
(e)   The board shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings
and determinations as minutes in accordance with the Michigan Open Meetings
Act, MCL 15.26 et seq.
(Ord. No. 92, § 2, 10-21-1974; Ord. No. 92-A-82, § 2, 12-20-1982; Ord No. 143,
5-3-2004)
*State law reference-State Construction Code Act, MCL 125.1501 et seq.
Cross reference-Boards and commissions, 2-206 et seq.
State law reference-Construction code board of appeals, MCL 125.1514 et seq.
Secs. 6-53--6-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 6-71. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, words and terms used herein shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless indicated to the contrary:
Designated enforcement official means the city manager, zoning and development
director, building official, and such other individual designated by resolution
of the city council to enforce this article.
Hearing officer; officer means the hearing officer provided for in section
6-76.
(Ord. No. 133, § 2, 4-3-2000; Ord. 222, § 14, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 6-72. Maintenance of dangerous building prohibited; penalty; public
nuisance.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep, own, occupy, or maintain any
dangerous building within the city. Any person who violates any provision of
this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined
and governed by section 113 of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961 (MCL 600.113)
and MCR 4.100. Any person found responsible for a violation of this article as
a municipal civil infraction shall be subject to a civil fine of not more than
$500.00 for each offense plus the costs of the action, including all expenses
of the city, direct and indirect, in connection with the action, not to exceed
$500.00. Each day that a violation is permitted to continue shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(b) The city finds and declares that any dangerous building located within the
city constitutes a public nuisance; in addition to any other penalty or
liability provided for in this article, any person who keeps, owns, occupies,
or maintains a dangerous building shall be liable for maintaining a public
hazard and nuisance which may be abated pursuant to section 2.2(s) of the City
Charter and/or this article.
(Ord. No. 133, § 3, 4-3-2000)
Sec 6-73. Inspections; right of entry.
(a)   The designated enforcement official may enter a structure or premises at
all reasonable times to inspect same to secure compliance with this article to
perform any duty imposed by this article. If a structure or premises is
occupied, the designated enforcement official shall first present proper
credentials and request and receive permission to enter. If a structure or
premises is unoccupied, the designated enforcement official shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control
of the structure or premises and request entry. The designated enforcement
official may request entry without presentation of a court order or other
authorization. If such entry is refused, the official shall have recourse to
every remedy provided by law to exercise and obtain entry.
(b)   Whenever a right of entry authorized under this article, including, but
not limited to, one or more of the bases set forth at § 126(3) of the Housing
Law of Michigan (MCL 125.526(3)) is refused by an owner, occupant, or other
person in charge or control of the structure or premises, the designated
enforcement official may take any appropriate action allowed by law including,
but not limited to, the following:
    (1)   Seek an administrative or criminal search warrant for the premises;
    (2)   Seek, in a court of competent jurisdiction, an order that such owner,
owner's legal agent, operator, occupant or the person in charge or control,
cease and desist with such refusal or interference with the inspector's right
to enter the premises.
(Ord. No. 133, § 4, 4-3-2000)
Sec. 6-74. Notice to owners.
(a)   When the whole or any part of any building is found to be in a dangerous
or unsafe condition (as defined in section
1-2), the designated enforcement official shall issue a notice of such
condition. The notice shall be served on the owner(s) by either certified mail
or personal service. A copy of said notice shall also be posted in a
conspicuous place on the building or structure.
(b)   Such notice shall be directed to each owner, and any other party with an
interest in the building or the property on which the building is located whose
name appears on the last city assessment records.
(c)   The notice shall identify the condition or conditions for which the
building has been found to be dangerous or unsafe; specify that a permit or
permits for the performance of work to correct such violations be obtained from
the building official and the time within which the violation shall be
corrected. If the owner(s) finds that the work cannot be completed within the
time specified, or for any other reason, the owner(s) may appeal to the hearing
officer, to show cause why the structure should not be ordered to be demolished
or otherwise made safe.
(Ord. No. 133, § 5, 4-3-2000)
Sec. 6-75. Notice of hearing.
(a)   If the owner(s) do not complete correction of the violation or complete
demolition within the time specified by the notice, then the designated
enforcement official shall send the owner(s) a second notice, stating the date
on which the owner(s) shall appear before the hearing officer to show cause why
the structure should not be ordered to be demolished or otherwise made safe.
This notice shall be given in writing and served on the owner(s) and any other
party having an interest as shown on the city tax assessment records personally
or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the owner is not personally
served, a copy of this notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on
the building or structure.
(b)   The designated enforcement official shall file a copy of the notice
provided for in this section with the hearing officer, together with proof of
service of such notice.
(Ord. No. 133, § 6, 4-3-2000)
Sec. 6-76. Appointment of hearing officer.
(a)   For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this article, a hearing
officer shall be appointed by the city council upon the recommendation of the
mayor. The hearing officer shall be a person who has expertise in housing
matters or building and construction, including, but not limited to, an
engineer, architect, building contractor, building inspector, or member of a
community housing organization.
(b)   The hearing officer shall be paid in an amount determined by council
resolution.
(c)   The hearing officer may not be a city employee.
(Ord. No. 133, § 7, 4-3-2000)
Sec. 6-77. Hearing.
(a)   At the hearing noticed pursuant to section
6-75, the hearing officer shall conduct the hearing referred to in such notice.
The city and the owner(s) and other parties having an interest may be
represented by counsel at this hearing. The hearing officer shall take the
testimony of the designated enforcement official, the owner(s), occupant,
lessee or agent of the property and any interested party, as well as any other
relevant evidence. The use of pictures, videotapes, or other recording devices
shall be permitted to present evidence in the hearing. The hearing officer
shall render findings of fact, which shall include but not be limited to:
    (1)   Evidence of relevant building codes and building regulations.
    (2)   The condition or state of repair of the building, dwelling or
structure.
    (3)   The estimated cost of repair or demolition of the building, dwelling,
or structure.
    (4)   The equalized assessed value of the building, dwelling, or structure.
Not more than five days after completion of the hearing, the hearing officer
shall render a decision, either closing the proceedings or ordering the
dangerous building to be demolished or otherwise made safe or properly
maintained.
(b)   If it is determined by the hearing officer that the building, dwelling,
or structure is unfit for human habitation or is a dangerous building and
should be demolished or otherwise made safe or properly maintained, the hearing
officer shall so order, fixing a time in the order for the owner(s) to comply
therewith. The order may require the owner(s) to maintain the exterior of the
building and adjoining grounds including, but not limited to, the maintenance
of lawns, trees, and shrubs.
(c)   A copy of the findings and order of the hearing officer shall be served
on the owner(s) and any interested party in the manner prescribed in section
6-75(a).
(Ord. No. 133, § 8, 4-3-2000)
Sec. 6-78. Action by city council.
(a)   If, pursuant to section
6-77, the hearing officer issues an order to demolish or otherwise make safe or
properly maintain a dangerous building, and the owner(s) neglects or refuses to
comply with such order, or if the owner(s) failed to appear at the hearing, the
hearing officer shall file a report of the findings and a copy of the order
with the city council and request that the city take the necessary action to
demolish or otherwise make safe or properly maintain the dangerous building.
(b)   The city council shall fix a date not less than 30 days after the hearing
provided in section
6-77 for hearing to review the findings and order of the hearings officer and
shall give notice to the owner(s), in the manner prescribed in section
6-75(a), of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner(s)
shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the hearing officer's order
should not be enforced and the city council shall either approve, disapprove,
or modify the order of the officer.
(Ord. No. 133, § 9, 4-3-2000)
Sec. 6-79. Appeal from decision or order of city council.
Any owner(s) or other party in interest aggrieved by a final decision or order
of the city council under section
6-78 may appeal the decision or order to the circuit court by filing a petition
for an order of superintending control within 21 days from the date of
decision.
(Ord. No. 133, § 10, 4-3-2000)
Sec. 6-80. Placarding and vacating: abatement of rent.
(a)   If an order to demolish or otherwise make safe a dangerous building is
affirmed by the city council and no appeal is taken within the time prescribed
by section
6-79, or if an appeal is taken and the order is affirmed by the court, and the
owner(s) fails to comply with the order, the designated enforcement official
may post the order that it be vacated, insofar as is reasonably practicable,
and shall post, in a conspicuous place or places on the dangerous building, a
placard bearing the following words: "CONDEMNED AS UNFIT FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY."
No person shall deface or remove such placard, except the designated
enforcement official, as provided for in this section.
(b)   A dangerous building which has been placarded under this section shall be
vacated within a reasonable time, as required by the designated enforcement
official. No owner or operator shall lease to any person for human occupancy
and no person shall occupy or permit anyone to occupy any such dangerous
building which has been placarded by the building official, after the date on
which the designated enforcement official has required such building to be
vacated, until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed
by, the designated enforcement official. The designated enforcement official
shall remove such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding action was based, have been eliminated.
(c)   If pursuant to the provisions of this section, a dangerous building has
been ordered vacated by the designated enforcement official and there is no
compliance with the order in the time specified, the designated enforcement
official may petition the appropriate court to obtain compliance, and the court
may order the occupants to vacate or demolish the dangerous building forthwith.
(d)   If any dangerous building is occupied after it has been ordered vacated
under this section, no rent shall be recoverable for the period of occupancy.
(Ord. No. 133, § 11, 4-3-2000)
Sec. 6-81. Demolition or repair by city.
(a)   If no appeal of an order of the city council is filed within the time
prescribed by section
6-79, or if such order is affirmed by the court, and such order is not fully
obeyed, the city may demolish such dangerous building or take whatever steps
necessary to make it safe and properly maintained. The cost of such work shall
constitute both a personal liability of the owner(s) and be a lien against the
real property on which the dangerous building is located and shall be reported
to the assessing officer of the city who shall assess the cost against the
property on which the dangerous building is or was located.
(b)   The owner(s) shall be notified of the amount of the cost referred to in
subsection
6-81(a) by first-class mail at the address shown on the record.
(c)   If the amount in subsection
6-81(a) is not paid within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of the notice
of the amount thereof, the assessor shall add the same to the next tax roll of
the city; and the same shall be collected and treated as a tax lien in the same
manner as provided by law for the collection of property taxes under the
General Property Tax Act (MCL 211.1 et seq.).
(d)   As an additional method of recovering the amount referred to in
subsection
6-81(a) above the amount may be recovered by lawsuit against the persons
referred to in subsection
6-74(b).
(e)   Interest shall accrue as provided for taxes and judgments by law.
(Ord. No. 133, § 12, 4-3-2000)
Sec. 6-82. Fees for actions.
(a)   The city council may, by resolution, establish reasonable fees for
covering the costs of actions taken with regard to this article.
(b)   All costs incurred in enforcement of this article may be assessed against
the owner(s) and be collected either personally from the owner(s) or shall be a
lien against the real property and shall be reported to the assessing officer
of the city who shall assess the cost against the property on which the
building or dwelling is or was located.
(c)   The owner(s) or any party in interest in whose name the property appears
upon the last local tax assessment record shall be notified of the amount of
the costs referred to in subsection
6-82(b) by first-class mail at the address shown on the record. If such person
(s) fails to pay the same within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of the
notice of the amount thereof, the assessor shall add the same to the next tax
roll of the city, and the same shall be collected and treated in the same
manner as provided by law for collection of property taxes under the General
Property Tax Act (MCL 211.1 et seq.), or may be collected by suit at law.
Interest shall accrue as provided for taxes and judgments by law.
(Ord. No. 133, § 13, 4-3-2000)
Sec. 6-83. Boarding up of buildings on notice by building official.
Whenever a building is a dangerous building under section
1-2 for a period of five days after notice of said condition has been issued in
accordance with section
6-74 the city may board up the building or take such other action as may be
feasible and necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the city.
The costs and their recovery shall be governed by section 6-82.
(Ord. No. 133, § 14, 4-3-2000)
Sec. 6-84. Demolition or correction without prior notice or hearing.
If a building is so dangerous that it poses an immediate threat to health or
safety, the building may be demolished or otherwise made safe without prior
notice or hearing. Such danger includes but is not limited to conditions which
pose the immediate threat of collapse of the building. Section
6-81 and
6-82 shall apply to recoupment of city costs, except that the notice
requirements of sections
6-75 and
6-78 shall not apply.
(Ord. No. 133, § 15, 4-3-2000)
ARTICLE IV. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
DIVISION 1.
INTENT AND PURPOSE
6-100. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum conditions and the
responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and
exterior property.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-101. Responsibility.
The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property
in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this
code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to
occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not
comply with the requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit,
rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean,
sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, house
keeping unit or premises which they occupy and control.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-102. Vacant structures and land.
All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained
in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to
cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Secs. 6-103— 6-120. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS
Sec. 6-121. Sanitation.
All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and
sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property
which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-122. Sidewalks and driveways.
All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas
shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from all
hazardous conditions other than a natural accumulation of ice and snow.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-123. Rodent Harborage.
All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage
and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated
by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After
extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage
and prevent re-infestation.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Secs. 6-124—6-140. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
EXTERIOR STRUCTURE
Sec. 6-141. General.
The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally
sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or
welfare.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-142. Protective treatment.
All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window
frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be
maintained in good condition. All exterior wood surfaces, other than naturally
decay-resistant wood, shall be protected from the elements and decay by
painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and
chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and
masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter
of windows, doors and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and water
tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to
inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion and all
surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit
future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior
surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this
requirement.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-143. Premises identification.
Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be
plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be
Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches
(102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inches (12.7 mm).
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-144. Structural members, foundation walls, and exterior walls.
All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall
be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. All foundation
walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall
be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other
pests. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or
rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated
where required to prevent deterioration.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-145. Roofs and drainage.
The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit
rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in
the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and
downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof
water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-146. Decorative features, overhand extensions.
All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar
decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage
and in safe condition. All overhand extensions including, but not limited to
canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust
ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be
kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood
shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic
application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface
treatment.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-147. Stairways, decks, porches and balconies.
Every exterior stairway, ramp, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances
attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with
proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-148. Chimneys and towers.
All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be
maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed
surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against
decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as
paint or similar surface treatment.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-149. Handrails and guards.
Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting
normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-150. Window, skylight and door frames.
Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good
repair and weather tight. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from
cracks and holes. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily
openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-151. Insect screens.
During the period from May 1 to November 1, every door, window and other
outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation
areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or
utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured , packaged
or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less
than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25mm) and every swinging door shall have a
self-closing device in good working condition.
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as
air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-152. Doors.
All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good
condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and
guestrooms shall tightly secure the door.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-153. Basement hatchways.
Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent entrance of rodents,
rain and surface drainage water.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-154. Guards for basement windows.
Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent shields,
storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-155. Building security.
Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping
units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the
occupants and property within.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Secs. 6-156 - 6-160. Reserved.
DIVISION 4.
RENTAL UNITS
Sec. 6-161. Doors; rental units.
Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit
that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock meeting
specifications set forth herein. Such deadbolt shall be operated only by the
turn of a knob or a key ad shall have a lock throw of not less than 1-inch. For
the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an
acceptable deadbolt lock. Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to
manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good working order. All
deadbolt locks required by this section shall be readily openable from the
inside of the dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit without the use
of a key, tool, combination thereof or any other special knowledge or effort.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-162. Windows; rental units.
Operable windows located in whole or in part within six feet (1828 mm) above
ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit,
rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be
equipped with a window sash locking devices.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-163. Basement hatchways; rental units.
Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
house keeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices
that secure the units from unauthorized entry.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Secs. 6-164—6-180. Reserved.
DIVISION 5.
EXTERMINATION
Sec. 6-181. Infestation.
All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All
structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated
by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After
extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-infestation.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-182. Owner.
The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the
structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-183. Single Occupant.
The occupant of a one -family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential
structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-184. Multiple-occupant.
The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple
occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible
for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior
property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such
infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for
extermination.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-185. Occupant.
The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and
pest-free condition of the structure.
Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defect in the structure , the
owner shall be responsible for extermination.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
Sec. 6-186—6-190. Reserved.
DIVISION 6.
APPEALS
Sec. 6-191. Application for Appeal.
Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or
order issued under this maintenance code shall have the right to appeal to the
Mason building code board of appeals pursuant to the rules and procedures
established by the board pursuant to division II of this chapter provided that
a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days of the decision,
notice, or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a
claim that the true intent of this code has been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code
are adequately satisfied by other means.
(Ord. No. 148, 3-20-2006)
ARTICLE V. NUISANCE ABATEMENT
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 6-210. Public Nuisance Defined and Prohibited.
(a)   A public nuisance is defined as follows:
   (1)   Any unreasonable interference with a common right enjoyed by the
general public. It includes conduct:
      a.   Which significantly interferes with the safety, health, comfort,
peace, convenience or repose of the public;
      b.   Offends public decency;
      c.   Significantly interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous any
street, highway, navigable lake or stream; or
      d.   In any way renders the public insecure in life or property;
      e.   Which is known, or should have been known, to be of a continuing
nature that produces a permanent or long-lasting, significant effect on these
common rights;
   (2)   Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is
forbidden by any provision of this article, or where nuisance is referenced in
Chapters 10, 18, 58, 68 and 82.
(b)   No person shall commit, create or maintain any public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 201, 8-17-2015)
Sec. 6-211. Enumeration of Nuisances.
The following acts, services, apparatus and structures are hereby declared to
be public nuisances:
(a)   The maintenance of any pond, pool of water or vessel holding stagnant
water.
(b)   The pollution of any stream, lake or body of water by depositing or
permitting to be deposited any refuse, toxic or industrial waste of forcing or
discharging into any public or private sewer or drain any stream or gas.
(c)   Any vehicle used for any illegal purpose.
(d)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in such occupations.
(e)   All gambling devices.
(f)   Gambling houses and all houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or
promiscuous sexual intercourse.
(g)   All dangerous, unguarded excavations or machinery in any public place, or
left or operated on private property so as to endanger the safety of the
public.
(h)   The owning, driving or moving upon any public streets and alleys of
trucks or other motor vehicles that are constructed or loaded so as to permit
any part of their load or contents to blow, fall or be deposited upon any
street, alley, sidewalk or other public or private place, or which deposits
from its wheels, tires or other parts, onto the street, alley, sidewalk or
other public or private place, dirt, grease, sticky substances or foreign
matter of any kind.
(i)   The placing, or causing to be placed, in or on any motor vehicle parked
upon any street, alley or other public place within the corporate limits of the
city, any paper, posters, signs, cards or other advertising matter.
(j)   The presence of an inoperable motor vehicle or parts of a motor vehicle
on any land in violation of the terms of Division 1 of this article.
(Ord. No. 201, 8-17-2015)
Secs. 6-212—6-220. Reserved.
Chapters 7--9
RESERVED
Chapter 10
BUSINESSES*
*Charter References: Authority to regulate businesses, § 2.2(l).
Cross References: Secondhand goods, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 82; vehicles for
hire, ch. 90.
Article I. In General
Secs. 10-1--10-30. Reserved.
Article II. Peddlers, Solicitors, Transient Merchants and Related Businesses
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
10-31.     Certain violations declared misdemeanor.
Sec.
10-32.     General regulations.
Sec.
10-33.     Prohibited practices.
Secs. 10-34--10-55.   Reserved.
Division 2. License
Sec.
10-56.     Required.
Sec.
10-57.     Application.
Sec.
10-58.     Bonds and fees.
Secs. 10-59 – 10-69.   Reserved.
Article III. Medical Marihuana
Sec.
10-70.   Definitions.
Sec.
10-71.   Required; fee; application.
Sec.
10-72.   Conditions of issuance.
Sec.
10-73.   Conduct of licensee.
Sec.
10-74.   Effect of license; suspension, penalty.
Sec.
10-75.   Confidentiality.
 
Article IV. Marihuana Establishments
Sec.
10-80.   Prohibition of marihuana establishments.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 10-1--10-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND RELATED BUSINESSES*
*Cross References: Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70.
State Law References: Transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 10-31. Certain violations declared misdemeanor.
Violations of section
10-56 of this article are misdemeanors.
(Ord. No. 153, 5-7-2007)
Sec. 10-32. General regulations.
(a)   All persons licensed under this article and each of their agents or
employees are required to exhibit their licenses, upon request, to any person.
(b)   Any licensee using any cart, wagon, motor vehicle or other conveyance,
when stopping upon the streets or public places of the city for the purposes of
conducting business, shall draw up to and parallel with the curbline and in
such a manner so as not to obstruct vehicle or pedestrian travel.
(c)   No licensee shall engage in selling on a street corner, public right-of-
way or public place; however, any person securing consent from the city council
to occupy a street corner or other public right-of-way or public place may be
permitted to occupy such place during the time specified by the city council.
(Ord. No. 51-A-96, § 6, 2-5-1996)
Sec. 10-33. Prohibited practices.
The following conduct by any licensee under this article shall be considered in
violation of this article and, in addition, any penalty may result in the
suspension, revocation or denial of the holder's license:
   (1)   Entering a private residence under pretense other than for soliciting
or peddling.
   (2)   Remaining in a private residence or on the premises after the owner or
occupant has requested any such person to leave.
   (3)   Going in and upon the premises of a private residence to solicit or
peddle when the owner or occupant has displayed a "No Soliciting" or "No
Peddling" sign on such premises. Such signs shall be conspicuously displayed at
or near the main entrance to the premises but shall not exceed one square foot
in surface display area.
   (4)   Soliciting or peddling at a private residence prior to 9:00 a.m. and
after 9:00 p.m. unless by prior invitation of the occupant.
   (5)   Shouting or calling wares or using a public address system, horn,
bells or other noisemaking device to call attention to the licensee's business
in such a way as to disturb residents or adjacent businesses.
   (6)   Occupying any space for the purpose of peddling or soliciting or as a
transient merchant on any public places, streets, or adjacent public rights-of-
way within the downtown business district; except a concessionaire license may
be granted by resolution of the city council within appropriate areas of the
public rights-of-way or other city-owned property. Concessionaires shall be
limited to locations and times within a business district, as determined by the
city council, and a concession fee shall be paid by each concessionaire in an
amount to be established by the council based upon such considerations as the
profitability of the business, the anticipated sales volume, the areas to be
occupied, the public convenience of goods or services to be provided, the
taxable status of the concessionaire, and the potential impact upon city
services.
(Ord. No. 51-A-96, § 7, 2-5-1996)
Secs. 10-34--10-55. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
LICENSE
Sec. 10-56. Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a peddler,
solicitor, transient merchant, or concessionaire within the limits of the city,
except as provided at subsections (1) through (5) of this section, without
first having obtained a license issued by the city clerk.
   (1)   Any person engaged in the retail sale of goods, wares, merchandise or
services at a permanent location in the city and subject to the city's ad
valorem real or personal property taxes shall not be required to obtain a
license to sell as a transient merchant at any other location within the city,
but shall be required to comply with every other provision of this article
regulating such activity. Any person engaged as a peddler, solicitor or
concessionaire for a locally established business shall be required to obtain a
license.
   (2)   Those persons currently licensed as transient merchants by the county
treasurer pursuant to Public Act No. 51 of 1925 (MCL 445.371 et seq.) or
veterans licensed by the county clerk pursuant to 1921 PA 359 (MCL 35.442).
   (3)   Any person having credentials representing any recognized religious or
charitable organization which has been granted a current license by the state's
attorney general under the provisions of Public Act No. 169 of 1975 (MCL
400.271 et seq.).
   (4)   Those persons having credentials representing any locally established
religious organization, community service organization, or school which state
that the entire proceeds of sale shall be paid over to the religious
organization, community service organization, or school, or representing any
newspaper of general circulation.
   (5)   A person selling at an art fair, exposition, festival, race or similar
event at the invitation of the event's sponsor if all of the following
conditions are met:
      a.   The sponsor is a governmental entity or local nonprofit
organization.
      b.   The art fair, exposition, festival, race or similar event has been
approved by the city council.
(Ord. No. 51-A-96, § 3, 2-5-1996)
State Law References: Exemption for certain veterans, MCL 35.441 et seq.
Sec. 10-57. Application.
Applicants for a license under this division shall file a verified application
on a form to be supplied by the city clerk containing the following
information:
   (1)   The applicant's name, date of birth, social security number, permanent
address, local address, business address, and occupation at the time of filing
the application and any prior permanent or business address used for the
previous three years. If a motor vehicle is to be used, the applicant's motor
vehicle operator's license.
   (2)   The name of the person represented, if different than the applicant,
together with the address of the registered office of the business and
registered agent designated in the state for service of legal process, and the
address of the nearest local or district office.
   (3)   If employed by another person or business entity, adequate credentials
establishing the exact relationship.
   (4)   A brief description of the nature of the business represented and the
goods or services to be sold, and, in the case of handicrafts or products of
farm or orchard, whether produced or grown by the applicant.
   (5)   The length of time for which the license is required and the expected
days and hours of operation.
   (6)   The proposed method of peddling, soliciting or vending, whether on
foot or by motor vehicle or other cart or conveyance.
   (7)   If a vehicle or other conveyance is to be used, a description of the
vehicle, together with license number, vehicle identification number, or other
adequate means of identification.
   (8)   If a lot, room, building or structure is to be used, or if a cart,
stand, booth or other structure or fixture is to be placed upon the property of
another, evidence that the applicant has the consent of the legal owner of the
property.
   (9)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor, or local ordinance and the nature of such violation
and penalty assessed.
   (10)   A driver's license or state identification card or such other
identifying information as the chief of police shall deem adequate to properly
certify the applicant's character and business responsibility and determine any
past record of violations of ordinances of this city or laws of the state which
reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the applicant.
   (11)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever had any
peddler's or other occupational licenses required by this city or any other
state or municipal authority revoked, suspended or denied within three years
immediately prior to the date of application and the circumstances of any such
revocation, suspension or denial.
   (12)   A copy of a valid current state sales tax license, or, if exempt, a
copy of a current exemption certificate, if required for the goods or services
sold.
   (13)   If food is to be sold, a health card issued by the county health
department.
(Ord. No. 51-A-96, § 4, 2-5-1996)
Sec. 10-58. Bonds and fees.
(a)   No license under this division shall be granted until the applicant has
filed with the city clerk a bond and has paid fees, for peddler, solicitor, or
transient merchants, in the following amounts:
   (1)   On foot:
      a.   Per day . . . . . $7.50
      b.   Per month . . . . . 30.00
      c.   Per year . . . . . 100.00
   (2)   With vehicle:
      a.   Annual fee . . . . . 100.00
      b.   Plus per person, annual fee . . . . . 7.50
      c.   Indemnity bond . . . . . 750.00
      d.   Rug merchant indemnity bond . . . . . 1,250.00
      e.   Concessionaire indemnity bond . . . . . 750.00
(b)   Such bond shall be conditioned upon the applicant's faithful performance
of all contracts and fulfillment of all warranties and representations made in
connection with the business of the applicant for which the license is sought,
and compliance with all provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 51-A-96, § 5, 2-5-1996)
Secs. 10-59 – 10-69.   Reserved.
ARTICLE III. MEDICAL MARIHUANA
Sec. 10-70. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
Act means the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act.
Dispensary means a structure, lot or premises from which two or more primary
caregivers sell, deliver or otherwise dispense medical marihuana to patients.
Marihuana means that term as defined in section 7106 of the public health code,
1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7106.
Patient means any person to whom a primary caregiver delivers marihuana
pursuant to the Act.
Primary caregiver means a person who is licensed and defined under the act as a
person who is at least 21 years old and who has agreed to assist with a
patient's medical use of marihuana and who has never been convicted of a felony
involving illegal drugs.
Primary caregiver operation means a structure, lot or premises from which a
primary caregiver sells, delivers or otherwise dispenses medical marihuana to a
patient.
Qualifying patient means a person who has been diagnosed by a physician as
having a debilitating medical condition.
Registry identification card means a document issued by the department of
community health that identifies a person as a registered qualifying patient or
registered primary caregiver.
Usable marihuana means the dried leaves and flowers of the marihuana plant, and
any mixture or preparation thereof, but does not include the seeds, stalks, and
roots of the plant.
(Ord. No. 196, 3-17-2014)
Sec. 10-71. Required; fee; application.
(a)   No person shall operate a primary caregiver operation or operate or
assist in the operation of a dispensary without having first obtained and
without being in possession of a valid license issued by the city clerk.
(b)    Application shall be made annually on forms provided by the city clerk
which shall require the full legal name and date of birth of each caregiver and
address of the intended location of the primary caregiver operation or
dispensary, a copy of each caregiver's registry identification card, the number
of registered patients for each caregiver and the maximum amount of usable
marihuana and maximum number of marihuana plants the caregiver operation or
dispensary may have on the property at any one time. The application shall
state whether any electrical devices designed to assist in the growing of
medical marihuana will be used in conjunction with the license, whether any
structural modifications have been made or are intended to be made in
conjunction with the license. The application shall be accompanied by any
required building, electrical or plumbing permits.
(c)    The initial application fee shall be $100.00 for each primary caregiver
operation and $100.00 per caregiver for each dispensary. Renewal fees shall be
established by annual budget resolution of the city council.
(Ord. No. 196, 3-17-2014)
Sec. 10-72. Conditions of issuance.
The city clerk shall not issue an initial or renewal license until such time as
all of the following conditions have been met:
   (1)   A completed application has been submitted to the clerk with the
required fees that accurately states the lawful amount of usable marihuana and
marihuana plants an applicant may have on the property at any one time.
   (2)   Proof that an annual inspection has been conducted by the Mason police
department and the police department certifies that the facility is in
conformity with the state law and city ordinances. The police department may,
as part of its inspection, require building officials and/or the fire
department inspect the property prior to certification to ensure that it is in
conformity with state law and city ordinances should the police suspect, during
their inspection, that unreported or non-permitted structural alterations have
been made, unreported or non-permitted electrical modifications have been made,
unreported or non-permitted electrical devices are being used, otherwise unsafe
electrical connections or overloaded circuits are present or unreported or un-
permitted plumbing modifications have been made in conjunction with the
license.
   (3)   Where the application identifies electrical devices are being used or
intended to be used to assist in the growing of medical marihuana, proof that
the fire department has inspected and approved the use or proposed use and that
any necessary permits for electrical alterations have been obtained.
   (4)   Where the application identifies structural modifications have been
made or are intended in conjunction with the license, proof that the
appropriate building code officials have inspected the property and issued the
necessary permits.
(Ord. No. 196, 3-17-2014)
Sec. 10-73. Conduct of licensee.
(a)    Each licensee shall, as a condition of obtaining and maintaining a
license, agree to comply at all times with all applicable local and state
building, zoning, fire, health, and sanitation statutes, ordinances, and
regulations.
(b)   The premises shall be operated and maintained at all times consistent
with responsible business practices and so that no excessive demands will be
placed upon public health or safety services, nor any excessive risk of harm to
the public health, safety, or sanitation.
(c)    The premises shall at all times be operated in compliance with all
applicable provisions of this code and the act.
(d)    The licensee shall immediately notify the city clerk of any changes in
the names or additions and reductions in the number of primary caregivers
operating from any structure, lot or premises within the city and pay the
appropriate application fee for each increase in the number of primary
caregivers.
(Ord. No. 196, 3-17-2014)
Sec. 10-74. Effect of license; suspension, penalty.
(a)    A license is valid only for the location identified on the license and
cannot be transferred to another location within the city without a new
application.
(b)    Conducting a primary caregiver operation or a dispensary is a violation
of federal law. A license does not prohibit prosecution by the federal
government of its laws. Nor does a license prohibit prosecution by state
authorities for violations of the act or other violations not protected by the
act. A valid license shall not be construed as providing any protection beyond
prosecution by the city of Mason for conducting a primary caregiver operation
or a dispensary without a license.
(c)    Compliance with city ordinances and state statutes is a condition of
maintenance of a license and a license may be suspended for cause pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
(d)    Suspension of a license is not an exclusive remedy and nothing contained
herein is intended to limit the city's ability to prosecute code violations
that may have been the cause of the suspension or any other code violations not
protected by this act.
(e)    No person who has not been identified as a primary caregiver on an
application with the city clerk, or subsequent filing with the city clerk
pursuant to the requirements of this article, shall be deemed to be licensed.
(f)    Any changes to the act or any decisions by a court of competent
jurisdiction which would render a license issued under this article void or
otherwise ineffective, shall result in the immediate expiration of any license
issued under this section.
(g)    Each day that a person shall conduct a primary caregiver operation or a
dispensary without a license shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 196, 3-17-2014)
Sec. 10-75. Confidentiality.
Names and addresses of applicants and any licensed primary caregivers under
this article shall be confidential information and shall be maintained as
confidential records not subject to disclosure, except to other authorized
employees of various city departments as is necessary to perform their official
duties under this article. No records or information shall be released except
upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 196, 3-17-2014)
ARTICLE IV. MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec. 10-80. Prohibition of marihuana establishments.
(a)   Pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.1 of the Michigan Regulation and
Taxation of Marihuana Act (the “Act”), marihuana establishments, as defined by
the Act, are completely prohibited within the boundaries of the city.
(b)   Any applicant for a state or local license to establish a marihuana
establishment, as defined by the Act, within the boundaries of the city shall
be deemed to be not in compliance with this section or with the Code of
Ordinances amended by this section.
(c)   This section does not supersede rights and obligations with respect to
the transportation of marihuana through the city to the extent provided by the
Act, and does not supersede rights and obligations under the Michigan Medical
Marihuana Act, the Medical Marihuana Licensing Act, 2016 PA 281, or any other
law of the State of Michigan allowing for or regulating marihuana for medical
use.
(Ord. No. 223, 12-17-2018)
Chapters 11--13
RESERVED
Chapter 14
CEMETERIES*
*Charter References: Cemeteries, ch. 16.
Cross References: Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70.
Article I. In General
Secs. 14-1--14-30. Reserved.
Article II. City Cemeteries
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
14-31.     Care and management.
Sec.
14-32.     Duties of director.
Sec.
14-33.     Burial standards, fees.
Sec.
14-34.     Burial records.
Sec.
14-35.     Cemetery board rules adopted.
Sec.
14-36.     Hours of operation.
Sec.
14-37.     Prohibited acts.
Secs. 14-38--14-60. Reserved.
Division 2. Cemetery Trust Fund
Sec.
14-61.     Continued.
Sec.
14-62.     Created; use of funds.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 14-1--14-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. CITY CEMETERIES*
*Charter References: Board of cemetery trustees, § 16.3 et seq.
State Law References: General authority relative to cemeteries, MCL 128.1 et
seq.; public cemeteries, MCL 128.11 et seq.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 14-31. Care and management.
Any cemetery established within the city as a public burial ground shall be
cared for and managed by the director of public works who shall be the
superintendent of the cemetery as provided by Chapter 16 of the City Charter.
(Ord. No. 114, § 1, 9-19-1983)
Sec. 14-32. Duties of director.
The director of parks and cemeteries shall have the exclusive right, and it
shall be his duty, to dig all graves, open graves when properly required,
report all burials, removal of bodies, and reburials to the city clerk, as well
as such other matters as may be required by resolution of the city council. He
shall further superintend the grounds of the city cemeteries; keep their walks,
drives and fences in good condition and repair; and see that the provisions of
this article are properly observed, reporting to the city manager any
violations that shall come to his knowledge.
(Ord. No. 114, § 2, 9-19-1983 ; Ord. 222, § 15, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 14-33. Burial standards, fees.
The board of cemetery trustees shall establish standards of burial and shall
fix the price of lots, the fees for the digging and opening of graves and for
the provision of perpetual care, the fees or costs relating to establishment of
grave markers and monuments, and such other prices, fees or costs as may be
designated by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. No. 114, § 3, 9-19-1983)
Sec. 14-34. Burial records.
The city clerk shall keep a record of all proceedings of the cemetery board of
trustees and shall keep a record of all burials, disinterments and reburials,
which record shall give the name, age and date of death of the deceased, locate
the lot number of burial, and include such other items as may be required by
the city council.
(Ord. No. 114, § 4, 9-19-1983)
Sec. 14-35. Cemetery board rules adopted.
The rules promulgated by the cemetery board of trustees are adopted by
reference. No person shall violate such rules.
Charter References: Authority to so provide, § 16.6.
Sec. 14-36. Hours of operation.
(a)   The city cemeteries shall be opened daily to the public between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. to one-half hour after sunset, with the exception of the hours of
operation for authorized traffic utilizing the designated route of the Hayhoe
Riverwalk shall be from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. It shall be unlawful for any
person (other than city personnel conducting city business) to occupy or be
present in any city cemetery during any hours in which the park is not open to
the public.
(b)   Any section or part of the city cemeteries may be declared closed to the
public by the director of public works/superintendent at any time and for any
interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals.
(c)   For the purpose of subsection (a), authorized traffic shall mean walkers,
runners, bicyclers, skaters, skateboarders, and those required to use devices
to assist the disabled.
(Ord. No. 114, § 7, 9-19-1983; Ord. No. 175, 8-17-2009; Ord. No. 236, 6-21-
2021; Ord. No. 238, 7-18-2022)
State law reference—Trespass, MCL 750.546 et seq.
Sec. 14-37. Prohibited acts.
(a)   No person shall obstruct any drive, walk or alley or in any way injure,
deface or destroy any vault, flower, tree, shrub, vine, lock or other thing in
or belonging to a city cemetery. It is a misdemeanor to injure, deface or
destroy any tombstone seat or grave in a city cemetery.
(b)   No person shall remove anything belonging to a cemetery without the
written permission of the director of parks and cemeteries, and all bodies
taken up to be reburied in cemeteries shall be removed and reburied under his
direction.
(c)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any streets or lanes within a
city cemetery at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour, or at a speed greater
than such other posted speed limit as may be established by a lawful traffic
control order issued by the traffic engineer or chief of police and approved by
the city council.
(d)   No owner of any dog or other domestic animal shall allow such dog or
other domestic animal to run unleashed within any city cemetery. The owner of
any dog or other domestic animal shall ensure that all feces or droppings left
by such dog or other domestic animal upon the grounds of any city cemetery are
picked up and disposed of in a sanitary manner. Dogs or other domestic animals
shall not be allowed to trespass upon marked grave sites within the city
cemetery.
(Ord. No. 114, § 6, 9-19-1983; Ord. No. 114-A-97, § 1, 7-7-1997)
Secs. 14-38--14-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
CEMETERY TRUST FUND
Sec. 14-61. Continued.
The cemetery trust fund is continued and shall be administered by the board of
cemetery trustees, in accordance with the laws of this state, and such city
council resolutions and ordinances as are not inconsistent with state law.
(Ord. No. 114, § 5, 9-19-1983)
Sec. 14-62. Created; use of funds.
(a)   A cemetery trust fund is created and established, and the city treasurer
is authorized and empowered to receive in trust from any party having charge of
or owning any lot or lots in a city cemetery any sum of money, not less than
$50.00, to be kept as a perpetual fund, the interest of which, at a rate to be
fixed as set forth in this section, shall be applied to the repair, improvement
and ornamentation of the lot or lots in the cemetery owned by the depositors of
the fund or on account of which the fund may be deposited or for any other
purpose for the improvement or beautifying of the cemetery as such depositor
may direct. The city treasurer is authorized to receive from any person, in
trust upon like conditions and for like purposes, a sum of money not less than
$25.00, the interest of which shall be used and applied for the perpetual
repair, improvement, beautification and ornamentation of any single burial lot
or any burial place in the cemetery, not exceeding a one-half lot, as regularly
laid out and platted in the cemetery. Such repairs, improvements and
ornamentation shall be as follows: All lots for which money is held in trust
shall be thoroughly sodded over and kept sodded, mowed, cut and trimmed, when
necessary from May 1 to November 1, in each year, and such other improvements
as depositors and the board of cemetery trustees may agree upon; provided, that
in no case shall it be compulsory to expend a greater amount for such sodding,
mowing, cutting and trimming, improving and beautifying of such lot than the
income from such trust fund deposited by any such depositor.
(b)   The city treasurer upon receiving a deposit from any such depositor shall
execute a receipt for the amount of the trust fund so deposited, which receipt
shall designate the name of the depositor, the amount deposited, and the
purpose for which the funds were deposited. No such receipt shall bind the city
to receive such trust fund on deposit until such receipt has been countersigned
by the chairman or president of the board of cemetery trustees, who is
authorized for good and sufficient reasons to reject or refuse to accept any
such deposit, in which case the fund shall be returned to the depositor, or to
his heirs, representatives or assigns.
(c)   It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to account for all such moneys
so deposited in his annual report; and it shall be one of the duties of his
office to faithfully account for all moneys deposited in the fund, to keep a
record of all moneys so deposited, the amount, by whom deposited, and the
purpose for which such deposits are made, and the amount of interest of such
fund expended; and he shall make an annual report to the city council.
(d)   The amount of money received by the city in trust may be used by the city
for any purpose not inconsistent with the provisions of the Charter and if so
used shall be charged to the fund for which it is used and credited to the
trust fund; and the city shall pay as interest for the use of the fund not less
than four percent per annum, payable annually; and when any part of the fund is
not used by the city, it shall be loaned by the city council upon good security
to be approved by it; and when so loaned, the rate of interest shall be at the
rate of not less than five percent per annum, to be paid annually; and all such
interest shall be credited to the trust fund and be used for the purposes set
forth for which the fund is created.
(e)   The interest on the trust fund shall be paid by the city treasurer to the
board of cemetery trustees upon the order of the board, and any excess of
interest not used in any year shall be credited by the treasurer to the general
trust fund.
(Ord. No. 17, § 4, 12-12-1924)
Chapters 15--17
RESERVED
Chapter 18
ELECTIONS*
*Charter References: Elections, ch. 3.
Cross References: Administration, ch. 2.
State Law References: Michigan election law, MCL 168.1 et seq.; city elections
generally, MCL 168.321 et seq.
Sec.
18-1.     Election date.
Sec.
18-2.     Nonpartisan election.
Sec.
18-3.     Elective officers and term of office.
Sec.
18-4.     Precincts.
Sec.
18-5.     Polling place.
Sec. 18-1. Election date.
A regular city election shall be held biennially on the Tuesday following the
first Monday in November.
(Ord. No. 86, § 1, 7-6-1971)
State Law References: Authority to so provide, MCL 168.644l.
Sec. 18-2. Nonpartisan election.
A nonpartisan city primary election shall be held on the date prescribed by
state statute for the holding of primary elections, and in all other respects
shall comply with the provisions of chapter 3 of the Charter.
(Ord. No. 86, § 3, 7-6-1971)
State Law References: Primary elections, MCL 168.644b.
Sec. 18-3. Elective officers and term of office.
The elective officers of the city shall be seven councilmembers elected for
terms of four years. Term of office shall begin January 1 following a
councilmember's election to office.
(Ord. No. 86, § 2, 7-6-1971; Ord. No. 86-A-95, § 2, 12-18-1995)
Sec. 18-4. Precincts.
The city shall consist of two precincts as follows:
   (1)   Precinct one shall consist of all of the City of Mason east of the
following line: Commencing at the intersection of Hagadorn Road and the north
city limits; thence south along the center of Hagadorn Road to the intersection
of Hagadorn Road, Howell Road and Jefferson Street; thence south along the
center of Jefferson Street to the south city limits.
   (2)   Precinct two shall consist of all of the City of Mason west of the
following line: Commencing at the intersection of Hagadorn Road and the north
city limits; thence south along the center of Hagadorn Road to the intersection
of Hagadorn Road, Howell Road and Jefferson Street; thence south along the
center of Jefferson Street to the south city limits.
(Ord. No. 33-A-95, §§ 1--4, 10-16-1995; Ord. No. 247, 11-20-2023)
State Law References: Precincts, MCL 168.656 et seq.
Sec. 18-5. Polling place.
The polling place for the two precincts shall be the City Hall, 201 W. Ash
Street, Mason, Michigan.
(Ord. No. 33-A-95, § 5, 10-16-1995; Ord. No. 247, 11-20-2023)
State Law References: Polling places, MCL 168.662.
Chapters 19--21
RESERVED
Chapter 22
ENVIRONMENT*
*Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; floods, ch. 30;
natural resources, ch. 38; parks and recreation, ch. 46; planning, ch. 50;
solid waste, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70;
subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 82;
vegetation, ch. 86; noxious weeds, § 86-31 et seq.
State Law References: Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, MCL
324.1701 et seq.
Article I. In General
Secs. 22-1--22-30. Reserved.
Article II. Noise
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
22-31.     Legislative findings.
Sec.
22-32.     Unlawful noise prohibited.
Sec.
22-33.     Prima facie violations.
Sec.
22-34.     Specific noises prohibited.
Sec.
22-35.     Retaliation.
Sec.
22-36.     Regulations.
Secs. 22-37--22-60. Reserved.
Division 2. Sound Equipment Registration
Sec.
22-61.     Registration of sound equipment.
Sec.
22-62.     Registration requirements and duties.
Sec.
22-63.     Registration approval or disapproval.
Sec.
22-64.     Fees.
Secs. 22-65--22-80. Reserved.
Article III. Junk and Junk Cars
Sec.
22-81.     Purpose.
Sec.
22-82.     Junk storage in enclosed building.
Sec.
22-83.     Dismantling in enclosed building.
Sec.
22-84.     Vacant structure to be protected.
Sec.
22-85.     Storage of building material; exceptions.
Sec.
22-86.     Removal by city; notice.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 22-1--22-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. NOISE*
*Charter References: Nuisance abatement, § 2.2(m).
Cross References: Loud noises prohibited, §
42-82.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 22-31. Legislative findings.
(a)   The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud
noises within the limits of the city is a condition which has existed for some
time; and the extent and volume of such noises is increasing.
(b)   The making, creation or maintenance of such excessive, unnecessary,
unnatural or unusually loud noises which are prolonged, unusual and unnatural
in their time, place and use affect and are a detriment to public health,
comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the
city.
(c)   The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions
contained and enacted in this article is declared as a matter of legislative
determination and public policy; and it is further declared that the provisions
and prohibitions contained and enacted in this article are in pursuance of and
for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort,
convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the city
and its inhabitants.
(Ord. No. 107, § 1, 5-5-1980)
Sec. 22-32. Unlawful noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which
either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others within the limits of the city.
(Ord. No. 107, § 2, 5-5-1980)
Sec. 22-33. Prima facie violations.
The making of any of the specific noises set forth in section
22-34 which are plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the source, or
which are plainly audible within any neighboring private residence, hospital or
court, shall constitute prima facie evidence of an unlawful noise in violation
of this article.
(Ord. No. 107, § 3, 5-5-1980)
Sec. 22-34. Specific noises prohibited.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing,
injurious, and unnecessary noises in violation of this article; but this
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
   (1)   Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public
place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any
such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding
of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
   (2)   Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating, or permitting to be
played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing of sound in such
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring
inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient
hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such
machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners. The operation of
any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is
located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
   (3)   Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or
singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort
or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of
residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
   (4)   Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by loud
or frequent barking or by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall
disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity.
   (5)   Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle or steam whistle
attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or
stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon the request of proper city
authorities.
   (6)   Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is used upon the public
streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention
of the public to any building or structure.
   (7)   Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises. The provisions of this section shall not apply to motor
vehicles operated on a highway or public street and subject to the noise
regulations of Sections 707a--707e of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code (MCL
257.707a--257.707e) or comparable provisions of the Uniform Traffic Code; and
in such case, violations shall be enforced under the procedures set forth in
such codes for civil infractions.
   (8)   Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise or so as to disturb the
peace and quiet of streets or other public places.
   (9)   Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the
opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
   (10)   Construction or repairing of buildings, streets or utilities. The
erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any
building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health
and safety, and then only with a permit from the building official, which
permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days while the emergency
continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less
while the emergency continues. If the building official should determine that
the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition,
alteration or repair of any building within the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., and if the official shall further determine that substantial loss or
inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission
for such work to be done between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon
application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during
the progress of the work. The construction, alteration or repair of public
streets or utilities shall not be conducted other than between the hours of 7:
00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. unless the director of public works or a bona fide public
utilities service employee determines that an emergency exists which requires
such work, or determines that the public health and welfare will not be
adversely affected by such work.
   (11)   Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive
noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or
court while they are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably
interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly
annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in
such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street.
   (12)   Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and
vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
   (13)   Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show
or sale.
   (14)   Blowers. The operation of any noise creating blower or power fan or
any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the
explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or
fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to
deaden such noise.
(Ord. No. 107, § 4, 5-5-1980)
Sec. 22-35. Retaliation.
If there is any evidence of retaliation by any offender against any complainant
or witness, such evidence shall be communicated to the district court
magistrate and any standard fine schedule adopted by the court for a violation
of this article shall thereafter be suspended. In sentencing any violator, the
district court or magistrate shall first examine the evidence of retaliation,
and if such be shown, shall consider such acts and sentence the violator
accordingly.
(Ord. No. 107, § 11, 5-5-1980)
Sec. 22-36. Regulations.
The commercial and noncommercial use of sound amplifying equipment shall be
subject to the following regulations:
   (1)   The only sounds permitted shall be either music or human speech, or
both.
   (2)   The operation of sound amplifying equipment shall only occur between
the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. each day. No operation of sound
amplifying equipment for commercial purposes shall be permitted on Sundays or
legal holidays.
   (3)   No sound emanating from sound amplifying equipment shall exceed a
volume adequate to serve its purpose as determined by the regulating authority.
   (4)   The volume of sound shall be so controlled that it will not be
unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to reasonable
persons of normal sensitiveness within the area of audibility.
   (5)   The user of sound amplifying equipment shall comply with such
additional requirements and regulations as shall be promulgated by the city
manager and approved by the city council.
(Ord. No. 107, § 9, 5-5-1980; Ord. 222, § 16, 12-3-2018)
Secs. 22-37--22-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
SOUND EQUIPMENT REGISTRATION
Sec. 22-61. Registration of sound equipment.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than personnel of law enforcement or
governmental agencies, to install, use or operate within the city a loudspeaker
or sound amplifying equipment in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon
any sound truck for the purposes of giving instructions, directions, talks,
addresses or lectures, or transmitting music to any persons or assemblages of
persons in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, place or public property
without first filing a registration statement and obtaining approval as set
forth in this division.
(Ord. No. 107, § 5, 5-5-1980)
Sec. 22-62. Registration requirements and duties.
Every user of sound amplifying equipment shall file a registration statement
with the city clerk 21 days prior to the date on which the sound amplifying
equipment is intended to be used, which statement shall contain the following
information:
   (1)   The name, address and telephone number of both the owner and user of
the sound amplifying equipment.
   (2)   The maximum sound producing power of the sound amplifying equipment,
which shall include the wattage to be used, the volume in decibels of sound
which will be produced, and the approximate distance for which sound will be
audible from the sound amplifying equipment.
   (3)   The license and motor number if a sound truck is to be used.
   (4)   The purpose for which the sound amplyifying equipment will be used.
   (5)   Such other information as may be required under registration standards
and administrative regulations promulgated by the city manager and approved by
the city council.
(Ord. No. 107, § 6, 5-5-1980; Ord. 222, § 17, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 22-63. Registration approval or disapproval.
(a)   The city clerk shall return to the applicant an approved copy of the
registration statement unless:
   (1)   The conditions of the motor vehicle movement are such that use of the
equipment would constitute a detriment to traffic safety;
   (2)   The conditions of pedestrian movement are such that use of the
equipment would constitute a detriment to traffic safety; or
   (3)   The city administrator determines that the equipment will create
unreasonable or unnecessary noise contrary to subsections (a)(1) and (2) of
this section, or violates the regulations of section
22-36.
(b)   If after advertising for comments on the proposed registration objections
are raised by more than 50 percent of the households within hearing range (as
stated in section
22-62), the registration will be denied.
(c)   If the application is disapproved, the city clerk will endorse upon the
application the reasons for disapproval and return it to the applicant.
(Ord. No. 107, § 7, 5-5-1980)
Sec. 22-64. Fees.
Prior to the issuance of the registration statement, a fee in the amount
established by resolution shall be paid to the city.
(Ord. No. 107, § 8, 5-5-1980)
Secs. 22-65--22-80. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. JUNK AND JUNK CARS
Sec. 22-81. Purpose.
It is hereby determined that the storage or accumulation of trash, rubbish,
junk, junk automobiles, abandoned vehicles, building materials, and the
maintenance of blighted structures upon any private property within the City of
Mason tends to result in blighted and deteriorated neighborhoods, the increase
in criminal activity, the spread of vermin and disease, is hazardous to persons
and property and is contrary to the public peace, health, safety and general
welfare of the community.
(Ord. No. 72, § 2, 6-5-1967)
Sec. 22-82. Junk storage in enclosed building.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store, or to permit the storage or
accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk, junk automobiles, or abandoned vehicles
on any private property in the city except within a completely enclosed
building or upon the premises of a duly licensed junk dealer, junk buyer,
dealer in used auto parts, dealer in secondhand goods or junk gatherer.
(Ord. No. 72, § 3, 6-5-1967)
Sec. 22-83. Dismantling in enclosed building.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dismantle, cut up, remove parts from, or
otherwise disassemble any automobile, whether or not the same be a junk
automobile, abandoned vehicle, or otherwise, or any appliance or machinery,
except in a completely enclosed building, or upon the premises of a duly
licensed junk dealer, junk buyer, dealer in used auto parts, dealer in
secondhand goods, or junk gatherer.
(Ord. No. 72, § 4, 6-5-1967)
Sec. 22-84. Vacant structure to be protected.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any blighted or vacant
structure, dwelling, garage, outbuilding, factory, shop, store, or warehouse
unless the same is kept securely locked, the windows kept glazed or neatly
boarded up, and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by unauthorized
persons or unless such structure is in the course of construction in accordance
with a valid building permit issued by the City of Mason and unless such
construction is completed within a reasonable time.
(Ord. No. 72, § 5, 6-5-1967)
Sec. 22-85. Storage of building material; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or permit the storage or
accumulation of building materials on any private property, except in a
completely enclosed building or except where such building materials are part
of the stock in trade of a business located on said property, or except when
such materials are being used in the construction of a structure on the
property in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the City of Mason
and unless such construction is completed within a reasonable time.
(Ord. No. 72, § 6, 6-5-1967)
Sec. 22-86. Removal by city; notice.
The city may remove or cause to be removed any junk automobile or abandoned
vehicle, or parts of either, from any unenclosed private property after having
notified, in writing, the owner or occupant of such property of his intention
to do so at least 48 hours prior to such removal. Such notice shall be served
personally upon the owner or occupant of the property, if occupied, or may be
posted in a conspicuous place upon vacant or unoccupied property. Such junk
automobiles or abandoned vehicles, or parts of either, shall be removed to the
automobile pound land and disposed of in accordance with law. Such removal by
the city shall not excuse or relieve any person of the obligation imposed by
this article to keep his property free from storage or accumulation of junk
automobiles or abandoned vehicles, or parts of either, nor from the penalties
for violation thereof.
(Ord. No. 72, § 7, 6-5-1967)
Chapters 23--25
RESERVED
Chapter 26
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION*
*Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6.
State Law References: State fire prevention code, MCL 29.1 et seq.
Article I. In General
Secs. 26-1--26-30. Reserved.
Article II. Fire Department
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 26-31--26-50. Reserved.
Division 2. Collection of Costs of Fire Runs
Sec.
26-51.     Purpose.
Sec.
26-52.     Charges for certain runs.
Sec.
26-53.     Exemption.
Sec.
26-54.     Payment for services.
Sec.
26-55.     Lien upon property located within the city.
Sec.
26-56.     Method of collection.
Secs. 26-57--26-70. Reserved.
Division 3. False Alarms
Sec.
26-71.     Falsely deployed emergency services defined.
Sec.
26-72.     Fees established.
Sec.
26-73.     Exemptions.
Sec.
26-74.     Notification, time for payment.
Sec.
26-75.     Lien upon property served.
Sec.
26-76.     Failure to pay.
Secs. 26-77--26-90. Reserved.
Article III. Outdoor Fires
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
26-91.     Open fires prohibited.
Sec.
26-92.     Exceptions.
Sec.
26-93.     Liability.
Secs. 26-94--26-125. Reserved.
Division 2. Allowable Fires
Sec.
26-126.     Allowable fires.
Sec.
26-127.     Application and conditions.
Sec.
26-128.     Fee.
Secs. 26-129--26-160. Reserved.
Article IV. Fireworks
Sec.
26-161.     Violations declared misdemeanor.
Sec.
26-162.     Exceptions to article provisions.
Sec.
26-163.     Use of consumer fireworks prohibited.
Sec.
26-164.     Licensed displays.
Secs. 26-165--26-200. Reserved.
Article V. Hazardous Waste Cleanup
Sec.
26-201.     Definition.
Sec.
26-202.     Responsibility.
Sec.
26-203.     Authorization for cleanup; liability for costs.
Sec.
26-204.     Payment of costs.
Sec.
26-205.     Lien upon property.
Sec.
26-206.     Court proceedings.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 26-1--26-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. FIRE DEPARTMENT*
*Charter References: Fire department, § 4.13.
Cross References: Departments, §
2-141 et seq.
State Law References: Authority to collect costs, MCL 41.806a.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Secs. 26-31--26-50. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
COLLECTION OF COSTS OF FIRE RUNS
Sec. 26-51. Purpose.
This division is adopted in order to provide reimbursement to the city for
costs incurred by the city regarding certain fire runs made within the city.
(Ord. No. 113, § 1, 5-16-1983)
Sec. 26-52. Charges for certain runs.
Any person starting, initiating or originating a fire within the city which
requires or necessitates the use of the firefighting personnel and/or equipment
of the fire department shall be charged for the actual cost of extinguishing of
the fire or the dispatching of personnel and equipment for the purpose of
extinguishing a fire, under the following circumstances:
   (1)   Any fire originating in or involving a motor vehicle or other vehicle,
that is owned by persons who are not residents of the city.
   (2)   Any fire set for which the person has not obtained a permit, as
required under article III of this chapter.
   (3)   Any fire for which a permit was obtained under article III that
becomes uncontrolled or when the permittee does not comply with permit
guidelines.
(Ord. No. 113, § 2, 5-16-1983)
Sec. 26-53. Exemption.
The following circumstances are exempt from the charges under this division:
   (1)   All fires which occur on property owned, maintained and used by the
city, including all buildings, grounds and other personal property.
   (2)   Unless instigated or caused by the owner, all false alarms regarding
any property located within the city.
(Ord. No. 113, § 3, 5-16-1983)
Sec. 26-54. Payment for services.
The city treasurer shall bill the person starting, initiating or originating a
fire as referred to in section
26-52, or the owner of the property on which such fire occurs, for the actual
expenses incurred by the fire department. Payment on the bill shall be due and
payable within 30 days of the postmark of such statement.
(Ord. No. 113, § 4, 5-16-1983)
Sec. 26-55. Lien upon property located within the city.
The charges shall constitute a lien on the property for which the fire service
charges were incurred, including both real and personal property; and if the
charges are not paid within three months after they become due, the official in
charge of the collection of the charges shall, prior to May 1 of each year,
certify to the tax assessing officer of the city the facts of such delinquency,
whereupon that officer shall enter such delinquent charge upon the next general
city tax roll as a charge against the premises; and the liens shall be enforced
in the same manner as provided by law for delinquent and unpaid taxes.
(Ord. No. 113, § 5, 5-16-1983)
Sec. 26-56. Method of collection.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section
26-55, the city shall be empowered to maintain proceedings in any court of
competent jurisdiction to collect such services as a matured debt of the city.
(Ord. No. 113, § 6, 5-16-1983)
Secs. 26-57--26-70. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
FALSE ALARMS
Sec. 26-71. Falsely deployed emergency services defined.
Emergency services shall be deemed to be falsely deployed if, upon arrival at
the scene, it is determined by the highest ranking officer present that there
was no danger present to warrant the deployment of emergency services. Falsely
deployed emergency services includes deployment caused by the activation of an
alarm system as a result of carelessness, intentional misconduct, mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation or sensitivity to substances,
conditions or objects that would not warrant the presence of emergency
services.
Sec. 26-72. Fees established.
To defray the cost of responding to false alarms and to discourage the
continuation of repeat false alarms, there is hereby established a fee, the
amount of which is to be set from time to time by resolution of the city
council, to be charged jointly to the property owner and lessee of any premises
to which, by means of automatic device or otherwise, emergency services of the
City of Mason are falsely deployed, whether said services are deployed to areas
within or without the corporate limits of the city.
Sec. 26-73. Exemptions.
The following are exempt from this division:
   (1)   Emergency runs where the run was the result of a hoax or prank and the
persons responsible are not under the control or supervision of the property
owner or lessee and cannot otherwise be located.
   (2)   Persons who call emergency personnel with a reasonable basis to
believe the service is necessary.
   (3)   Emergency response caused by an alarm system activated by tornado,
earthquake, lightening, or other violent condition beyond the control of the
property owner or lessee of the premises.
   (4)   One falsely activated alarm may be allowed within a 120-day period.
Sec. 26-74. Notification, time for payment.
The highest ranking officer present at the scene who determines the emergency
to be falsely deployed shall notify the city finance director of the name and
address of the person or entity responsible for the false deployment, the type
of emergency services that were deployed, the cause for the deployment, the
type of structure the deployment was made to, and the basis upon which it was
determined that the emergency services were falsely deployed. The finance
director shall convey to the person or entity responsible, by first class mail,
the information received along with notification of the specific fees being
charged. All of the fees shall be due and payable within 30 days from the date
of postmark of the statement to the responsible party.
Sec. 26-75. Lien upon property served.
The charges for false deployment shall constitute a lien on the property served
within the city and shall be assessed and collected in the manner provided by
section
26-55 of this chapter.
Sec. 26-76. Failure to pay.
Upon receipt of a denial of responsibility or upon the failure or refusal to
make payment, the city finance director may cause proceedings to be instituted
in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect the sum as a mature debt.
Such proceedings shall be in addition to the lien provided by section
26-75 or any other remedy available to the city. Proof by the responsible party
of the existence of an applicable exemption set forth in section
26-73 shall be a defense in any collection proceeding undertaken pursuant to
this Code.
Secs. 26-77--26-90. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. OUTDOOR FIRES
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 26-91. Open fires prohibited.
No person shall kindle or maintain any outdoor fire, or authorize or permit any
open fire to be kindled or maintained any place, either on public or private
property, within the city, except as authorized by this Code.
(Ord. No. 83, § 1, 10-21-1972)
Sec. 26-92. Exceptions.
The prohibition of section
26-91 shall not be construed to prohibit burning in the M-1 and M-2 zoning
districts when such burning is in compliance with the standards of section
94-131 and section
94-132, respectively; nor to occasional wood fires in designated stoves and
grills in city parks; nor to fires of charcoal or non-ash-producing fuel when
used for the exclusive preparation of food for human consumption; nor to non-
ash-burning fuels being used not less than 15 feet from combustible materials
when used in adequate fire-resistant metal containers for the heating of
building materials or for the warmth of workers.
(Ord. No. 83, § 2, 10-21-1972)
Sec. 26-93. Liability.
Liability for damage or injury to persons or property caused by open fires
permitted under this division shall be the sole obligation of the applicant,
the requirements in this division being the minimum standards for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. No. 83, § 6, 10-21-1972)
Secs. 26-94--26-125. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
ALLOWABLE FIRES
Sec. 26-126. Allowable fires.
The following special or occasional fires may be allowed, by permit, if the
chief of the fire department or designee shall determine that the maintenance
of such fire is not likely to create atmospheric pollution, a nuisance or a
fire hazard potentially dangerous or injurious to persons or property:
   (1)   Recreational fires when supervised, controlled and maintained, and
utilizing charcoal, seasoned firewood, or other fuel approved by the fire chief
or a designee where the fuel being burned is contained within a device or pit.
   (2)   Personal or private papers of any person, corporation, business or
profession which by reason of their confidential and private nature cannot
safely be disposed of by the usual disposal methods without potential injury to
the reputation, business or interests of the permittee, or others.
   (3)   Contagious, flammable or explosive material which, if disposed of in
the usual manner, could be potentially dangerous to persons or property.
   (4)   Such other special or occasional fires, when there is a compelling
need for such fires by reason of the inadequacy of the city's disposal system.
(Ord. No. 83, § 3,10-21-1972; Ord. No. 208, 3-20-2017)
Sec. 26-127. Application and conditions.
Recreational fires shall be subject to the following conditions:
   (1)   No recreational fire shall be within 15 feet of an existing building,
nor within 15 feet of an existing property line, except when the recreational
fire location is specifically authorized by the fire chief or a designee.
   (2)   A recreational fire shall not exceed 36 inches in diameter and the
flame height shall not exceed 24 inches from the ground surrounding the device
or pit containing the fire.
   (3)   A recreational fire shall be allowed only in the AG, RS-1, RS-2, RS-3,
and R2F zoning districts or on any property used and occupied as a single- or
two-family dwelling in any district.
   (4)   Burning may be done in a metal container, masonry fire ring, or store-
bought device manufactured for recreational burning and so constructed as to
prevent the dispersal of sparks and burning material having suitable covers and
constructed to prevent the dispersal of sparks and burning material. No device
shall exceed 36 inches in diameter.
   (5)   Recreational fire burning shall not take place between 12:00 a.m. and
7:00 a.m.
   (6)   No such burning shall be done unless under the constant supervision of
a person at least 18 years of age.
   (7)   No burning shall be allowed at a time or place and of such materials
which, when burning, emit foul or obnoxious odors, dense smoke, or when wind
conditions create or are apt to create a nuisance or hazard to persons or
property in the vicinity.
   (8)   No burning shall be allowed when atmospheric conditions or local
circumstances are likely to make such burning hazardous.
   (9)   Burning of yard waste, leaves and trash is prohibited.
   (10)   Any burning may be summarily suspended by the highest ranking fire
officer on duty if the officer determines that any permitted fire is maintained
contrary to this chapter or is a fire hazard potentially dangerous to persons
or property. Any such suspension may be appealed to the fire chief.
(Ord. No. 83, § 4, 10-21-1972; Ord. No. 208, 3-20-2017)
Sec. 26-128. Fee.
Should the person(s) performing the burning violate any of the conditions as
expressly set forth in sections
26-126 and
26-127, or any applicable state law regulating open fires, necessitating a fire
department response, they shall be responsible for all costs associated with
the response, but in no case less than $300.00 per hour.
(Ord. No. 83, § 5, 10-21-1972; Ord. No. 83-A-95, § 1, 12-18-1995; Ord. No. 208,
3-20- 2017)
Secs. 26-129--26-160. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. FIREWORKS*
*State Law References: Fireworks, MCL 750.243a et seq.
Sec. 26-161. Violations declared misdemeanor.
Violations of this article are a municipal civil infraction punishable by a
civil fine of not more than $1,000 for each violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 190, 7-2-2012; Ord. No. 190-A-2013, 7-1-2013; Ord. No. 225, 2-18-
2019)
Sec. 26-162. Exceptions to article provisions.
This article does not apply to:
   (1)   Toy plastic or paper caps containing not more than 0.25 grain of
explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum
explosive content per cap.
   (2)   Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers and toy
guns of a type in which paper caps as described in subsection (1) of this
section are used and which are so constructed that the hand cannot come in
contact with the cap when in place for the explosion and which are not designed
to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion.
   (3)   Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding one-eighth inch in
diameter.
   (4)   Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes with
not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer's name
and the quantity contained in each box are printed on the box; and toy smoke
devices.
   (5)   The use of fireworks by railroads, or other transportation agencies or
law enforcement agencies for signal purposes of illumination.
   (6)   The use of agricultural or wildlife fireworks.
   (7)   The use of blank cartridges for any of the following:
      a.   A show or play.
      b.   Signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports.
      c.   Use by military organizations, such as the American Legion, Veterans
of Foreign Wars, or similar organizations to provide honored burials, celebrate
patriotic events, or similar activities.
      d.   Use by law enforcement agencies.
      e.   Interstate wholesalers from using fireworks.
      f.   Wholesaler from using consumer fireworks or low impact fireworks.
(Ord. No. 103, § 2, 6-19-1978; Ord. No. 103-A-95, § 2, 12-18-1995; Ord. No.
190, 7-2-2012; Ord. No. 225, 2-18-2019)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 750.243a(3).
Sec. 26-163. Use of consumer fireworks prohibited.
No person except those persons granted a permit pursuant to Section 26-164 of
this Article shall display discharge, use or ignite any consumer fireworks
within the city, except that on the on the following days after 11 a.m.:
   (1)   December 31 until 1 a.m. on January 1.
   (2)   The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day until 11:45
p.m. on each of those days.
   (3)   June 29 to July 4 until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days.
   (4)   July 5, if that date is a Friday or Saturday, until 11:45 p.m.
   (5)   The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day until 11:45
p.m. on each of those days.
(Ord. No. 103, § 3, 6-19-1978; Ord. No. 190, 7-2-2012; Ord. No. 190-A-2013, 7-
1-2013; Ord. No. 225, 2-18-2019)
  *State law reference-Fireworks, MCL 750.243a et seq.
Sec. 26-164. Licensed displays.
(a)   The city council may, upon receipt of written application and the
required fees, grant a permit for the supervised public or private display of
articles pyrotechnic display fireworks or special effects by other
municipalities, fair associations, amusement parks, or other organizations or
groups or individuals approved by the city council, or permits for outdoor pest
control or agricultural purposes if the applicable provisions of the Michigan
Fireworks Safety Act, MCL 28.451, et seq. are complied with. Applications for
permits shall be made in writing on forms provided by the director of the
department of state police, or by the chief of police, and shall designate a
competent operator approved by the chief of police. The displays shall be of
such a character and so located, discharged or fired as in the opinion of the
chief after proper investigation, so as not to be hazardous to property or
endanger any person. No permit granted under this section shall be transferable
nor shall any permit be issued to a minor.
(b)   The permittee shall furnish a bond or certificate of public liability
insurance in an amount deemed adequate by the chief of police, but no less than
one million dollars, for the payment of all damages which may be caused to
persons or property by reason of the permitted display.
(c)   A permit shall not be issued to a nonresident person, firm or corporation
for ignition of articles, pyrotechnic, display fireworks or special effects in
the city until the person, firm or corporation has appointed in writing a
resident member of the bar of the State of Michigan or a resident agent to be
the legal representative upon whom all process in an action or proceeding
against the person, firm or corporation may be served.
(d)   The city council shall rule on the competency and qualifications of
applicants for a permit to display articles, pyrotechnic, display fireworks and
special effects operators as required under NFPA 1123, as the operator has
furnished in his or her application form, and on the time, place and safety
aspects of the display or articles pyrotechnic or display fireworks before
granting permits.
(e)   A $200.00 processing fee plus the actual cost of material, equipment and
labor for public safety activity required at the event as determined by the
chief of police shall be paid to the city as a condition of the permit.
(f)   No person, other than an agent or employee of the city, shall use
articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, or special effect in the city without
a valid city permit.
(Ord. No. 103, § 4, 6-19-1978; Ord. No. 190, 7-2-2012; Ord. No. 225, 2-18-2019)
Secs. 26-165--26-200. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. HAZARDOUS WASTE CLEANUP
Sec. 26-201. Definition.
In this article, "costs" means any costs directly or indirectly incurred by the
city and shall include but not necessarily be limited to the following:
   (1)   Actual labor costs of city personnel, including workers' compensation
benefits, fringe benefits, and administrative overhead;
   (2)   Costs of equipment, operation and materials obtained by the city; and
   (3)   Costs of any contract labor or materials which are necessitated for
the cleanup of hazardous substances.
The term shall not include actual fire suppression activities normally or
usually provided by the city fire department. The provisions of this section
shall apply to all costs incurred by the city not recovered through the state
hazardous waste service fund or through Section 123 of the Comprehensive
Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act.
(Ord. No. 127, § 1, 9-5-1995)
Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 26-202. Responsibility.
The cleanup of hazardous materials, substances and waste shall be the
responsibility of the person who produced, used or consumed such materials,
substances and waste. Hazardous materials, substances and waste shall not be
disposed of within the city, or allowed to be collected, stored or transported
within the city without written approval of the city manager or the fire chief.
(Ord. No. 127, § 2, 9-5-1995; Ord. 222, § 19, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 26-203. Authorization for cleanup; liability for costs.
The fire department or a contractor working at the direction of the fire
department is authorized to clean up or abate the effects of any hazardous
materials, substances or waste deposits upon the property or facilities within
the city. Any person or company who causes or contributes to such deposit shall
be jointly and severally liable for payment of all costs incurred by the city
and the fire department and/or the contractor working on behalf of the fire
department as a result of such cleanup or abatement activity. The remedy
provided in this section shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by
law, including remedial activities as may be mandated by state or federal law.
(Ord. No. 127, § 3, 9-5-1995)
Sec. 26-204. Payment of costs.
The city treasurer shall bill the person responsible for intentionally or
negligently depositing hazardous materials, substances or waste for which the
city incurs cleanup costs. Payment of the bill shall be due and payable within
30 days of the postmark of such statement.
(Ord. No. 127, § 4, 9-5-1995)
Sec. 26-205. Lien upon property.
The cost of cleanup incurred by the city shall constitute a lien upon the
property for which the cleanup charges were incurred, including both real and
personal property, if the owner or the owner's lessee caused or contributed to
the deposit; and if not paid within three months after the charge is due, the
city treasurer or his designee, prior to May 1 of each year, shall certify to
the tax assessing officer of the city the facts of such delinquency, whereupon
such official shall enter such delinquent charges upon the next general city
tax roll as a charge against the premises; and the liens shall be enforced in
the same manner as provided by law for delinquent and unpaid taxes.
(Ord. No. 127, § 5, 9-5-1995)
Sec. 26-206. Court proceedings.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the city shall be empowered to
maintain proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect the
charges as a matured debt of the city.
(Ord. No. 127, § 6, 9-5-1995)
Chapters 27--29
RESERVED
Chapter 30
FLOODS*
*Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; environment, ch.
22; natural resources, ch. 38; planning, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other
public places, ch. 70; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 74.
Article I. In General
Secs. 30-1--30-30. Reserved.
Article II. Flood Damage Prevention
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
30-31.     Definitions.
Sec.
30-32.     Legislative findings of fact.
Sec.
30-33.     Statement of purpose.
Sec.
30-34.     Designation of regulated flood-prone hazardous areas.
Sec.
30-35.     Conformance with other codes.
Sec.
30-36.     Interpretation.
Sec.
30-37.     Warning and disclaimer of liability.
Sec.
30-38.     Penalties for noncompliance.
Secs. 30-39--30-60. Reserved.
Division 2. Administration and Enforcement
Sec.
30-61.     Designation of enforcing agency; code appendix enforced.
Sec.
30-62.     Development permit review.
Sec.
30-63.     Permit approval.
Sec.
30-64.     Variance.
Secs. 30-65--30-85. Reserved.
Division 3. Flood Hazard Reduction
Sec.
30-86.     General standards.
Sec.
30-87.     Specific standards.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 30-1--30-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 30-31. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after September 8, 1982.
Start of construction means the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure (other than a mobile home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or
footings or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling, nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For the structure (other
than a mobile home) without a basement or poured footing, the start of
construction includes the first framing or assembly of the structure or any
part of the structure on its piling or foundation. For mobile homes not within
a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, start of construction means the
affixing of the mobile home to its permanent site. Mobile homes not within a
mobile home park or mobile home subdivision must be constructed in accordance
with accepted building standards for conventional homes. For mobile homes
within mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions, start of construction is
the date on which the construction of facilities for servicing the site on
which the mobile home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
constructions of streets, either final grading or the pouring of concrete pads,
and installation of utilities) is completed.
Structure means a walled and roofed building, a mobile home, or a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground.
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value
of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the
structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to
occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural
part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include
either:
   (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
   (2)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.
(Ord. No. 112, § 3, 8-16-1982)
Cross References: Definitions generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 30-32. Legislative findings of fact.
It has been found that there are specific flood hazard areas within the city
which are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards; the disruption of commerce and
governmental services; extraordinary public and private expenditure for flood
protection and relief; and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare; that these flood losses
are caused and increased by the cumulative effect of development in areas of
special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, damage uses
in other areas when inadequately anchored and themselves suffer inordinate loss
when inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood
damage; and that the general welfare of the residents and safety of all
structures located within or adjacent to flood hazard areas would substantially
benefit by the implementation of certain limitations upon development as set
forth in this article.
(Ord. No. 112, § 1, 8-16-1982)
Sec. 30-33. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (1)   Protect human life and health;
   (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding, generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer line and treatment facilities,
streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
   (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
   (7)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
   (8)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. No. 112, § 2, 8-16-1982)
Sec. 30-34. Designation of regulated flood-prone hazardous areas.
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the city
as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) entitled “Flood Insurance Study, Ingham County, Michigan
(All Jurisdictions)”, having the flood insurance study number 26065CV000A dated
August 16, 2011, with the following accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRM), having FIRM numbers 26065C; 0252D, 0253D, 0254D, 0258D, 0260D, 0265D,
and 0270D dated August 16, 2011, all of which are adopted and incorporated in
this article by reference for the purposes of administration of the Michigan
Construction Code, and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan
Building Code, and to provide the content of the “Flood Hazards” section of
Table 301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code.
(Ord. No. 112, § 4, 8-16-1982; Ord. No. 185, 8-1-2011)
Sec. 30-35. Conformance with other codes.
All uses located in areas of special flood hazard which are currently permitted
either by right or by special use permit, pursuant to the zoning code, shall
continue to be permitted, provided they conform to all requirements of the
zoning code, and the additional requirements set forth in this article when new
developments or substantial improvements are undertaken. This article is not
intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any rule, regulation or restrictions
arising by virtue of any easement, deed restriction, site plan approval or
plat. Where this article conflicts or overlaps with any other ordinance of the
city, the provisions of this article shall apply, except where other provisions
impose more stringent restrictions furthering the intent and purpose of this
article, in which case the more stringent restriction shall apply.
(Ord. No. 112, § 5, 8-16-1982)
Sec. 30-36. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
   (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and
   (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. No. 112, § 6, 8-16-1982)
Sec. 30-37. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Large floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not
imply that land outside the area of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article
shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee of
the city, or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully
made under this article.
(Ord. No. 112, § 7, 8-16-1982)
Sec. 30-38. Penalties for noncompliance.
No development, structure or land use shall be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered by any person within areas of special flood hazard without
full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable
regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply
with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 112, § 8, 8-16-1982)
Secs. 30-39--30-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT*
*Cross References: Administration, ch. 2.
Sec. 30-61. Designation of enforcing agency; code appendix enforced.
Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with
Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the Zoning
and Development Director of the City of Mason is hereby designated as the
enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Mason under Act
230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The City of
Mason assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act
throughout the corporate limits of the City of Mason. The duties of the
designated enforcing agency shall include the following:
   (1)   Review all permits to determine that the requirements of this article
have been satisfied.
   (2)   Review all permits to determine that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required.
   (3)   Review all permits to determine if the proposed development is located
in the floodway; if located in the floodway, assure that encroachment
provisions of section
30-87(3) are met.
   (4)   Notify adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
   (5)   Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished.
   (6)   Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given
a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation under the variance
procedures provided in section
30-64.
(7)   a.   Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a
basement.
      b.   For all new substantially improved, floodproofed structures:
         1.   Verify and record actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
         2.   Maintain floodproofing certifications (see development permit
review).
   (8)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided by the Flood
Insurance Administration, obtain, review and reasonably utilize other available
base flood elevations.
Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with
Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the
Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the
city.
(Ord. No. 112, § 9, 8-16-1982; Ord. No. 185, 8-1-2011)
Sec. 30-62. Development permit review.
All applications for building permits, moving permits or certificates of
occupancy; all applications for site plan or plan of development approval; and
all applications for grading permits shall first be referred to the zoning and
development director for a review and determination as to whether the proposed
development, structure, land or use lies within an area of special flood
hazard. If it is found that the proposed activity lies within a special flood
hazard area, the application shall not be further processed or approved until
the applicant submits the following information:
   (1)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all existing and proposed structures;
   (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
   (3)   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria;
   (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
   (5)   A location map including existing topographical data at one-foot
interval contours on a scale of one inch representing 100 feet;
   (6)   A map showing grading and drainage plans, including the location of
all public drainage easements; the location of existing and proposed utilities
such as sewer, gas, electric and water systems; and the extent and elevations
of the proposed fill, excavations and occupation;
   (7)   A letter of approval from the water resources division of the state
department of natural resources; and
    (8)   Any other information reasonably requested by the zoning and
development director.
(Ord. No. 112, § 10, 8-16-1982; Ord. No. 185, 8-1-2011)
Sec. 30-63. Permit approval.
(a)   Review by city engineer. Upon receipt of submittal requirements, the
zoning and development director shall forward the plans and information to the
city engineer for review, comment and, where necessary, approval of the
following:
   (1)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
   (2)   Adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (3)   New and replacement water systems designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
   (4)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems, and discharges from the
systems into floodwaters.
(b)   Review and approval by zoning and development director. No more than 15
working days after receipt of submittal, the city engineer shall submit review
comments and, where necessary, approval to the zoning and development director.
    (1)   Review of submittal. The zoning and development director shall review
the complete submission in relation to general and specific standards. The
zoning and development director shall obtain and utilize for his review any
base flood elevation data available from federal, state or other source in
order to administer the provisions of this article.
    (2)   Approval. The zoning and development director shall, after receipt of
the complete submission and receipt of all fees, approve the application for a
building permit, grading permit, plat, plan of development or certificate of
occupancy if he is satisfied that the proposal meets the requirements of this
article and that the proposed construction and use of the premises conform with
the applicable city codes.
    (3)   Conditions. The zoning and development director shall have the
authority to attach conditions to the approval of any proposal located in a
floodway area where such conditions are clearly necessary to ensure conformance
with the purpose and objectives of this article.
(Ord. No. 112, § 11, 8-16-1982; Ord. No. 185, 8-1-2011)
Sec. 30-64. Variance.
(a)   The building board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests
for variances from the requirements of this article.
(b)   The building board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made
by the zoning and development director in the enforcement or administration of
this article.
(c)   In passing upon such applications, the building board of appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in this article, and:
   (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
   (2)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
   (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
   (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
   (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
   (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
   (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
   (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program of that area;
   (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
   (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
   (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(d)   Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (c) and the purposes of
this article, the building board of appeals may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this
article.
(e)   The zoning and development director shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any variances to
the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
(f)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing subsections (c)(1)--(c)(11) of this section have been
fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places,
without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.
(h)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
significant increase in flood levels during the base flooding discharge would
result.
(i)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(j)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
   (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
   (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
   (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary
public expense; create nuisances; cause fraud on or victimization of the
public; or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(k)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice
that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
(Ord. No. 112, § 12, 8-16-1982; Ord. No. 112-A-96, § 2, 5-6-1996; Ord. No. 185,
8-1-2011)
Secs. 30-65--30-85. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sec. 30-86. General standards.
(a)   Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
(b)   Construction materials and methods.
   (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
   (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(c)   Utilities.
   (1)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
   (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
   (3)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(d)   Subdivision proposals.
   (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
   (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
   (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
   (4)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development which contain at least 50 lots or five acres
(whichever is less).
(Ord. No. 112, § 14, 8-16-1982)
Sec. 30-87. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been
provided, the following standards are required:
   (1)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above base flood elevation.
   (2)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level
of the base flood elevation, or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall:
      a.   Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
      b.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
      c.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be
provided to the official as set forth in the development permit review.
   (3)   Floodways. Those areas located within areas of special flood hazard
are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous
area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential
projectiles, and erosion potential, the following additional provisions apply:
Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other developments unless a technical evaluation demonstrates
that encroachments shall not result in any significant increase in flood levels
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(Ord. No. 112, § 15, 8-6-1982; Ord. No. 112-A-96, § 2, 5-6-1996)
Chapter 31
GOLF CARTS AND UTILITY TASK VEHICLES
Sec.
31-1.   Definitions
Sec.
31-2.   Rules and regulations.
Sec.
31-3.   Registration, inspection, and fee prior to usage.
Sec.
31-4.   Enforcement.
Sec. 31-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
Driver's license means a valid license issued to operate a motor vehicle issued
by the state of Michigan or any other state.
Golf cart means a vehicle designed and manufactured for operation on a golf
course for sporting or recreational purposes and that is not capable of
exceeding speeds of 15 miles per hour.
Operator means only persons over 18 years of age and holding a valid driver's
license may operate a golf cart or UTV on roads.
Utility task vehicle (UTV) means a vehicle designed and manufactured for off-
road recreation and work use with two or more seats and a roll-over protection
system. Also commonly known as a side-by-side.
(Ord. No. 240, 11-9-2022; Ord. No. 257, 12-16-2024)
Sec. 31-2. Rules and regulations.
   (a)   Golf carts and UTVs shall not be operated on or alongside a public
road or street with a posted speed limit greater than 30 miles per hour.
   (b)   Golf carts and UTVs may cross a road with a posted speed limit greater
than 30 miles per hour. Golf carts and UTVs must cross in a manner that is the
most direct route to minimize crossing distance.
   (c)   Any person who operates a golf cart or UTV must be at least 18 years
of age.
   (d)   No person may operate a golf cart or UTV unless that person is
licensed to drive upon the public streets, roads, and highways of Michigan.
Golf cart and UTV operators must always carry their driver's license on their
person while operating a golf cart or UTV on public roads.
   (e)   Any person who operates a golf cart or UTV on a public road must
adhere to all applicable State and local laws, regulations, and ordinances.
   (f)   An operator may not allow the number of people in the golf cart or UTV
at any one time to exceed the maximum capacity specified by the manufacturer.
The operator shall not allow passengers to ride on any part of a golf cart or
UTV not designed to carry passengers, such as the part of the golf cart
designed to carry golf bags or the flatbed of the UTV.
   (g)   In no instances shall a golf cart or UTV be operated at a speed
greater than 15 miles per hour. No golf cart or UTV may be operated at a speed
greater than reasonable and prudent for the existing conditions.
   (h)   Golf carts and UTV must be operated at the right edge of the roadway
and must yield to all vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
   (i)   Golf carts and UTV must park in parking spaces. All parking rules and
limits apply. Golf carts and UTV may not be parked on sidewalks.
   (j)   Golf carts and UTV must have basic equipment supplied by the
manufacturer, including a vehicle identification or serial number. Such
equipment must include all safety devices as installed by said manufacturer.
   (k)   The operator of a golf cart or UTV must meet signal requirements of
Section 648 of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code.
   (l)   Golf carts or UTV may not be operated one half-hour before sunset to
one half-hour after sunrise.
   (m)   The city manager, or designee, may authorize the operation of golf
carts or UTV by specific persons, groups, or organizations outside of the
restricted times or on restricted streets prescribed in this article for
special events or specific purposes.
(Ord. No. 240, 11-9-2022; Ord. No. 257, 12-16-2024)
Sec. 31-3. Registration, inspection and fee prior to usage.
   (a)   All golf cart and UTV users must submit a completed registration
application with the required fee to the city for approval. Before driving on
public roads, the operator of a golf cart or UTV must have a valid registration
sticker issued by the city. A registration sticker will be issued only to a
city resident.
   (b)   Each owner of a golf cart or UTV that is operating on a public road
must retain proof of ownership, current liability insurance, and a completed
waiver of liability provided by the city releasing the city from liability that
may arise as a result of operation of a golf cart or UTV inside the city.
   (c)   All golf carts and UTV must meet the requirements or minimum standards
as set forth above in this chapter.
   (d)   The registration sticker shall be valid for no more than one year and
all registration stickers will expire on December 31. Registration stickers
must be visible on a golf cart or UTV operated on a public road. Lost or stolen
registration stickers are the sole responsibility of the owner and must be
replaced before the golf cart or UTV is operated on a public road.
(Ord. No. 240, 11-9-2022; Ord. No. 257, 12-16-2024)
Sec. 31-4. Enforcement.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a civil
infraction and carry a penalty of $50 for first offense, $100 for a second
offense, and $200 for each additional offense.
(Ord. No. 240, 11-9-2022; Ord. No. 257, 12-16-2024)
  Chapter 32
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Sec.
32-1.    Purpose.
Sec.
32-2.    Definitions.
Sec.
32-3.    Historic district commission.
Sec.
32-4.    Commission powers and duties.
Sec.
32-5.    Permit required; procedure for application review.
Sec.
32-6.   Historic districts–Establishment; study committee; adding, modifying,
or eliminating historic districts; permit required in proposed historic
district; emergency moratorium.
Sec.
32-7.    Established historic districts.
Sec.
32-8.    Violation; fine; payment of costs.
Sec. 32-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the establishment of historic
districts; to provide for preservation of historic and non-historic resources
within historic districts; to provide for the establishment of historic
district commissions; to provide for certain assessments under certain
circumstances; to provide for procedures, remedies and penalties, pursuant to
the authority and powers granted in the Local Historic Districts Act, 1970 PA
169.
Sec. 32-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings as set forth below:
Act or Act 169 means the Local Historic Districts Act, 1970 PA 169.
Alteration means work that changes the detail of a resource but does not change
its basic size or shape.
Center means the Michigan Historical Center.
Certificate of appropriateness means the written approval of a permit
application for work that is appropriate and that does not adversely affect a
resource.
Commission means the historic district commission created by the city council
pursuant to this ordinance.
Committee means the historic district study committee appointed by the city
council pursuant to this ordinance.
Demolition means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a
resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect.
Demolition by neglect means neglect in maintaining, repairing, or securing a
resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource
or the loss of structural integrity of the resource.
Denial means the written rejection of a permit application for work that is
inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource.
Emergency moratorium means a declaration by the city council that all work on a
district resource or a resource located within a proposed historic district
must immediately cease for a period or periods not to exceed six months.
Historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having
contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources that
are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture.
Historic preservation means the identification, evaluation, establishment, and
protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering, or culture.
Historic resource means a publicly or privately owned building, structure,
site, object, feature, or open space that is significant in the history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of this state or a community
within this state, or of the United States.
Notice to proceed means the written permission to issue a permit for work that
is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to a finding
by the commission under section
32-5(f)(3) of this chapter.
Open space means undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal or
man- made landscaped area that provides a connective link or a buffer between
other resources.
Ordinary maintenance means keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition
through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its
exterior condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the external
appearance or historic nature of the resource except through the elimination of
the usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not
constitute work for purposes of this chapter.
Proposed historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily
having contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and that is under
review by a committee or a standing committee for the purpose of making a
recommendation as to whether it should be established as a historic district or
added to an established historic district.
Repair means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound
condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a
resource constitutes work for purposes of this ordinance.
Resource means one or more publicly or privately owned historic or non-historic
buildings, structures, sites, objects, features, or open spaces located within
a historic district.
Restoration means the process of accurately recovering the form and appearance
of a resource as it existed at a particular period of time by removing later
work, replacing missing elements, and restoring the appearance and function of
the original resource.
Standing committee means a permanent body established pursuant to section 14 of
Act 169 to conduct the activities of a historic district study committee on a
continuing basis.
Stop work order is a written order given by the zoning official to immediately
cease all work on a district resource proceeding without a certificate of
appropriateness or notice to proceed. Such orders may be served by hand
delivery to any person actively engaged in work on the work site, or may be
served upon an owner or occupant of the resource by posting a copy on the land
or attaching a copy to the building or structure and, in addition, mailing a
copy of the order by first-class mail to the owner of the resource at the
owner's last known address as shown on the city's most current tax roll.
Work means construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, or
demolition.
Sec. 32-3. Historic district commission.
(a)   There is hereby established a commission to be known as the Mason
historic district commission. The commission shall consist of seven members
each of whom shall reside within the city. Members shall be appointed by the
mayor with the consent of the city council for three year terms except that the
initial terms of some of the members shall be staggered so that subsequent
appointments shall not recur at the same time. One member may be selected from
the city council to serve ex officio at the discretion of the mayor and with
the approval of the city council. The term of a member from the city council
shall be stated in the resolution selecting said member, but the term shall not
exceed the term of office for said member as member of the city council. At
least one member shall be appointed from a list of residents submitted by a
duly organized and active historical society if such a list is submitted to the
mayor. The commission shall include as a member, if available, a graduate of an
accredited school of architecture who has two years of architectural experience
or who is an architect registered in the state. A majority of the members shall
have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation.
(b)   An appointment shall by made within 60 days to fill a vacancy on the
commission.
(c)   The commission shall meet at least once each quarter or more often as
required.
(d)   The city zoning official or a designee, shall serve as secretary of the
commission.
(e)   The concurring vote of four members of the commission shall be necessary
for the approval of an application and for the adoption or modification of
preservation guidelines. Other actions of the commission shall require a simple
majority of a quorum.
(f)   The commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions,
findings and determinations as minutes in accordance with the Michigan Open
Meetings Act, MCL 15.26 et seq.
(Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004)
Sec. 32-4. Commission powers and duties.
The commission established by this chapter shall have the following duties and
powers:
   (1)   Carry out, assist, and collaborate in studies and programs designed to
identify and evaluate additional district resources and historic districts
worthy of preservation under this chapter as recommended by a duly appointed
historic district study committee.
    (2)   Consult with and consider the ideas and recommendations of civic
groups, public agencies, and citizens interested in historic preservation.
    (3)   Disseminate information to the public concerning those district
resources deemed worthy of preservation, and encourage and advise property
owners in the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of property of
historic, architectural, and archaeological interest.
   (4)   Consider methods other than those provided for in this chapter for
encouraging and achieving historic preservation, and make appropriate
recommendations to the city council and other bodies and agencies, both public
and private.
    (5)   Establish such policies, rules, and regulations as it deems necessary
to administer its duties as herein provided.
    (6)   Maintain and use funds obtained by gift or grant from any public or
private source to acquire property for preservation purposes and administer
such funds and acquisitions in accordance with the purposes herein provided.
    (7)   Review plans and applications for all permits required by this
chapter for any work affecting the exterior appearance of any historic or non-
historic resource within a historic district. The commission shall have the
power to issue a certificate of appropriateness if it approves of the plans
submitted. The commission shall also have the power to issue a denial or a
notice to proceed. The commission may authorize the zoning official to review
and approve certain types of applications involving minor alterations,
additions or repair of district resources, with quarterly review by the
commission. The commission shall provide written standards that clearly
describe the type of minor work that the zoning official may review and
approve.
Sec. 32-5. Permit required; procedure for application review.
(a)   A permit shall be obtained from the zoning official before any work is
performed within a historic district affecting the exterior appearance of a
resource or affecting the interior arrangements of a resource that will cause
visible change to the exterior appearance of a resource.
(b)   Application for a permit for work on any resource in a historic district
shall be made to the zoning official before any such work is commenced. If the
proposed work requires a permit under other city codes or ordinances, no
separate application, permit, or fee shall be required under this chapter,
except that the approving authority shall not grant the permit until the
commission shall review and approve the application.
(c)   Before an application shall be accepted as complete, the zoning official
shall require that plans and elevations, as deemed necessary, be submitted
showing the extent of the proposed change to the district resource in question.
The zoning official will review the plans and elevations for compliance with
the general guidelines and the applicable preservation standards, and will
consult with the applicant in order that proper modifications to the plans or
elevations may be made. No permit shall be granted by the zoning official until
the commission has acted upon the application as prescribed by this chapter. If
the application is denied by the commission, the denial is binding upon the
building official and no building permit can be issued by the building
official.
(d)   The review of any application shall follow the U.S. Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating
Historic Buildings, as set forth in 36 C.F.R. Part 67. Review standards and
guidelines that address special design characteristics of historic districts
administered by the commission may be followed if they are equivalent in
guidance to the Secretary of Interior's Standards and Guidelines and are
established or approved by the center.
(e)   In reviewing applications, the commission shall consider the following:
   (1)   The historical or architectural value and significance of the
structure and its relationship to the historical value of the surrounding area.
    (2)   The relationship of the exterior architectural features of the
structure to the rest of the structure and the surrounding area.
    (3)   The general compatibility of exterior design, arrangement, texture,
and materials proposed to be used.
    (4)   Other factors, including aesthetic value, which the commission
considers pertinent.
(f)   The commission shall meet within 45 days after the zoning official has
accepted the application as complete to consider the application for approval,
denial, or a notice to proceed.
   (1)   If approval is granted, a certificate of appropriateness shall be
issued by the zoning official.
    (2)   If the commission denies approval of the application, the commission
shall create a record of the reasons for denial. The zoning official shall
transmit notice of the denial in writing to the applicant by first-class mail,
including the reasons for denial and notification of the appeal process. The
applicant may make modifications to the application and shall have the right to
resubmit the application within 60 days from the date of denial for
reconsideration by the commission. No additional fee is required for an
application for reconsideration.
    (3)   The commission may grant a notice to proceed if any of the following
conditions prevail and the commission makes a written finding that the proposed
work is necessary to substantially improve or correct the conditions:
      a.   The structure constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or
the occupants.
       b.   The structure is a deterrent to a major improvement program which
will be of substantial benefit to the community.
       c.   Retention of the structure would cause undue financial hardship to
the owner.
       d.   Retention of the structure would not be in the interest of the
majority of the community.
    (4)   The failure of the commission to take action on an application within
60 days from the date the zoning official accepts the application as complete,
unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the commission,
shall be deemed to constitute approval and the zoning official shall process
the application without regard to a certificate of appropriateness.
(g)   Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the commission
shall have the right to appeal the decision to the state historic preservation
review board of the Michigan historical commission within the department of
state. The appeal shall be filed within 60 days after the decision is furnished
to the applicant. The appellant may submit all or part of the appellant’s
evidence and arguments in written form. The review board shall consider an
appeal at its first regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the appeal but
may not charge a fee for considering an appeal. The review board may affirm,
modify or set aside a commission’s decision and may order a commission to issue
a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed. A permit applicant
aggrieved by the decision of the state historic preservation review board may
appeal the decision to the circuit court having jurisdiction over the historic
district commission whose decision was appealed to the state historic
preservation review board. Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation
organization in the local unit, as well as resource property owners, jointly or
severally aggrieved by a decision of the historic district commission may
appeal the decision to the circuit court, except that a permit applicant
aggrieved by a decision of the historic district commission may not appeal to
the court without first exhausting the right to appeal to the state historic
preservation review board.
(h)   Deliberate or irresponsible neglect in maintaining, repairing, or
securing of a district resource resulting in any of the following conditions
shall constitute demolition by neglect and a violation of this chapter:
    (1)   The deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports.
    (2)   The deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members.
    (3)   The deterioration or crumbling of exterior plaster or mortar.
    (4)   The deterioration of exterior chimneys.
    (5)   The ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs and
foundations, including broken windows and doors.
    (6)   The deterioration of any other exterior architectural feature so as
to create or permit the creation of a hazardous or unsafe condition, or
conditions, which, in the judgment of the commission, produces a detrimental
effect upon the character of the district as a whole and the life and character
of the district resource.
    (7)   The loss of structural integrity of a resource.
(i)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent ordinary
maintenance or repair of any district resource within a historic district which
does not alter the exterior features of a structure or resource; nor shall
anything in this ordinance be construed to prevent work on a district resource
under a permit issued by the building official prior to the creation of a
historic district as provided herein, except as provided in section
32-6(g).
(j)   When work has been done upon a resource without a permit, and the
commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of
appropriateness, the commission may require an owner to restore the resource to
the condition the resource was in before the inappropriate work or to modify
the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the
owner does not comply with the restoration or modification requirement within a
reasonable time as prescribed by the commission, the commission may seek an
order from the circuit court to require the owner to restore the resource to
its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a
certificate of appropriateness. The owner shall be liable for reasonable
attorneys fees should the city receive an order for relief in the action. If
the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order of the court, the
commission or its agents may enter the property and conduct work necessary to
restore the resource to its former condition or modify the work so that it
qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the court's
order. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied
by the city as a special assessment against the property. When acting pursuant
to an order of the circuit court, the commission or its agents may enter a
property for purposes of this section.
(Ord. No. 142, 5-19-03)
Sec. 32-6. Historic districts–Establishment; study committee; adding,
modifying, or eliminating historic districts; permit required in proposed
historic district; emergency moratorium.
(a)   The city may establish by ordinance one or more historic districts.
Before such establishment, the city council shall appoint a historic district
study committee. The com- mittee shall contain a majority of persons who have a
clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation and
shall contain representation from one or more duly organized local historic
preservation organizations. The committee shall do all of the following:
   (1)   Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed
historic district following procedures established or approved by the center.
    (2)   Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and the
historic resources located within that district.
    (3)   Determine the total number of historic and non-historic resources
within a proposed historic district and the percentage of historic resources of
that total. In evaluating the significance of historic resources the committee
shall be guided by the selection criteria for evaluation issued by the United
States Secretary of the Interior for inclusion of resources in the National
Register of Historic Places as set forth in 36 C.F.R. part 60, and criteria
established or approved by the center, if any.
    (4)   Prepare a preliminary historic district study committee report that
addresses at a minimum all of the following:
       a.   The charge of the committee.
       b.   The composition of the committee membership.
       c.   The historic district or districts studied.
       d.   The boundaries for each proposed historic district in writing and
on maps.
       e.   The history of each proposed historic district.
      f.   The significance of each district as a whole as well as a sufficient
number of its individual resources to fully represent the variety of resources
found within the district relative to the evaluation criteria.
    (5)   Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and
recommendations to the planning commission, to the center, to the state
historical commission, and to the state historic preservation review board.
    (6)   Make copies of the preliminary report available to the public
pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act.
(b) Not less than 60 days after the transmittal of the preliminary report, the
committee shall hold a public hearing in compliance with the Open Meetings Act.
Written notice shall be mailed by first-class mail not less than 14 days before
the hearing to the owners of properties within a proposed historic district as
listed on the tax rolls of the city.
(c) After the date of the public hearing, the committee and the city council
shall have not more than one year, unless otherwise authorized by the city
council, to take the following actions:
    (1)   The committee shall prepare and submit a final report with its
recommendations and the recommendations, if any, of the planning commission to
the city council. If the recommendation is to establish a historic district or
districts, the final report shall include a draft of a proposed ordinance or
ordinances.
    (2)   After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment of a
historic district or districts, the city council, at its discretion, may
introduce and pass or reject an ordinance or ordinances. If the city council
passes an ordinance or ordinances establishing one or more historic districts,
the city shall file a copy of that ordinance or those ordinances, including a
legal description of the property or properties located within the historic
district or districts, with the register of deeds. The city shall not pass an
ordinance establishing a contiguous historic district less than 60 days after a
majority of the property owners within the proposed historic district, as
listed on the tax rolls of the city, have approved the establishment of the
historic district pursuant to a written petition.
(d) The city may at any time establish by ordinance additional historic
districts, including proposed districts previously considered and rejected, may
modify boundaries of an existing historic district, or may eliminate an
existing historic district. Before adding, modifying or eliminating a historic
district, the city council shall establish a historic district study committee
as delineated in section
32-6(a).
(e) If considering the elimination of a historic district, the committee shall
follow the procedures set forth in section
32-6(a) to compile a report and conduct a public hearing, but with the intent
of showing one or more of the following:
    (1)   The historic district has lost the physical characteristics that
enabled establishment of the district.
    (2)   The historic district was not significant in the way previously
defined.
    (3)   The historic district was established pursuant to defective
procedures.
(f) Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic,
architectural, archaeological, engineering or cultural significance of a
proposed historic district, the city council may, at its discretion, adopt a
resolution requiring that all work within the proposed historic district shall
require a permit and be referred to the commission as prescribed in section
32-5. The commission shall review permit applications with the same powers that
would apply if the proposed historic district was an established historic
district. The review may continue in the proposed historic district for not
more than one year, or until such time as the city council approves or rejects
the establishment of the historic district by ordinance, whichever occurs
first.
(g) If the city council determines that pending work will cause irreparable
harm to resources located within an established historic district or a proposed
historic district, the city council may by resolution declare an emergency
moratorium of all such work for a period not to exceed six months. The city
council may extend the emergency moratorium for an additional period not to
exceed six months upon finding that the threat of irreparable harm to resources
is still present. Any pending permit application concerning a resource subject
to an emergency moratorium may be summarily denied.
Sec. 32-7. Established historic districts.
Effective June 21, 1983, there is hereby established City of Mason Historic
District No. 1, the area to be included within which shall be described as
follows:
Lots 6 through 10 inclusive of block 7; lots 7 through 12 inclusive of block 8;
lots 1 through 10 inclusive of block 13; all of the Courthouse Square; The
north 1/2 of lots 1 and 2, and all of lots 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, and 10 of block
16; lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 7 and 8 of block 17, except the east 49.5 feet of the
south 66 feet of said lot of lot 8 of block 17; all of the original plat of the
City of Mason, including all platted streets, alleys and rights-of-way
contained within the aforesaid description.
Sec. 32-8. Violation; fine; payment of costs.
(a) In addition to any other penalty or legal remedy available to the city, any
person who violates any provision of this chapter, or any rule or regulation
adopted or issued in pursuance hereof, or fails to comply with any proper order
issued by the city hereunder within the time limits specified therein, shall,
upon conviction of said violation, be responsible for a municipal civil
infraction and may be fined not more than $5,000.00 plus costs of the action as
provided by MCL 600.8727. Each act of violation and every day upon which such
violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like
penalty. The zoning official is authorized to issue and serve municipal civil
infraction citations tickets with respect to any violation of this chapter
pursuant to MCL 600.8707.
(b) Any person that violates this chapter may be ordered by the court to pay
the costs to restore or replicate a resource unlawfully constructed, added to,
altered, repaired, moved, excavated, or demolished.
Chapters 33
RESERVED
Chapter 34
LAW ENFORCEMENT*
*Cross References: Administration, ch. 2; offenses and miscellaneous
provisions, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78.
Article I. In General
Secs. 34-1--34-30. Reserved.
Article II. Police Department
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 34-31--34-50. Reserved.
Division 2. Police Reserve Force
Sec.
34-51.     Intent.
Sec.
34-52.     Authorization.
Sec.
34-53.     Compensation.
Sec.
34-54.     Worker's compensation.
Sec.
34-55.     Authority.
Secs. 34-56 – 34-59. Reserved.
Division 3. False Alarm
Sec.
34-60.   Definitions.
Sec.
34-61.   False alarm violation, responsibility of alarm user.
Sec.
34-62.   False alarm fine schedule.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 34-1--34-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. POLICE DEPARTMENT*
*Charter References: City police, § 4.12.
State Law References: Law enforcement officer employment standards, MCL 28.601
et seq.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Secs. 34-31--34-50. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
POLICE RESERVE FORCE
Sec. 34-51. Intent.
It is the intent of this division to provide for a standby police force for use
during emergencies or on other occasions when it is necessary to support the
regular police force of the city.
(Ord. No. 95-A-96, § 1, 2-5-1996)
Sec. 34-52. Authorization.
The chief of police is authorized to recruit, equip and train a special reserve
police force to serve as an auxiliary to and under the direct supervision of
the police department. The selection of reserve officers shall be in a manner
prescribed by the chief of police, but a person shall not be selected unless he
is a citizen of the United States and a resident of the state for one year. In
addition, a person shall not be selected unless the person has all of the
qualifications of a regular police officer other than the education and
training requirements. The city clerk shall administer the constitutional oath
of office to the reserve officers, who shall be subject to the departmental
rules while they are serving in an official capacity. The chief of police may
discharge any member of the reserve at any time.
(Ord. No. 95-A-96, § 2, 2-5-1996)
Sec. 34-53. Compensation.
Officers of the reserve force shall serve without compensation; however, the
city council shall reserve the right to appropriate funds to reimburse actual
expenses incurred, or compensate reserve officers for particular duties as the
chief of police may recommend. Officers shall not be eligible to participate in
any pension or disability plan or any life, hospitalization or other medical
insurance plans of the department by virtue of their affiliation with the
police reserve force.
(Ord. No. 95-A-96, § 3, 2-5-1996)
Sec. 34-54. Worker's compensation.
A reserve police officer, while performing his duties under the direction of
the chief of police, is an employee of the city and is entitled to receive
worker's compensation benefits. The reserve police officer's average weekly
earnings at the time of the duty-related injury or illness shall form the basis
for compensation under the Worker's Disability Compensation Act of 1969 (MCL
418.101 et seq.).
(Ord. No. 95-A-96, § 4, 2-5-1996)
Sec. 34-55. Authority.
A reserve police officer shall have no enforcement authority except when in
immediate association with regular officers of the department, or when
performing policy functions assigned and supervised by the department. A
reserve police officer may assist a duly sworn police officer in making an
arrest pursuant to Section 16(c) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (MCL 764.16
(c)).
(Ord. No. 95-A-96, § 5, 2-5-1996)
Secs. 34-56 – 34-59. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
FALSE ALARM
Sec. 34-60. Definitions.
For purposes of this division, the following terms, when used herein, shall
mean:
Alarm system means a device or devices designed or arranged to signal the
existence of a hazard requiring the urgent response of police personnel. These
systems include intrusion alarms or other alarms which require an emergency
response by police personnel.
Alarm user means any business, entity, or person who owns, possesses, controls,
or otherwise exercises dominion over property upon which an alarm system is
placed.
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system requiring an urgent
response by the police department when there is no immediate threat to life,
safety, or property in, on, or about the property from which the signal
originated. A false alarm shall not include alarms caused by tornados,
earthquakes, lightning, or other conditions beyond the control of the user but
shall include unknown alarms.
Unknown alarm means the activation, due to causes that cannot be determined, of
an alarm system requiring an urgent response by the police department where
there is no immediate threat to life, safety, or property in, on, or about the
property from which the signal originated.
(Ord. No. 181, 4-4-2011)
Sec. 34-61. False alarm violation, responsibility of alarm user.
   Any alarm system user who has an activation of an alarm system that is a
false alarm as defined herein that occurs within 120 days of a prior false
alarm or within 240 days of three or more prior false alarms is responsible for
a civil infraction. Any violation notice or municipal civil infraction citation
charging an offense shall specify the dates of any prior offense causing the
activation to be a violation.
(Ord. No. 181, 4-4-2011)
Sec. 34-62. False alarm fine schedule.
Any alarm system user found responsible for a violation of section 34-61 shall
be fined in accordance with the following schedule:
   (1)   $50.00 for any false alarm occurring within 120 days of a prior false
alarm.
   (2)   $100.00 for any false alarm occurring within 120 days of two prior
false alarms.
   (3)   $250.00 for any false alarm occurring within 240 days of three or more
prior false alarms.
(Ord. No. 181, 4-4-2011)
Chapters 35--37
RESERVED
Chapter 38
NATURAL RESOURCES*
*Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; environment, ch.
22; floods, ch. 30; parks and recreation, ch. 46; planning, ch. 50; solid
waste, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; subdivisions
and other divisions of land, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86.
Article I. In General
Secs. 38-1--38-30. Reserved.
Article II. Oil and Gas Wells
Sec.
38-31.     Violations declared misdemeanor.
Sec.
38-32.     Occupation deemed hazardous.
Sec.
38-33.     Purpose.
Sec.
38-34.     Compliance and abatement.
Sec.
38-35.     Required.
Sec.
38-36.     Location and spacing of wells.
Sec.
38-37.     Production and operation.
Sec.
38-38.     Equipment.
Sec.
38-39.     Restoration; abandonment.
Sec.
38-40.     Deepening, reworking.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 38-1--38-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. OIL AND GAS WELLS*
*State Law References: Oil and gas wells, MCL 324.61501 et seq.
Sec. 38-31. Violations declared misdemeanor.
Violations of this article are a misdemeanor.
Sec. 38-32. Occupation deemed hazardous.
The business and occupation of drilling and exploring for, producing,
obtaining, transporting, gathering, and storing of oil, gas, petroleum, and
hydrocarbons within the corporate limits of the city is a hazardous and
dangerous business and occupation; and it is necessary that such business and
occupation be regulated, controlled and limited for the purpose of providing
protection for the lives, health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the
city and of the public generally and for the protection of property from the
danger of fire, explosion, gas, leaks, nuisances and other hazards, injurious
to the public peace, health, welfare and safety.
(Ord. No. 85, § 1(A), 4-19-1971)
Sec. 38-33. Purpose.
The provisions of this article shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements
for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety and welfare; and
compliance with all terms of this article shall not be deemed to relieve any
person from any duty imposed by law to use all necessary care and take all
necessary precautions for the safeguarding of the public peace, health and
safety, and the rights of any individual or group of individuals; and it shall
be the duty of any person drilling, operating or maintaining any well to use
all necessary care and take all precautions of whatsoever nature which shall be
reasonably necessary under the circumstances to protect the public or the
rights of any part of the public.
(Ord. No. 85, § 1(B), 4-19-1971)
Sec. 38-34. Compliance and abatement.
(a)   The chief of the fire department, director of public works, or such other
employee of the city as shall be designated for that purpose by the city
council shall have the right and privilege at any time to enter upon the
premises covered by any permit issued under this article for the purpose of
making inspections to determine if the requirements of this article are
complied with, or the requirements of any other ordinance of this city are met
relating to the health, welfare, and safety of persons within the city.
(b)   All drilling operations for the discovery of oil, gas, petroleum or other
hydrocarbons; equipping of wells; producing and marketing of oil, gas,
petroleum and hydrocarbons; plugging of wells; and all material used and work
done in connection with the exploring for, producing and marketing of petroleum
products shall be in conformity with all pertinent state and federal laws and
statutes and rules and regulations and particularly with the statutes of the
state and the regulations of the supervisor of wells of the state.
(Ord. No. 85, § 8(A), (B), 4-19-1971)
Sec. 38-35. Required.
(a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drill, explore or commence to
drill any well for oil, gas, petroleum or other hydrocarbons in any area within
the corporate limits of the city or for its secondary recovery, or to extend,
or to deepen one already drilled, without first having applied for and
receiving a permit by the authority of the city council in accordance with the
terms of this division and the applicant's having complied with the terms of
this article and having complied with the requirements of this section.
(b)   The producer or owner of any proposed well shall fill out, sign and file
an application in writing for a permit on forms provided by the city clerk,
accompanied with a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount established by
resolution. The application shall contain the information as to the location
where the proposed well is to be drilled, and attached to the application shall
be a map, plat or survey of the area to be drilled and the location of the well
on the spacing and the exact location of tanks, flowlines, fences, and details
incident to the proposed location. The location of the well shall be stated in
relation to established street or plat lines or, in lieu thereof, quarter
section lines. The application shall show the names of the owners of the oil
and gas in all of the area to be drilled and the lease on the area. The
application shall also be accompanied by the consent in writing of the owner of
the drill site to be drilled consenting to the drilling of the well on his
property. Attached to the application shall be duly certified, sworn or
photostatic copies of all leases for the discovery and removal of oil and gas,
and ratifications of oil and gas, executed by the owners of the oil or gas in
such area, owned or controlled by the applicant, setting forth the names of the
lessors and lessees of each such respective lease.
(c)   The application shall be forwarded to the city council for consideration
if it shall appear that all persons having an interest in the drilling unit or
area to be drilled have consented to such drilling, or a pooling order or
permit to drill an exploratory well has been issued by the supervisor of wells
of the state department of natural resources.
(d)   (1) Upon receipt of a completed application, the city council may elect
to schedule a public hearing before acting on the application. If a public
hearing is required, the applicant shall cause notice of such hearing on forms
to be furnished by the city clerk to be given by certified mail to all known
owners of the lands containing oil and gas within the area to be drilled and
the lessees under valid oil and gas leases of record addressed to their last
known place of residence, not less than seven days prior to the date of the
hearing. In addition, the applicant shall publish a notice in a public
newspaper published and printed in the city at least five days prior to the
hearing and shall post notices of the hearing in not less than five public
places in the city at least five days prior to the hearing. The applicant shall
file proof of compliance with the publication requirements of this division
with the city clerk at or prior to the time set for the hearing.
   (2)   No final action on the application shall be taken and no drilling
permit shall be issued until the applicant has filed with the city clerk a
permit to drill which has been granted by the supervisor of wells of the state
department of natural resources, together with a statement of all special
permit conditions or requirements imposed by the supervisor of wells.
   (3)   The city council shall have the power and reserves the authority to
refuse any application for a permit where, by reason of the location of the
proposed well, the character and value of the permanent improvements already
erected in or adjacent to the area in question, the use to which the land and
surroundings are adapted, or for health or sanitary reasons, the drilling of
any oil or gas well will cause a serious disadvantage or hazard to the city and
its inhabitants as a whole. It shall be discretionary with the city council to
grant or deny a permit in any industrial area or in any area in which
residences or other buildings may have been erected when the granting of the
permit shall create fire hazards; endanger the health, safety or welfare of
residents; or otherwise be destructive of property interests. The city council
may make and impose any and all reasonable requirements necessary to protect
and safeguard the property of all parties affected by such drilling or
production activities.
(e)   No permit for the drilling of any well shall be issued without a duly
executed bond given by the applicant as principal and executed by some bonding
or indemnity company authorized to do business in the state, as surety, running
to the city for the benefit of the city, and all persons concerned, conditioned
that if the permit is granted, the applicant and his assigns shall comply with
the terms and conditions of this article in the drilling and operation of the
proposed well; pay and discharge any liability imposed by law for damages on
account of injury to property, either public or private, or bodily injury, or
death, received or suffered by any person and resulting from the drilling
operation or maintenance of any well or any structures, equipment, machinery,
lines or appurtenances used or allowed in the drilling or producing operation;
and clear from the area to be drilled all litter, machinery, derricks,
trenches, pits, debris, oil and other substances used in the drilling or
producing operations, whenever the well shall be abandoned or its operation
discontinued. The maximum total liability under the bond, for loss or damage,
either to person or property shall be in the amount of $1,000,000.00. The bond
shall be made for a term of not less than one year, and a new bond shall be
furnished at the expiration of any existing one if the operation of such well
covered by the bond is continued. If at the time of such renewal all drilling
on such well has been completed, the amount of total liability under such bond
may be reduced to $500,000.00. If any bond required in this section shall lapse
or become void for any reason whatsoever, the permit issued under the terms of
this division shall immediately become inoperative and void until a new bond
shall have been provided and filed with the city clerk or the existing bond
reinstated in full force; and such well and the drilling operations and
production under the bond shall be shut down, suspended and discontinued until
the filing of such new bond or reinstatement of such existing bond. Each bond,
both original and renewal, shall be approved by the city council and shall be
filed with the city clerk.
(f)   (1)   All applicants for a permit to drill a well for oil or gas shall at
time of making such applications pay to the city clerk the sum established by
resolution as a nonrefundable application fee to apply on the cost and expenses
of the administration of this article.
   (2)   In addition, all applicants shall deliver to the city clerk a cash
deposit in the amount established by resolution to be held in escrow pending
completion of drilling operations or denial or abandonment of the permit
application. An additional permit fee shall thereafter be levied by the city
council against this deposit in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for
its actual expenses incurred in investigating and processing the application,
planning and providing public safety services, the expenses of inspecting and
supervising completion operations, and litigation arising out of the approval
of the application. Following completion of drilling or denial or abandonment
of the permit application, the city clerk shall prepare and file with the city
council and the applicant a written itemization of all such expenses incurred
by the city. The city council shall then, by resolution, determine such amounts
as shall reasonably compensate the city for such necessary expenses and shall
order the city clerk to disburse that portion of applicant's escrow to the city
general fund and refund the balance to the applicant. The applicant shall be
provided notice of the meeting at which such action is to be taken and shall be
provided an opportunity to appear and present arguments and/or evidence in
opposition to the charges.
   (3)   On the January 2 after the completion of any producing well and
annually thereafter so long as production of oil or gas continues from such
well, the owner of each well shall pay to the city clerk a sum of $250.00 to
apply on the cost and expense of the administration of this article.
(g)   When a permit shall have been issued, it shall terminate and become
inoperative without any action on the part of the city council unless within 60
days from the date of the issue, actual drilling of the well shall have been
commenced; and after the drilling of a well shall be commenced, the cessation
of drilling for 60 days or the cessation of production of oil or gas from the
well after production shall have commenced shall operate to terminate and
cancel the permit; and the well shall be considered as abandoned for all
purposes of this article; and it shall be unlawful thereafter to continue the
operation, reworking or drilling of such well without the issuance of another
permit upon new application as provided in this division; however, there may be
granted additional periods of 60 days each, but not to exceed three in number,
upon application by the permittee to the city council requesting such extension
and good and reasonable cause shown.
(h)   A copy of the permit so granted shall be forwarded by the city clerk by
certified mail to the supervisor of wells of the state and a copy posted in the
location of such well.
(i)   The director of public works is granted the authority to suspend the
permit for the operation of any well where any of the provisions of this
article or any permit conditions are violated, which suspension of any such
license shall be effective until such time as that person shall comply with the
provisions of this article. Before suspending any such license, the city clerk
shall cause written notice to be served upon the permittee, advising such
permittee that a hearing will be had at a time and place fixed in the notice to
determine whether the permit held by such permittee shall be suspended. Five
days' notice of the time of the hearing shall be given. It shall be unlawful
and an offense for any person to operate any well during any period in which
the permit covering the operation of such well is so suspended. The provisions
of this section shall in no way limit or interfere with the enforcement of the
penalties for the violation or ordinances generally, but shall be cumulative
and in addition to such penalties.
(Ord. No. 85, § 2, 4-19-1971; Ord. No. 85-A-82, § 1, 1-18-1982)
Sec. 38-36. Location and spacing of wells.
(a)   Drilling units shall conform to those units established under the rules,
regulations and orders of the state department of natural resources. No permit
shall be granted in the absence of some affirmative action by such department.
(b)   No permit shall be granted and no well shall be located unless the
location is at least 330 feet from an adjoining property line, unless such
adjoining property shall be communitized with the property so located, and
unless the location is at least 660 feet from an adjacent or adjoining well.
(c)   The drilling location of any well shall in no instance be nearer than 300
feet from any street line, alley line or railroad right-of-way line.
(d)   The drilling location of any well shall in each instance be at least 300
feet from the location of any building existent at the time of commencement of
actual drilling operations.
(e)   No well shall be located within any of the streets, alleys or rights-of-
way of the city, or so located as to block or incumber or obstruct the use of
any street, alley, or right-of-way in any drilling or producing operations,
except by previous consent having been given by order of the director of public
works, and in such event for the limited period only.
(f)   If it shall appear from the application on file, and after notice and
hearing as provided in section
38-35(d), that the limitation and restrictions established in this article will
preclude drilling and operating in an area which should reasonably be drilled
and operated, the city council shall be authorized and empowered to make
exception from such limitations and restrictions set forth in subsections (b),
(c) and (d) of this section.
(Ord. No. 85, § 3, 4-19-1971)
Sec. 38-37. Production and operation.
(a)   In the drilling for oil and gas, petroleum or other hydrocarbons and
their production, the permittee shall use every precaution, equipment and
materials in accordance with approved methods of operation, drilling and
production to stop and prevent waste of oil, gas, petroleum or hydrocarbons,
and to protect residents and properties of the city, and shall equip and
operate the well with equipment of standard design and quality as is in common
use in the petroleum industry; and all such equipment shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with standard drilling, producing and operating
practices.
(b)   From the time of placing any equipment, derricks, riggings or other
drilling equipment or supplies until the time of their removal upon final
completion of the well, each location of the well shall be completely
surrounded by fencing in order to completely surround and enclose the drilling
operation. Such fence shall be supported by steel posts and shall be of woven
wire of not less than 14 gauge wire with mesh of not less than two inches nor
more than four inches and be at least six-feet high.
(c)   All flares erected within the corporate limits of the city shall be at
least 300 feet from any building or structure and shall extend at least 20 feet
above the surface of the ground. All such flares shall be of approved
construction and shall be installed in a pit of sufficient depth and area to
provide adequate drainage and safety precautions. The location of all such
flares shall be completely enclosed by steel fencing of the same type and
dimensions as provided in this section for enclosing the drilling operation.
(d)   In all cases where an oil and gas well is being drilled in a
residentially zoned area, the drilling operator shall use a portable slush pit;
and all slush and waste shall be deposited in the pit and removed beyond the
corporate limits of the city for disposal. No open pits for the disposal of
slush, brine or salt water shall be permitted at any time after the completion
of the drilling operation in any area in the city.
(e)   All brine or salt water produced in the drilling for or production of oil
shall, under the supervision of the supervisor of wells of the state, be
returned to some underground formation or otherwise disposed of in order that
such brine, salt water, or refuse shall not do damage to any fresh water,
wells, lakes, ponds, or rivers.
(f)   The person in charge of the producing operations of a well shall keep the
fenced enclosure around such well free of all trash and flammable substances
not necessary in the operation of such well and shall keep the weeds cut and
otherwise keep the location in a clean and orderly condition. Machinery and
equipment not used in the operation of the well shall not be stored or left in
such enclosure. All oil tanks shall be painted or galvanized.
(g)   Except in emergency, at least six hours before any mud or fluid in any
well shall be removed, swabbed, baled or otherwise cleaned out, the chief of
the fire department or other officer in charge shall be served with written
notice of the hour that such cleaning, swabbing or bailing is done; and if in
his opinion the cleaning, swabbing or bailing shall be hazardous to the safety
of life or property, he is authorized to stop or prevent such cleaning,
swabbing or bailing until such time as conditions may become favorable to
continue such activity. It shall be unlawful to commence the testing of any
well from sundown until sunrise, or during a period when gas may settle on the
ground, or during any electrical storm. Before bringing in a well, all of the
control devices, including master gates and safety valves, shall be tested,
shall be in good working order, and shall comply with the provisions of this
article.
(h)   Drilling shall be done with mud-laden fluids of such weight and viscosity
as shall be required by and under good drill practices in the area in which
such drilling is being done.
(Ord. No. 85, § 4, 4-19-1971)
Sec. 38-38. Equipment.
(a)   All equipment and materials used in the drilling of a well for the
discovery of oil, gas, petroleum and hydrocarbons shall be modern and shall be
kept in good working condition at all times. All drilling rigs shall be of the
rotary type only to the production state of the well; and thereafter cable-tool
equipment may be used for swabbing, cleaning and completion of the well. All
drilling rigs shall be anchored or secured in accordance with good drilling
practices.
(b)   All drilling rigs or derricks shall be constructed with platform and
superstructure of sufficient height to accommodate a double ram automatic
blowout preventor or space-saver of "Shaffer" or "Cameron" type or the
equivalent, with hydraulic blowout preventor, "Hydril" or "Reagen" above, such
blowout preventors to be installed above the ground level, together with blow-
line of proper size and working pressure, and with choke-manifold installed on
each preventor. The blowout preventor shall be pressure tested prior to
drilling operations under surface pipe, and shall be closed periodically every
eight hours thereafter.
(c)   When cable-tool equipment shall be used for completion of the well, they
shall be equipped with master-gate, and the rig shall be equipped with
lubricators while the well is being tested, swabbed or bailed. Such master-gate
shall have a remote control located at least 20 feet from the well bore.
(d)   Every producer or operator who shall drill a well shall, as a minimum
requirement, set 500 feet of conductor pipe and cement it to the surface; then,
not less than 1,000 feet of intermediate casing and cemented with cement
circulated to the surface; then, a production string shall be set into or
through the producing formation and shall be cemented with sufficient cement to
fill up at least 300 feet above the producing formation, plus 20 percent excess
cement. Each string of casing within any well shall have the fittings securely
anchored to the casing immediately enclosing it.
(e)   Each well shall have a separator capable of caring adequately for the
production of the well, and both oil and gas, without spraying oil through the
separator vent line. No gas shall be produced, wasted or allowed to escape
through a separator vent line from any well. When it shall appear that an
explosive mixture of gas may be accumulating near the ground, the designated
city officer in charge may require that the well be shut down until such gas is
dissipated.
(f)   No tanks or other facility for the storage of oil, gas, petroleum or
hydrocarbons produced from any well within the corporate limits of the city
shall be kept, erected or maintained within the corporate limits of the city
except in areas zoned as industrial and agricultural areas where such storage
tanks shall be allowed. Such storage tanks shall be erected outside the
corporate limits of the city, except for such installation in industrially and
agriculturally zoned areas, and shall be connected to any well by pipes or
pipelines by the nearest possible route.
(g)   All tanks for the storage of oil permitted to be installed in
industrially and agriculturally zoned areas shall be located in a pit and
encircled by an embankment and a fire wall with a capacity of one and one-half
times the capacity of the tank. No tank shall be located nearer than 300 feet
from any building or industrial structure.
(h)   All pipes or pipelines leading to or from a well location shall be buried
underground to a minimum depth of 24 inches below normal surface of the ground;
and before a pipeline is laid in, down or along a street, the person or company
laying such line shall deposit with the city treasurer the sum established by
resolution for the laying of such line; and in the construction of such lines,
the permittee shall pay to the city all damages sustained by it by reason of
the construction of the lines and the repair of any streets crossed by or
extending along such pipelines in an amount sufficient to place the city
property in the same condition as prior to the laying of the lines and shall
pay to the city any and all damage incident to the taking up or repairing of
the lines thereafter. No concrete or asphalt paving shall be cut or disturbed
unless absolutely necessary, and then only under the supervision of the city;
and the permittee shall be required to replace and repair the paving at his own
expense and under the supervision of the director of public works.
(i)   No rigs or heavy machinery used in connection with the drilling or
operation of wells in the city shall be moved over the city streets from one
location to another without obtaining a permit, which permit shall set forth
the streets which may be used for that purpose.
(j)   All flowing wells shall be properly equipped with well head connections
designed for a minimum of 2,000 psi working pressure and 4,000 psi testing
pressure.
(k)   All pumping units installed shall be electrically operated and properly
housed and so enclosed as to protect the public. All electrical switches and
electrical outlets shall be enclosed and be explosion-proof.
(Ord. No. 85, § 5, 4-19-1971)
Sec. 38-39. Restoration; abandonment.
(a)   Upon the discontinuance of the drilling operations or the production of
any oil or gas from any working well, the well shall be abandoned and plugged
under the supervision of the supervisor of wells of the state.
(b)   All plugging operations on all dry or abandoned wells shall commence
within 60 days after drilling production operations shall have ceased and shall
be carried through forthwith to completion.
(c)   The permittee shall fill all pits and cellars with dirt and level off the
surface and restore the surface as nearly as possible to its condition prior to
the commencement of drilling operation. All equipment shall be removed from the
location promptly; and all machinery, tanks, pipes and tools shall be
transported from the well site and embankments leveled and the surface of the
land restored to its former condition.
(d)   The permittee shall not permit any undue accumulation of slush, salt
water or oil, or any other offensive or dangerous substances to accumulate, and
upon the completion of the well shall remove and eliminate all debris and
eliminate all conditions and circumstances contributing to the hazard of fire
or pollution.
(Ord. No. 85, § 6, 4-19-1971)
Sec. 38-40. Deepening, reworking.
If any person shall desire to deepen or extend a well below the depth of its
original objective, he shall make application to the city council the same as
if original application for permit were taken. In such deepening and reworking,
the same precautions shall be complied with as set forth in this article. If
such application for reworking or deepening shall be filed within 60 days from
the date of the completion or abandonment of the original drilling operation, a
reduced fee in the amount established by resolution shall be required.
(Ord. No. 85, § 7, 4-19-1971)
Chapters 39--41
RESERVED
Chapter 42
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS*
*Cross References: Law enforcement, ch. 34; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78.
Article I. In General
Sec.
42-1.     Violations declared misdemeanor.
Sec.
42-2.     Resistance and obstruction of city officials prohibited.
Sec.
42-3.     Failure to disperse prohibited.
Sec.
42-4.     Threatening language prohibited.
Sec.
42-5.     Violent, tumultuous acts prohibited.
Sec.
42-6.     Curfew for minors.
Sec.
42-7.     False information to police officer.
Secs. 42-8--42-40. Reserved.
Article II. Offenses Involving Property Rights
Sec.
42-41.     Destruction of property prohibited.
Sec.
42-42.     Violent, tumultuous acts prohibited.
Sec.
42-43.     Trespassing prohibited.
Sec.
42-44.    Retail fraud.
Sec.
42-45.    Larceny.
Sec.
42-46.    Larceny from motor vehicle.
Sec.
42-47.    False pretenses with intent to defraud.
Secs. 42-48--42-75. Reserved.
Article III. Offenses Involving Public Peace and Order
Sec.
42-76.     Fighting prohibited.
Sec.
42-77.     Interference with lawful occupation prohibited.
Sec.
42-78.     Obstructing traffic prohibited.
Sec.
42-79.     Public intoxication prohibited.
Sec.
42-80.     Inciting riot prohibited.
Sec.
42-81.     Damaging public property.
Sec.
42-82.     Loud noises prohibited.
Sec.
42-83.     Obscene language and conduct prohibited.
Sec.
42-84.     Urinating or defecating in public.
Sec.
42-85.    Drug paraphernalia - definition.
Sec.
42-86.    Possession of drug paraphernalia.
Sec.
42-87.    Sale of drug paraphernalia.
Sec.
42-88.    Exceptions.
Sec.
42-89.    Use and possession of marihuana.
Sec.
42-90.    Sale to and use and possession of tobacco by minor - definitions.
Sec.
42-91.    Sale of tobacco products to minors; prohibition, penalty, affirmative
defense, rebuttal.
Sec.
42-92.    Use or possession of tobacco products by minor in public.
Sec.
42-93.    Possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor by underage person.
Sec.
42-94.    Open alcohol prohibited.
Sec.
42-95.   Deferral of proceedings and probation in cases of no previous
conviction under section 42-89.
Sec.
42-96.   Reserved.
Sec.
42-97.   Disturbing the peace by loud or boisterous conduct.
Sec.
42-98.   Assaulting or assaulting and battering any individual.
Secs. 42-99 – 42-115. Reserved.
Article IV. Offenses Involving Public Safety
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
42-116.     Hunting game limited.
Secs. 42-117--42-135. Reserved.
Division 2. Weapons
Sec.
42-136.     Use regulated.
Sec.
42-137.     Sale to minors prohibited.
Secs. 42-138--42-170. Reserved.
Article V. Schools
Sec.
42-171.     Property destruction.
Sec.
42-172.     Disturbing the peace.
Sec.
42-173.     Obscene language or conduct.
Sec.
42-174.     Refusal to leave upon request.
Sec.
42-175.     Trespass.
Sec.
42-176.     Driving on school property.
Sec. 42-177 – 42-200. Reserved.
Article VI. Graffiti Offenses
Sec.
42-201.   Definitions.
Sec.
42-202.   Prohibited acts.
Sec.
42-203.   Accessibility to graffiti implements.
Sec.
42-204.   Rewards and reimbursements for information.
Sec.
42-205.   Graffiti as nuisance.
Sec.
42-206.   Removal of graffiti by perpetrator.
Sec.
42-207.   Right of city to remove.
Sec.
42-208.   Penalties.
 
Article VII. False Summoning and Obstructing
Sec.
42-301.   Prohibited acts.
Sec.
42-302.   Rewards and reimbursements for information.
Sec.
42-203.   Penalties.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 42-1. Violations declared misdemeanor.
Except as otherwise stated in this chapter or as otherwise provided by state
law, violations of this chapter are a misdemeanor.
Sec. 42-2. Resistance and obstruction of city officials prohibited.
(a)   No person shall willfully obstruct, resist or oppose the performance of
duties by someone the person knows or reasonably should have known to be a city
police or any other authorized official of the city.
(b)   As used in this section, "obstruct" includes the use or threatened use of
physical interference or force or knowing failure to comply with a lawful
command.
(Ord. No. 88, § 3, 3-18-1974; Ord. No. 88-A-91, § 2(3(g)), 8-5-1991; Ord. No.
168, 9-2-2008)
State Law References: Obstruction of police officer, MCL 750.479.
Sec. 42-3. Failure to disperse prohibited.
No person shall willfully in a public place fail to obey a lawful order to
disperse by a police officer, when known to be such an official, where one or
more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate
vicinity and the public health and safety is imminently threatened.
(Ord. No. 88, § 3, 3-18-1974; Ord. No. 88-A-91, § 2(3(l)), 8-5-1991)
Editor's Note: of police signal, MCL 750.479a.
Sec. 42-4. Threatening language prohibited.
No person shall willfully in a public place address threats to any member of
the city police department, any other authorized official of the city who is
engaged in the lawful performance of their duties, or any other person when
such words have a direct tendency to cause acts of violence.
(Ord. No. 88, § 3, 3-18-1974; Ord. No. 88-A-91, § 2(3(i)), 8-5-1991)
Sec. 42-5. Violent, tumultuous acts prohibited.
No person shall willfully in a public place commit an act in a violent and
tumultuous manner toward another whereby that other is placed in danger of his
life, limb or health.
(Ord. No. 88, § 3, 3-18-1974; Ord. No. 88-A-91, § 2(3(a)), 8-5-1991)
Sec. 42-6. Curfew for minors.
(a)   No minor under the age of 12 years shall loiter, idle or congregate in or
on any public street, highway, alley or park, or in or on any motor vehicle on
any public street, highway, alley or park, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. unless the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some
adult over the age of 21 years delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany
the child.
(b)   No minor under the age of 18 shall loiter, idle or congregate in or on
any public street, highway, alley or park, or in or on any motor vehicle on any
public street, highway, alley or park, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
6:00 a.m., immediately following, except where the minor is accompanied by a
parent or guardian, or some adult over the age of 21 years delegated by the
parent or guardian to accompany the minor child, or where the minor is upon an
errand or other legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian.
(c)   Any person of the age of 17 years or over assisting, aiding, abetting,
allowing, permitting or encouraging any minor under the age of 18 years to
violate the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section is also
guilty of a violation of this section.
(d)   Violations of this section are municipal civil infractions.
(Ord. No. 69, §§ 1--3, 7-20-1964)
State Law References: Curfew, MCL 722.751 et seq.
Sec. 42-7. False information to police officer.
No person shall furnish to a peace officer false, forged, fictitious, or
misleading verbal or written information either identifying the person as
another person or falsely misrepresenting a material fact about the person
including, but not limited to, the person's date of birth or correct spelling
of their full name, if the person is detained for a violation of the law, is
temporarily detained for the purpose of issuance of an appearance ticket or
civil infraction citation, or has an outstanding warrant for their arrest.
State Law References: Unlawful use void license, MCL 257.324(1)(h).
Secs. 42-8--42-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY RIGHTS
Sec. 42-41. Destruction of property prohibited.
(a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, injure or damage any
electrical light, equipment, or any livestock, animal or poultry of another or
any real or personal property of any person within the city; however, this
section shall not apply to any officer acting in the discharge of his duty.
(b)   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the
custody or charge of any minor under the age of 16 years to knowingly permit
such minor to violate any of the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 52-A-95, §§ 4, 6, 12-18-1995)
State Law References: Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq.
Sec. 42-42. Violent, tumultuous acts prohibited.
No person shall willfully in a public place commit an act in a violent and
tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed
in danger of being destroyed or damaged.
(Ord. No. 88, § 3, 3-18-1974; Ord. No. 88-A-91, § 2(3(b)), 8-5-1991)
State Law References: Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq.
Sec. 42-43. Trespassing prohibited.
No person shall willfully trespass upon the premises of another or unlawfully
remain upon the premises of another without permission or authority of the
lawful occupants or an agent of the occupant.
(Ord. No. 88, § 3, 3-18-1974; Ord. No. 88-A-91, § 2(3(n)), 8-5-1991)
State Law References: Trespass, MCL 750.546 et seq.
Sec. 42-44. Retail fraud.
(a) A person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate
vicinity is guilty of retail fraud:
   (1)   While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and
replaces, conceals, or otherwise misrepresents the price at which property is
offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less
than the price at which the property is offered for sale, if the resulting
difference in price is less than $200.00.
   (2)   While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store that
is offered for sale at a price of less than $200.00.
   (3)   With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or
property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid
for and belongs to the store, if the amount of money, or the value of the
property, obtained or attempted to be obtained is less than $200.00.
(b)   Evidence that the property or money taken or attempted to be taken has a
value equal to or greater than $200.00 shall not be a defense to this offense.
(c)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by jail for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both
jail and a fine.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Sec. 42-45. Larceny.
(a)   A person who commits larceny by stealing any of the following property of
another person is guilty of a crime as provided in this section if the property
stolen has a value of less than $200.00:
   (1)   Money, goods, or chattels.
   (2)   A bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of
exchange or other bill, draft, order, or certificate.
   (3)   A book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due, to become
due, or to be delivered.
   (4)   A deed or writing containing a conveyance of land or other valuable
contract in force.
   (5)   A receipt, release, or defeasance.
   (6)   A writ, process, or public record.
(b)   Evidence that the property or money taken or attempted to be taken has a
value equal to or greater than $200.00 shall not be a defense to this offense.
(c)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by jail for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both
jail and a fine.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Sec. 42-46. Larceny from Motor Vehicle.
(a)   A person who enters or breaks into a motor vehicle, house trailer,
trailer, or semitrailer to steal or unlawfully remove property is guilty of
larceny from a motor vehicle if the value of the property stolen or to be
stolen or removed is less than $200.00.
(b)   Evidence that the property or money taken or attempted to be taken has a
value equal to or greater than $200.00 shall not be a defense to this offense.
(c)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by jail for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both
jail and a fine.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Sec. 42-47. False pretenses with intent to defraud.
(a) A person who, with intent to defraud or cheat and by color of a false token
or writing, by a false or bogus check or other written, printed, or engraved
instrument, by counterfeit coin or metal that is intended to simulate a coin,
or by any other false pretense does one or more of the following is guilty of
the crime of false pretenses, punishable as provided in this section if the
property stolen has a value of less than $200.00:
   (1)   Causes a person to grant, convey, assign, demise, lease, or mortgage
land or an interest in land.
   (2)   Obtains a person's signature on a forged written instrument.
   (3)   Obtains from a person any money or personal property or the use of any
instrument, facility, article, or other valuable thing or service.
   (4)   By means of a false weight or measure obtains a larger amount or
quantity of property than was bargained for.
   (5)   By means of a false weight or measure sells or disposes of a smaller
amount or quantity of property than was bargained for.
(b) Evidence that the property or money taken or attempted to be taken has a
value equal to or greater than $200.00 shall not be a defense to this offense.
(c) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
jail for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both jail
and a fine.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Secs. 42-48--42-75. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER
Sec. 42-76. Fighting prohibited.
No person shall willfully in a public place cause, provoke or engage in any
fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health, or
property of another.
(Ord. No. 88, § 3, 3-18-1974; Ord. No. 88-A-91, § 2(3(c)), 8-5-1991)
Sec. 42-77. Interference with lawful occupation prohibited.
No person shall willfully in a public place interfere with another's pursuit of
a lawful occupation by acts of violence.
(Ord. No. 88, § 3, 3-18-1974; Ord. No. 88-A-91, § 2(3(d)), 8-5-1991)
Sec. 42-78. Obstructing traffic prohibited.
No person shall willfully in a public place obstruct, either singly or together
with other persons, the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to
clear such public way when ordered to do so by city police or other lawful
authority known to be such.
(Ord. No. 88, § 3, 3-18-1974; Ord. No. 88-A-91, § 2(3(e)), 8-5-1991)
Sec. 42-79. Public intoxication prohibited.
No person shall be intoxicated in a public place and either endanger directly
the safety of another person or of property.
(Ord. No. 88, § 3, 3-18-1974; Ord. No. 88-A-91, § 2(3(f)), 8-5-1991; Ord. No.
154, 5-7-2007)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(e); local public
intoxication ordinances, MCL 333.6523.
Sec. 42-80. Inciting riot prohibited.
No person shall willfully in a public place incite, attempt to incite, or be
involved in attempting to incite a riot. This section shall not be construed to
suppress the right to lawful assembly, picketing, public speaking or other
lawful means of expressing public opinion not in contravention of law.
(Ord. No. 88, §§ 3, 4, 3-18-1974; Ord. No. 88-A-91, § 2(3(h)), 8-5-1991)
State Law References: Inciting to riot, MCL 752.542.
Sec. 42-81. Damaging public property.
No person shall willfully damage, befoul or disturb public property or the
property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically
offensive condition.
(Ord. No. 88, § 3, 3-18-1974; Ord. No. 88-A-91, § 2(3(j)), 8-5-1991)
Sec. 42-82. Loud noises prohibited.
No person shall willfully in a public place make or cause to be made any loud,
boisterous and unreasonable noise or disturbance to the annoyance of any other
persons nearby, or near to any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park,
square or common, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed, or the
traveling public annoyed. This section shall not be construed to suppress the
right to lawful assembly, picketing, public speaking or other lawful means of
expressing public opinion not in contravention of law. Violations of this
section are municipal civil infractions.
(Ord. No. 88, §§ 3, 4, 3-18-1974; Ord. No. 88-A-91, § 2(3(k)), 8-5-1991; Ord.
No. 153, 5-7-2007)
Cross References: Noise generally, §
22-31 et seq.
Sec. 42-83. Obscene language and conduct prohibited.
No person shall in a public place use obscene language or engage in obscene
conduct.
(Ord. No. 88, §§ 3, 4, 3-18-1974; Ord. No. 88-A-91, § 2(3(m)), 8-5-1991)
Sec. 42-84. Urinating or defecating in public.
No person shall urinate or defecate in a public place or on the private
property of another open to public view except where a sanitary facility is
provided and used.
Sec. 42-85. Drug paraphernalia - definition.
As used in sections
42-86 through
42-89, "drug paraphernalia" means any equipment, product, material, or
combination of equipment, products, or materials, which is specifically
designed for use in planting; propagating; cultivating; growing; harvesting;
manufacturing; compounding; converting; producing; processing; preparing;
testing; analyzing; packaging; repackaging; storing; containing; concealing;
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance; including, but not limited to, all of the following:
   (1)   An isomerization device specifically designed for use in increasing
the potency of any species of plant which plant is a controlled substance.
   (2)   Testing equipment specifically designed for use in identifying or in
analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a controlled substance.
   (3)   A weight scale or balance specifically designed for use in weighing or
measuring a controlled substance.
   (4)   A diluent or adulterant, including, but not limited to, quinine
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, specifically designed
for use with a controlled substance.
   (5)   A separation gin or sifter specifically designed for use in removing
twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.
   (6)   An object specifically designed manufactured, adapted, or altered for
the use or suggested use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing
marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body.
   (7)   A kit specifically designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, or harvesting any species of plant which is a controlled
substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
   (8)   A kit specifically designed for use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances.
   (9)   A device, commonly known as a cocaine kit, that is specifically
designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled
substances into the human body, and which consists of at least a razor blade or
other sharp cutting object and a mirror, tray, or similar portable flat
surface.
   (10)   A device, commonly known as a bullet, that is specifically designed
to deliver a measured amount of controlled substances to the user.
   (11)   A device, commonly known as a snorter, that is specifically designed
to carry a small amount of controlled substances to the user's nose.
   (12)   A device, commonly known as an automotive safe, that is specifically
designed to carry and conceal a controlled substance in an automobile,
including, but not limited to, a can used for brake fluid, oil, or carburetor
cleaner which contains a compartment for carrying and concealing controlled
substances.
   (13)   A spoon, with or without a chain attached, that has a small diameter
bowl and that is specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing controlled substances into the human body.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Sec. 42-86. Possession of Drug Paraphernalia.
(a)   It is unlawful for any person to possess drug paraphernalia.
(b)   Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a civil
infraction.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Sec. 42-87. Sale of Drug Paraphernalia.
(a)   A person shall not sell or offer for sale drug paraphernalia, knowing
that the drug paraphernalia will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance.
(b)   Before a person is arrested for a violation of subsection (a), the city
attorney shall notify the person in writing, not less than two business days
before the person is to be arrested, that the person is in possession of
specific, defined material that has been determined by the city attorney to be
drug paraphernalia. The notice also shall request that the person refrain from
selling or offering for sale the material and shall state that if the person
complies with the notice, no arrest will be made for a violation of subsection
(a).
(c)   If a person complies with a notice sent under subsection (b), the
compliance is a complete defense for the person against a prosecution under
subsection (a) as long as the compliance continues.
(d)   Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Sec. 42-88. Exceptions.  
Sections
42-86 and
42-87 of the Code of the City of Mason do not apply to any of the following:
   (1)   An object used or possessed by, sold to or offered for sale to, a
person licensed under the Michigan Public Health Code or under the Occupational
Code, 1980 PA 299, MCL 339.101 to 339.2721, or any intern, trainee, apprentice,
or assistant in the profession licensed under the Michigan Public Health Code
or under 1908 PA 299 for use in that profession.
   (2)   An object sold or offered for sale to any hospital, sanitarium,
clinical laboratory, or other health care institution including a penal,
correctional, or juvenile detention facility for use in that institution.
   (3)   An object sold or offered for sale to a dealer in medical, dental,
surgical, or pharmaceutical supplies.
   (4)   Equipment, a product, or material which may be used in the preparation
or smoking of tobacco or smoking herbs other than a controlled substance.
   (5)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device not specifically
designed for a use described in section
82-85.
   (6)   A hypodermic syringe or needle sold or offered for sale for the
purpose of injecting or otherwise treating livestock or other animals.
   (7)   An object sold, offered for sale, or given away by a state or local
governmental agency or by a person specifically authorized by a state or local
governmental agency to prevent the transmission of infectious agents.
   (8)   Any person suffering from diabetes, asthma, or any other medical
condition requiring self-injection.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Sec. 42-89. Use and possession of marihuana.
(a)   No person shall use or have in his/her possession or under his/her
control, marihuana or cannabis as defined by MCL 333.7106 unless pursuant to a
valid prescription or order of a practitioner, or except as otherwise
authorized by article 7 of the Public Health Code.
(b)   A person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Sec. 42-90. Sale to and use and possession of tobacco by minor - definitions. 
As used in sections
42-91 to
42-92 the following definitions apply:
   (1)   Chewing tobacco means loose tobacco or a flat, compressed cake of
tobacco that is inserted into the mouth to be chewed or sucked.
   (2)   Person who sells tobacco products at retail means a person whose
ordinary course of business consists, in whole or in part, of the retail sale
of tobacco products subject to state sales tax.
   (3)   Tobacco snuff means shredded, powdered, or pulverized tobacco that may
be inhaled through the nostrils, chewed, or placed against the gums.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Sec. 42-91. Sale of tobacco products to minors; prohibition, penalty,
affirmative defense, rebuttal.
(a)   A person shall not sell, give, or furnish any cigarette, cigar, chewing
tobacco, tobacco snuff, or tobacco in any other form to a person under 18 years
of age.
(b)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
(c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge pursuant to subsection (a) that
the defendant had in force at the time of arrest and continues to have in force
a written policy to prevent the sale of cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco,
tobacco snuff, and other tobacco products to persons under 18 years of age, and
that the defendant enforced and continues to enforce the policy.
   (1)   A defendant who proposes to offer evidence of the affirmative defense
described in this subsection shall file and serve notice of the defense, in
writing, upon the court and the prosecuting attorney. The notice shall be
served not less than 14 days before the date set for trial.
   (2)   A prosecuting official who proposes to offer testimony to rebut the
affirmative defense shall file and serve a notice of rebuttal, in writing, upon
the court and the defendant. The notice shall be served not less than seven
days before the date set for trial, and shall contain the name and address of
each rebuttal witness.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Sec 42-92. Use or possession of tobacco products by minor in public.
(a)   A person under 18 years of age shall not possess or smoke cigarettes or
cigars; or possess or chew, suck, or inhale chewing tobacco or tobacco snuff;
or possess or use tobacco in any other form, on a public highway, street,
alley, park, or other lands used for public purposes, or in a public place of
business or amusement.
(b)   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007)
Sec 42-93. Possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor by underage person.
(a)   Prohibited; enforcement.  
   (1)   A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor,
consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, possess or attempt to possess
alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as provided in
this section. A minor who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor as set forth in section
42-93(h) of this code.
   (2)   A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has
consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may request the
person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. If the minor does
not consent to a preliminary chemical breath analysis, the analysis shall not
be administered without a court order, but a peace officer may seek to obtain a
court order. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other
acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a civil infraction proceeding
or criminal prosecution to determine whether the minor has consumed or
possessed alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol content.
   (3)   A law enforcement agency, on determining that an individual who is
less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to
722.6, allegedly consumed, possessed, or purchased alcoholic liquor, attempted
to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor, or had any bodily alcohol
content in violation of subsection (1) shall comply with MCL 436.1703(8).
(b)   Exceptions. The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not
apply to the following:
   (1)   A minor who possesses alcoholic liquor during regular working hours
and in the course of his or her employment, if employed by a person licensed
under the Michigan Liquor Control Code, by the liquor control commission, or by
an agent of the commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or
her personal consumption.
   (2)   The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled in a
course offered by an accredited post-secondary educational institution in an
academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member,
if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of
the course.
   (3)   The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection with
religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple.
   (4)   An undercover operation as set forth at MCL 436.1703(15).
   (5)   A minor who has consumed alcoholic liquor and who voluntarily presents
himself of or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for
observation including, but not limited to, medical examination and treatment
for any condition arising from a violation of MCL 750.520b to MCL 750.520g of
the Michigan penal code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.520b to MCL 750.520g, committed
against a minor.
   (6)   A minor who accompanies an individual who meets both of the following
criteria:
      a.   Has consumed alcoholic liquor.
      b.   Voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility of
agency for treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical
examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of MCL
750.520b to MCL 750.520g, committed against a minor.
   (7)   A minor who initiates contact with a peace officer or emergency
medical service personnel for the purpose of obtaining medical assistance for a
legitimate health care concern.
(c) Affirmative defense. In a prosecution for a violation of this section, it
is an affirmative defense that the minor consumed alcoholic liquor in a venue
or location where that consumption is legal.
(d)   Definition of “any bodily alcohol content”. As used in this section any
bodily alcohol content means either of the following:
   (1)   An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood,
per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
   (2)   Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the
consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as
a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony.
(e)   Definition of “emergency medical services personnel”. As used in this
section emergency medical services personnel means that term as defined in
section 20904 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.20904.
(f)   Definition of “health facility or agency”. As used in this section health
facility or agency means that term as defined in section 20106 of the public
health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.20106.
(g)   Definition of “minor”. As used in this section a minor means a person
less than 21 years of age.
(h)   A person who violates section
42-93(a) is responsible for a civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor as
follows and subject to the following fines, penalties and sanctions;
   (1)   For the first violation, the minor is responsible for a civil
infraction and shall be fined not more than $100.00. A court may order a minor
under this subdivision to participate in substance use disorder services as
defined in section 230 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.230, and
designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, and may order the
minor to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and
assessment at his or her own expense as described in MCL 436.1703(5). A minor
may be found responsible or admit responsibility only once under this
subdivision or a corresponding subdivision of state law or another municipal
ordinance.
   (2)   If a violation of section 42-93(a) occurs after 1 prior judgement, the
minor is guilty of a misdemeanor. A misdemeanor under this subsection is
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days if the court finds the
minor violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any
treatment, screening or community service ordered by the court, or failed to
pay any fine for that conviction, a fine of not more than $200.00 or both. A
court may order a minor under this subsection to participate in substance use
disorder services as defined in section 230 of the public health code, 1978 PA
368, MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse
services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse
screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in MCL 436.1703
(5). A person is also subject to sanctions against his or her operator's or
chauffeur's license imposed under state law.
   (3)   If a violation of section
42-93(a) occurs after two or more prior judgments, the minor is guilty of a
misdemeanor. A misdemeanor under this section is punishable by imprisonment for
not more than 60 days if the court finds the minor has violated an order of
probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening or
community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that
conviction, by a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, as applicable. A court
may order a minor under this subsection to participate in substance use
disorder services as defined in section 230 of the public health code, 1978 PA
368, MCL 333.230, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse
services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse
screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in MCL 436.1703
(5). A person is also subject to sanctions against his or her operator's or
chauffeur's license imposed under state law.
   (4)   If an individual who pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of
section
42-93(a), the court, without entering a judgment of guilt, with the consent of
the accused, may defer further proceedings and place the individual on
probation. The terms and conditions of that probation include, but are not
limited to, the sanctions set forth in section
42-93(h)(3), payment of the costs including any minimum state costs, and the
costs of probation. If a court finds that an individual violated a term or
condition of probation or that the individual is utilizing a corresponding
provision in another court, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt and
proceed as otherwise provided by law. If an individual fulfills the terms and
conditions of probation, the court shall discharge the individual and dismiss
the proceedings. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without
adjudication of guilt and is not a conviction for purposes of this section or
for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon
conviction of a crime. An individual may obtain only one discharge or dismissal
under this section as to an individual or any corresponding provision of the
state law or local ordinance. In accordance with the corresponding provisions
of state law, the court shall maintain a nonpublic record of the matter while
proceedings are deferred and the individual is on probation under this section.
The court shall provide the secretary of state with a record of the plea and
discharge under this section to allow the secretary of state to retain and
disseminate a nonpublic record of a plea and of the discharge and dismissal
under the procedures established for the corresponding state law provision.
   (5)   A misdemeanor violation of section
42-93(a) successfully deferred, discharged and dismissed under section
42-93(h)(4) is considered a prior judgment for the purposes of section
42-93(h)(3).
   (6)   As used in this section, prior judgment means a conviction, juvenile
adjudication, finding of responsibility, or admission of responsibility for any
of the following, whether under a law of this state, a local ordinance
substantially corresponding to a law of this state, a law of the United States
substantially corresponding to a law of this state, or a law of another state
substantially corresponding to a law of this state:
      a.   MCL 436.701, MCL 436.703 or MCL 436.707.
      b.   MCL 257.624a, MCL 257.624b or MCL 257.625.
      c.   MCL 324.80176, MCL 324.81134 or MCL 324.82127.
      d.   MCL 750.167a and MCL 750.237.
(Ord. No. 154, 5-7-2007; Ord. 212, 10-16-2017)
Sec. 42-94. Open alcohol prohibited.
No person shall possess alcoholic liquor in any container other than the
original container or in any container which is open or uncapped or which has a
broken seal while on any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, boulevard, or
public building. Violations of this section are municipal civil infractions.
(Ord. No. 153, 5-7-2007)
Sec. 42-95. Deferral of proceedings and probation in cases of no previous
conviction under section 42-89.
When any person who has not previously been convicted of any offense under
section
42-89 pleads guilty to or is found guilty of a violation of section
42-89 charged as a misdemeanor, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt
and with the consent of the accused, may defer further proceedings and place
him/her on probation upon terms and conditions which terms shall include
substance abuse screening at the cost of the accused. Upon violation of a term
or condition, the court may enter an adjudication of guilty and proceed as
otherwise provided. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions, the court
shall discharge the person and dismiss the proceeding against him/her.
Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of
guilt and is not a conviction for purposes of this section or for purposes of
disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a city
ordinance violation, including the additional penalties imposed for second or
subsequent convictions under section
42-89. There may be only one discharge and dismissal under this section with
respect to any person. The court shall maintain a non-public record of an
arrest and discharge or dismissal for the purpose of showing that a defendant
has once availed himself/herself of the provisions of this section.
(Ord. No. 163, 12-4-2007)
Sec. 42-96. Reserved.
Sec. 42-97. Disturbing the peace by loud or boisterous conduct.
No person shall disturb the public peace and quiet by loud or boisterous
conduct.
(Ord. No. 183, 7-18-2011)
Sec. 42-98. Assaulting or assaulting and battering any individual.
(a)   No person shall assault or assault and batter any individual.
(b)   This section does not apply to:
   (1)   An individual who commits an offense described in MCL 750.81(2).
   (2)   Any assault offense described under state statute that carries
penalties higher than 93 days in jail and/or a fine of $500.00.
   (3)   An individual using necessary reasonable force in compliance with
section 1312 of the revised school code, 1976 PA 451, MCL 380.1312.
(c)   It shall not be a defense to a charge brought under this section that the
defendant committed or intended to commit an offense carrying greater penalties
than 93 days in jail and/or a fine of $500.00.
(d)   A person who violates this section is punishable by 93 days in jail, a
fine of $500.00, or both.
(Ord. No. 184, 7-18-2011)
Secs. 42-99—42-115. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 42-116. Hunting game limited.
(a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or pursue game within the
platted portion of the city; but nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to prohibit the owners and lessees of unplatted land within the city
and their spouses, children and family from hunting on their own premises,
except that the discharge of firearms within 20 rods of a street, highway,
residence or building of another is prohibited.
(b)   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the
custody or charge of any minor to knowingly permit such minor to have in his
possession any firearm, slingshot or airgun or to violate any of the provisions
of this article except when the minor is not in violation of any provisions of
this article and is under the direct supervision of a responsible adult or is
in possession of a firearm in accordance with Part 401 of the Natural Resources
and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451 (MCL 750.234f and MCL 750.235a).
(Ord. No. 52-A-95, §§ 2, 6, 12-18-1995)
State Law References: Authority to prohibit discharge of firearms, MCL
123.1104.
Secs. 42-117--42-135. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
WEAPONS*
*State Law References: Weapons generally, MCL 750.222 et seq.
Sec. 42-136. Use regulated.
(a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to draw, handle or knowingly
brandish, any revolver, pistol or gun in any park, cemetery or city-owned
property.
(b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or fire any revolver,
pistol or gun in any public street, alley, park or other public or private
space, cemetery, or city-owned property.
(c)   This section does not apply to citizens acting in self-defense or peace
officers or members of any duly authorized military organization when acting in
the discharge of their duties. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city
council from granting permission for the maintenance of shooting galleries or
target ranges under suitable regulations for the protection and safety of its
citizens and inhabitants.
(Ord. No. 52-A-95, § 3, 12-18-1995)
State Law References: Authority to prohibit discharge of firearms, MCL
123.1104; brandishing firearm in public, MCL 750.234e.
Sec. 42-137. Sale to minors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or
distribute any slingshot, airgun or other weapon to any minor within the city
who is under the age of 16 years. Violations of this section are municipal
civil infractions.
(Ord. No. 52-A-95, § 5, 12-18-1995; Ord. No. 153, 5-7-2007)
Secs. 42-138--42-170. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. SCHOOLS
Sec. 42-171. Property destruction.
No person shall damage, destroy or deface any public, private or parochial
school building, or any building occupied by any public, private or parochial
school, or the grounds, outbuildings, fences, trees or other appurtenances or
fixtures belonging to such school.
(Ord. No. 124, § 1, 12-7-1992)
State Law References: Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq.
Sec. 42-172. Disturbing the peace.
No person shall willfully or maliciously make or assist in making any noise,
disturbance or improper diversion, by which the peace, quietude or good order
of any class, gathering or other function in any public, private or parochial
school or on the grounds belonging to such school is disturbed.
(Ord. No. 124, § 2, 12-7-1992)
Sec. 42-173. Obscene language or conduct.
No person shall use obscene language or engage in obscene conduct in any
building or on any property adjacent to any building in the city occupied as a
public, private or parochial school.
(Ord. No. 124, § 3, 12-7-1992)
Sec. 42-174. Refusal to leave upon request.
No person shall disregard an order from a school principal, school official,
teacher or any other person designated by the principal to leave immediately
when he is found to be creating a disturbance in any private, public or
parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds.
(Ord. No. 124, § 4, 12-7-1992)
State Law References: Refusal to leave, MCL 750.552.
Sec. 42-175. Trespass.
(a)   No person shall willfully enter upon the lands or premises of any public,
private or parochial school in the city without lawful authority, after having
been forbidden to do so by the principal or the principal's designated agent.
No person, being upon such lands or premises, shall refuse or neglect to depart
upon being requested to do so by the principal or the principal's designated
agent. No person shall enter or remain in any school building without complying
with the directions posted at the building entrance. Failure to comply with
such directions shall be deemed a prima facie violation of this section.
However, this requirement shall not apply to students who are regularly
enrolled at and attending such school, to parents or guardians of such
students, to teachers or to other employees.
(b)   For the purpose of this section, "students who are regularly enrolled at
and attending" does not include students who are expelled or suspended from
such public, private or parochial school.
(Ord. No. 124, § 5, 12-7-1992)
State Law References: Trespass, MCL 750.546 et seq.
Sec. 42-176. Driving on school property.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon any public, private or parochial
school property which has not been designated for vehicular traffic. Violations
of this section are municipal civil infractions.
(Ord. No. 124, § 6, 12-7-1992; Ord. No. 153, 5-7-2007)
Secs. 42-177—42-200. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. GRAFFITI OFFENSES
Sec. 42-201. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
Aerosol paint container means any aerosol container that is adapted or made for
the purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of defacing
property.
Broad-tipped marker means any felt tip indelible marker or similar implement
with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width, is greater
than one-quarter of an inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid that is
not water soluble.
Etching equipment means any tool, device, or substance that can be used to make
permanent marks on any natural or man-made surface.
Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, picture, pictograph,
design, motto, inscription, painting or other defacement that is written,
marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise
affixed to any surface of public or private property by any graffiti implement,
to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner or
occupant of the property, or, despite advance authorization, is otherwise
deemed a public nuisance by the city council.
Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped marker, gum
label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other
device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or man-made
surface.
Paint stick or graffiti stick means any device containing a solid form of
paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied
to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least one-eighth of an inch
in width.
(Ord. No. 177, 10-5-2009)
Sec. 42-202. Prohibited acts.
(a)   Defacement. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface,
destroy or apply graffiti to any natural or man-made surface on any public
property or, without the permission of the owner or occupant, on any private
property. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable as provided in section
1-8 of this code.
(b)   Possession of graffiti implements.
   (1)   By minors at or near school facilities. It shall be unlawful for any
person under the age of 18 years to possess any graffiti implement while on any
school property, grounds, facilities, buildings, or structures, or in areas
immediately adjacent to those specific locations upon public property, or upon
private property without the prior written consent of the owner or occupant of
such private property. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
possession of broad-tipped markers by a minor attending or traveling to or from
a school at which the minor is enrolled if the minor is participating in a
class or sanctioned school activity that formally requires the possession of
broad-tipped markers. The burden of proof in any prosecution for violation of
this section shall be upon the minor student to establish the need to possess a
broad-tipped marker.
   (2)   In designated public places. It shall be unlawful for any person to
possess any graffiti implement while in or upon any public facility, park,
playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or other public building or
structure or while in or within 50 feet of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm
drain, or similar types of infrastructure unless otherwise authorized by the
city.
(c)   Negligent parental supervision. No parent or guardian of any minor under
the age of 18 years shall by negligent supervision, or by failure to exercise
reasonable parental control, suffer, permit or allow such minor to injure,
deface or destroy public property or the private property of another by
graffiti. An adjudication that said minor has violated subsection (a) of this
section shall be prima facie evidence that said parent or guardian failed to
exercise reasonable parental control.
(Ord. No. 177, 10-5-2009)
Sec. 42-203. Accessibility to graffiti implements.
Furnishing to minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, other
than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise
furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise
furnished, any graffiti implement to any person under the age of 18 years
without the written consent of the parents or guardian of the person.
(Ord. No. 177, 10-5-2009)
Sec. 42-204. Rewards and reimbursements for information.
(a)   The city may offer a reward in an amount to be established by resolution
of the city council for information leading to the identification and
apprehension of any person who willfully damages or destroys any public
property by the use of graffiti. In the event of any such damage to public
property, the offender or the parents or legal guardian of any unemancipated
minor shall reimburse the city for any reward paid. In the event of multiple
contributors of information, the reward amount shall be divided by the city in
the manner it shall deem appropriate.
(b)   Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed with the city in the
manner specified by a resolution of the city council.
(c)   No claim for a reward shall be allowed unless the city investigates and
verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that the requirements of this
section have been satisfied.
(Ord. No. 177, 10-5-2009)
Sec. 42-205. Graffiti as nuisance.
(a)   The existence of graffiti on public or private property in violation of
this article is expressly declared to be a public nuisance and, therefore, is
subject to the removal and abatement provisions specified in this article and
sections
2.2(19) and
11.9 of the city charter.
(b)   It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which graffiti has
been applied and any person who may be in possession or who has the right to
possess such property to at all times keep the property clear of graffiti.
(Ord. No. 177, 10-5-2009)
Sec. 42-206. Removal of graffiti by perpetrator.
Any person applying graffiti on public or private property shall have the duty
to remove the graffiti within 24 hours after notice by the city or private
owner of the property involved. Such removal in the case of public property
shall be done in a manner prescribed by the chief of police, the director of
the department of public works, or any additional city department head, as
authorized by the city manager. Any person applying graffiti shall be
responsible for the costs of removal. Failure of any person to remove graffiti
or pay for the removal shall constitute an additional violation of this
article. Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parents or
legal guardian shall also be responsible for such removal or for the costs of
removal.
(Ord. No. 177, 10-5-2009; Ord. 222, § 20, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 42-207. Right of city to remove.
If graffiti is not removed by the perpetrator as required by section
42-206, graffiti shall be removed pursuant to the following provisions:
(a)   Property owner responsibility. It is unlawful for any person who is the
owner or who has primary responsibility for control of property or for repair
or maintenance of property in the city to permit property that is defaced with
graffiti to remain defaced for a period of ten days after service by first
class mail of notice of the defacement. The notice shall contain the following
information:
   (1)   The street address and legal description of the property sufficient
for identification of the property;
   (2)   A statement that the property is a potential graffiti nuisance
property with a concise description of the conditions leading to the finding;
   (3)   A statement that the graffiti must be removed within ten days after
receipt of the notice and that if the graffiti is not abated within that time
the city will declare the property to be a public nuisance, subject to the
abatement procedures in sections
2.2(19), and
11.9 of the city charter; and
   (4)   An information sheet identifying any graffiti removal assistance
programs available through the city and private graffiti removal contractors.
(b)   Exceptions to property owner responsibility. The removal requirements of
subsection (a) above shall not apply if the property owner or responsible party
can demonstrate to the chief of police or city manager that:
   (1)   The property owner or responsible party lacks the financial ability to
remove the defacing graffiti; or
   (2)   The property owner or responsible party has an active program for the
removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part of
that program, in which case it shall be unlawful to permit such property to
remain defaced with graffiti for a period of 15 days after service by first
class mail of notice of the defacement.
(c)   Right of city to remove.
   (1)   Use of public funds. Whenever the city becomes aware or is notified
and determines that graffiti is located on publicly or privately owned property
viewable from a public or quasi-public place, the city shall be authorized to
use public funds for the abatement of the graffiti nuisance, but shall not
authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more
extensive an area than that where the graffiti is located, unless the city
manager, or his designee, determines in writing that a more extensive area is
required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic
disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the property owner or
responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the
more extensive area.
   (2)   Right of entry on private property. Prior to entering upon private
property or property owned by a public entity other than the city for the
purpose of graffiti removal, the city shall attempt to secure the consent of
the property owner or responsible party and a release of the city from
liability for property damage or personal injury. If the property owner or
responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti within the time
specified by this article, or if the city has requested consent to remove or
paint over the offending graffiti and the property owner or responsible party
has refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the city and consistent
with the terms of this section, the city shall commence abatement and cost
recovery proceedings for the graffiti removal according to the provisions
specified below.
(d)   Abatement and cost recovery proceedings.
   (1)   Notice of due process hearing. If the owner has refused consent and
the city intends to proceed with abatement, the city manager, or his designee,
serving as the hearing officer, shall provide the property owner of record and
the party responsible for the maintenance of the property, if a person
different from the owner, not less than 48 hours notice of the city's intent to
hold a due process hearing at which the property owner or responsible party
shall be entitled to present evidence and testimony that the property does not
constitute a public nuisance. Notice shall be served in the same manner as a
citation in a civil action in accordance with section
1-13(7) of the code. If the owner of record cannot be found after a diligent
search, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous
place upon the property for a period of ten days and mailing by first-class
mail to the most current owner of record as shown on the city's tax rolls.
   (2)   Determination of hearing officer. The determination of the hearing
officer after the due process hearing shall be final and not appealable. If,
after the due process hearing, regardless of the attendance of the owner or the
responsible party or their respective agents, the hearing officer determines
that the property contains graffiti viewable from a public or quasi-public
place, the hearing officer shall give written notice in an abatement order
that, unless the graffiti is removed within ten days, the city shall enter upon
the property, cause the removal, painting over (in such color as shall meet
with the approval of the hearing officer), or such other abatement thereof as
the hearing officer determines appropriate, and shall provide the owner with an
accounting of the costs of the abatement on a full cost recovery basis.
   (3)   Abatement effort. Not sooner than the time specified in the order of
the hearing officer, the city manager, or the designee of the city manager,
shall implement the abatement order and shall mail an accounting to the owner
and the responsible party of the costs thereof.
   (4)   Cost hearing. The owner or responsible party may, within ten days
following date of mailing, request a hearing before the hearing officer on the
abatement cost accounting, and appropriate due notice and a due process hearing
shall be extended to the owner or responsible party. If, following the hearing,
or if no hearing is requested, after the implementation of the abatement order,
the total amount set forth in the abatement accounting, or an amount thereof
determined as appropriate by the hearing officer, shall be due and payable to
the city by the owner or responsible party within 30 days.
   (5)   Lien. If all or any portion of the abatement charges remain unpaid
after 30 days, the portion thereof that remains unpaid shall constitute a lien
on the property that was the subject of the abatement effort. The city
treasurer shall cause a notice of lien to be recorded with the Ingham County
Register of Deeds. If any such charges are not paid within six months after the
recording of the lien, the official in charge of the collection shall, prior to
May 1 of each year, certify to the tax assessing officer of the city of the
facts of such delinquency, whereupon the officer shall enter such delinquent
charges upon the next city tax roll as a charge against the premises pursuant
to sections
2.2(19) and
11.9 of the city charter and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as
provided by law for delinquent and unpaid taxes.
   (6)   Suit. Unpaid abatement charges shall also constitute a debt owed to
the city by the owner or the person occupying and controlling the property
which may also be collected by the city by a suit in assumpsit brought in the
name of the city against the owner or person occupying or in control of the
premises, or both.
(Ord. No. 177, 10-5-2009; Ord. 222, § 21, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 42-208. Penalties.
(a)   Fines and imprisonment.  Except as otherwise stated herein, any person
violating this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction
and punished by a fine of $250.00 for the first offense; $500.00 for the second
offense; and $1,000.00 for each subsequent offense and all direct and indirect
costs of the action not to exceed the amount allowed by the Revised Judicature
Act.
   (1)   In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be jointly
and severally liable with the minor for payment of all fines and costs.
   (2)   Failure of the parents or legal guardian to make payment will result
in the filing of a lien on the parents' or legal guardian's property that
includes the fine and administrative costs.
   (3)   Upon an application and finding of indigence, the court may decline to
order fines against the minor, parents or guardian.
(b)   Restitution. In addition to any punishment specified in this section, the
court may order any violator to make restitution to the victim for damages or
loss caused directly or indirectly by the violator's offense in the amount or
manner determined by the court. In the case of a minor, the parents or legal
guardian shall be ordered jointly and severally liable with the minor for
liquidated damages in an amount equal to the cost to restore or repair the
defaced property.
(c)   Community service. In lieu of, or as part of, the penalties specified in
this section, a minor or adult may be required by the court to perform
community service as described by the court based on the following minimum
requirements:
   (1)   The minor or adult shall perform at least 30 hours of community
service.
   (2)   At least one parent or guardian of the minor shall be in attendance a
minimum of 50% of the period of assigned community service.
   (3)   The entire period of community service shall be performed under the
supervision of a community service provider approved by the chief of police.
   (4)   Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the minor or adult to a type
of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most
rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult, including community service that
involves graffiti removal.
(Ord. No. 177, 10-5-2009)
ARTICLE VII. FALSE SUMMONING AND OBSTRUCTING
Sec. 42-301. Prohibited acts.
(a)   False summoning of police or fire department or ambulance. It shall be
unlawful for any person to summon, as a joke or prank or otherwise without any
good reason therefor, by telephone or otherwise, the police or fire department
or any public or private ambulance to go to any address where the service
called for is not needed.
(b)   False alarm fire. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (1)   Raise a false alarm of fire at any gathering or in any public place.
   (2)   Ring any bell or operate any mechanical apparatus, electrical
apparatus, or combination thereof, for the purpose of creating a false alarm of
fire.
   (3)   Raise a false alarm of fire or by telephone or in person.
(c)   Firefighter; obstructing and disobeying.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to, while in the vicinity of a fire or other emergency, willfully
disobey any reasonable order or rule of the officer commanding any fire
department, when the order or rule is given by the commanding officer or
firefighter there present.
(Ord. No. 200, 7-20-2015)
Sec. 42-302. Rewards and reimbursements for information.
(a)   The city may offer a reward in an amount to be established by resolution
of the city council for information leading to the identification and
apprehension of any person who willfully violates this article. In the event of
any such expense to the fire and/or police departments when their services are
not needed, the offender or the parents or legal guardian of any un-emancipated
minor shall reimburse the city for any rewards paid. In the event of multiple
contributors of information, the reward amount shall be divided by the city in
the manner it shall deem appropriate.
(b)   Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed with the city in the
manner specified by a resolution of the city council.
(c)   No claim for reward shall be allowed unless the city investigates and
verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that the requirements of this
section have been satisfied.
(Ord. No. 200, 7-20-2015)
Sec. 42-303. Penalties.
(a)   Fines and imprisonment. Any person violating this article shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days and a
fine of not more than $500.00.
   (1)   In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be jointly
and severally liable with the minor for payment of all fines and costs.
   (2)   Failure of the parents or legal guardian to make payment will result
in the filing of a lien on the parents' or legal guardian's property that
includes the fines and administrative costs.
   (3)   Upon the application and finding of indigence, the court may decline
to order fines against the minor, parents, or guardian.
(b)   Restitution. In addition to any punishment specified in this section, the
court may order any violator to make restitution to the city for the expense of
the fire and/or police departments or to any ambulance provider for their
services that were not needed or for any other damages or loss caused, directly
or indirectly, by the violator's offense in the amount or manner determined by
the court. In the case of a minor, the parents or legal guardian shall be
ordered jointly and severally liable with the minor for liquidated damages in
an amount equal to the cost billed by the city's police and/or fire
departments.
(c)   Community service. In lieu of, or as part of, the penalties specified in
this section, a minor or adult may be required by the court to perform
community service as described by the court based on the following minimum
requirements:
   (1)   The minor or adult shall perform at least 30 hours of community
service.
   (2)   At least one parent or guardian of the minor shall be in attendance a
minimum of 50% of the period assigned to community service.
   (3)   The entire period of community service shall be performed under the
supervision of a community service provider approved by the chief of police. In
the event that the offender violates section 42-301 of this article at a
school, then the community service will be performed at said school. If the
school does not approve said offender to do community service there, then it
shall be performed in accordance with the rest of this section.
   (4)   Reasonable effort shall be made to assign a person who violates
section
42-301 to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the
most rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult.
(Ord. No. 200, 7-20-2015)
Chapters 43--45
RESERVED
Chapter 46
PARKS AND RECREATION*
*Cross References: Environment, ch. 22; natural resources, ch. 38; streets,
sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70.
Article I. In General
Secs. 46-1--46-30. Reserved.
Article II. Use of Parks
Sec.
46-31.     Leaving park when ordered.
Sec.
46-32.     Use of grounds and facilities.
Sec.
46-33.     Prohibited acts.
Sec.
46-34.     Hours of operation.
Sec.
46-35.     Picnic areas and use.
Sec.
46-36.     Other regulations.
Sec.
46-37.     Prohibited motorized vehicles.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 46-1--46-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. USE OF PARKS
Sec. 46-31. Leaving park when ordered.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be ordered to
leave a park. It is a misdemeanor to fail to leave the park when so ordered.
Sec. 46-32. Use of grounds and facilities.
Each person using the public parks and grounds shall clean up all debris and
leave the premises in good order and the facilities in a neat and sanitary
condition.
(Ord. No. 104, § 1, 9-18-1978)
Sec. 46-33. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person using a public park to either perform or
permit to be performed any of the following acts:
   (1)   Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace,
remove or vandalize any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces,
railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or
their parts or appurtenances, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or
permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other
structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal. A violation of this provision is a
misdemeanor.
   (2)   Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in or
adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing
into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will
or may result in the pollution of such waters.
   (3)   Bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes,
paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash. No
such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any
park, or left anywhere on the grounds of a park, but shall be placed in the
proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so
provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.
   (4)   Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act.
   (5)   Commit any assault or battery or engage in fighting. A violation of
this provision is a misdemeanor.
   (6)   Carry, possess or drink any alcoholic beverage.
   (7)   Violate any rule for the use of the park made or approved by the city
manager.
   (8)   Prevent any person from using any park, or any of its facilities, or
interfere with such use in compliance with this article and the rules
applicable to such use.
   (9)   Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any
park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided in this article,
and in compliance with such regulations as are set forth in this article or as
may be adopted.
(Ord. No. 104, § 2, 9-18-1978; Ord. No. 153, 5-7-2007; Ord. 222, § 22, 12-3-
2018)
Sec. 46-34. Hours of operation.
(a)   During the months of May through October, the city parks shall be open
daily to the public during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. In addition,
Hayes Park and Bond Park may remain open until 11:00 p.m. during organized
athletic events sponsored by an area school or other nonprofit sponsoring
organization, provided the organization obtains the written approval of the
city manager and designates a responsible individual who should be present
during the event. No organization shall be granted approval to occupy Hayes
Park or Bond Park after 10:00 p.m. for more than two events per week, except
that approval may be granted for more than two events per week if determined
necessary by the city manager.
(b)   During the months of November through April, the parks shall be opened
daily to the public during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to one-half hour after
sunset; however, the director of the parks and cemeteries may keep open until
10:00 p.m. those parks he may designate for public ice skating or other
organized winter activities sponsored by the city.
(c)   Any section or part of a park may be declared closed to the public by the
director of public works/superintendent at any time and for any interval of
time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals.
(d)   It shall be unlawful for any person (other than city personnel conducting
city business) to occupy or be present in any park during any hours in which
the park is not open to the public.
(e)   The hours of operation for authorized traffic utilizing the portions of
the Hayhoe Riverwalk shall be 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(f)   For the purpose of subsection (e) authorized traffic shall mean walkers,
runners, bicyclers, in-line skaters, and those required to use devices to
assist the disabled.
(Ord. No. 104, § 3, 9-18-1978; Ord. No. 104-A-78, § 1, 12-18-1978; Ord. No.
104-A-97, § 1, 6-16-1997; Ord. No. 160, 5-21-2007; Ord. No. 175, 8-17-2009;
Ord. 222, § 23, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 46-35. Picnic areas and use.
(a)   No person in a park shall picnic or lunch in a place other than one
designated for that purpose. The director of parks and cemeteries shall have
the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to
prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and
convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve
this end.
(b)   No person in a park shall use any portion of the picnic areas or of any
of the buildings or structures in the picnic areas for the purpose of holding
picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area
and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
(Ord. No. 104, § 4, 9-18-1978)
Sec. 46-36. Other regulations.
(a)   Special activities. It shall be unlawful to engage in special activities,
including flying model airplanes, golf practice, ice skating, games and
picnics, except at locations specifically designated for such activities by the
director of parks and cemeteries. Areas for such activities may be reserved by
groups for use at specified times.
(b)   Animals. It shall be unlawful to bring any dangerous animal into any
park, and it shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be in any park unless such
dog is on a leash not more than six feet long.
(c)   Sales. It shall be unlawful for any person, without permit from the city
council, other than employees and officials of the city to vend, sell, peddle
or offer for sale any commodity or article within any park.
(d)   Signs. It shall be unlawful for anyone to paste, glue, tack or otherwise
post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any
person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or
highways or roads adjacent to a park.
(e)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
properly authorized governmental official in pursuit of any official duty.
(Ord. No. 104, § 5, 9-18-1978)
Sec. 46-37. Prohibited motorized vehicles.
It shall be unlawful to drive or park any automobile, motorcycle, motor-driven
cycle or moped, as these terms are defined by the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL
257.1 et seq.), in any park, except on a street, driveway or paved parking lot,
or to park or leave any such vehicle in any place other than one established
for public parking. This prohibition shall not apply to the use of motorized
vehicles by city personnel while engaged in park maintenance.
(Ord. No. 104, § 6, 9-18-1978)
Cross References: Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78.
Chapters 47--49
RESERVED
Chapter 50
PLANNING*
*Cross References: Any ordinance adopting or amending the comprehensive plan
saved from repeal, §
1-12(a)(14); any ordinance pertaining to zoning, including but not limited to
the basic zoning ordinance and ordinances rezoning property, saved from repeal,
§ 1-12(a)(21); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch.
6; environment, ch. 22; floods, ch. 30; natural resources, ch. 38; signs, ch.
58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; subdivisions and other
divisions of land, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; zoning ch.
94.
State Law References: Municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq.
Article I. In General
Secs. 50-1--50-30. Reserved.
Article II. Planning Commission
Sec.
50-31.     Created.
Sec.
50-32.     Terms and qualifications.
Sec.
50-33.     Bylaws, meetings and records.
Sec.
50-34.     Expenditures.
Sec.
50-35.     Functions, duties, master plan.
Sec.
50-36.   Contents of master plan.
Sec.
50-37.   Functions and duties; zoning commission.
Sec.
50-38.   Functions, duties; capital improvements.
Sec.
50-39.   Subdivision review.
Sec.
50-40.   Annual report.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 50-1--50-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PLANNING COMMISSION
Sec. 50-31. Created.
   For the purpose of cooperating with the governments of the United States and
of the state and region, and to promote the comfort, convenience, health,
safety, and general welfare of the city and its environs, a city planning
commission is created with powers and duties as prescribed by the Michigan
Planning Enabling Act, 2008 PA 33, which shall be designated and known as "The
Mason Planning Commission." In general, the planning commission shall have such
lawful powers as may be necessary to enable it to promote local planning and
otherwise carry out the purposes of the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, 2008 PA
33.
(Ord. No. 38-A-95, §§ 2, 3, 12-18-1995; Ord. No. 171, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 260,
2-17-2025)
State Law References: Authority to create planning commission, MCL 125.3811.
Sec. 50-32. Terms and qualifications.
   The planning commission shall consist of nine members who shall be qualified
electors of the city. Each member shall be appointed by the mayor with the
approval of the city council. One member shall be selected from the city
council to serve ex officio. The membership of the planning commission must be
representative of important segments of the community, such as the economic,
governmental, educational, and social development of the city, in accordance
with the major interests of the city, such as agriculture, natural resources,
recreation, education, public health, government, transportation, industry,
housing, and commerce. The membership must also be representative of the entire
territory of the city to the extent practicable. The term of each member shall
be three years, except that the term of an ex officio member shall expire as
follows:
   (1)   If the ex officio member is the mayor, the term shall expire with the
member's term as mayor.
   (2)   If the ex officio member is not the mayor, the term shall expire with
the member's term on the council.
(Ord. No. 38-A-95, § 4, 12-18-1995; Ord. No. 38-A-98, § 1, 2-2-1998; Ord. No.
38-B-98, § 1, 9-8-1998; Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 171, 5-4-2009; Ord.
No. 260, 2-17-2025)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 125.3815.
Sec. 50-33. Bylaws, meetings and records.
   The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month except
when the city manager, or designee, and chair of the commission agree there is
no business for the commission requiring a meeting, but subject to the
requirement that at least four meetings shall be held each calendar year. The
commission shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions,
findings and determinations as minutes in accordance with the Michigan Open
Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the
possession of, or retained by the planning commission in the performance of its
official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with the
Michigan Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 et seq. The planning commission
shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of its business.
(Ord. No. 38-A-95, § 5, 12-18-1995; Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 171, 5-4-
2009; Ord. No. 260, 2-17-2025)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 125.3821.
Sec. 50-34. Expenditures.
   The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts and grants,
shall be within the amounts appropriated for such purposes by the council.
(Ord. No. 38-A-95, § 6, 12-18-1995; Ord. No. 171, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 260, 2-17-
2025)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 125.35.
Sec. 50-35. Functions, duties, master plan.
   The planning commission shall make and approve a master plan as a guide for
the development of the city, including any areas outside of its boundaries
which in the commission's judgment bear relation to the planning of the city.
In the preparation of a master plan, the planning commission shall do all of
the following, as applicable:
   (1)   Make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present
conditions and future growth within the city with due regard to its relation to
neighboring jurisdiction.
   (2)   Consult with representatives of adjacent local units of government in
respect to their planning so that conflicts in master plans and zoning may be
avoided.
   (3)   Cooperate with all departments of the state and federal governments
and other public agencies concerned with programs for economic, social, and
physical development within the city and seek the maximum coordination of the
city's programs with these agencies.
   (4)   In the preparation of the master plan, the planning commission may
meet with other governmental planning commissions or agency staff to
deliberate.
   (5)   If an airport approach plan or airport layout plan has been filed with
the planning commission by the airport manager, the planning commission shall
incorporate the airport approach plan or airport layout plan into any
amendments or revisions to the city master plan and shall receive and consider
comments from the airport manager at or before a public hearing held to
consider any amendment to the zoning ordinance or zoning use district map which
affects property within the airport approach plan or airport layout plan filed
with the city.
   (6)   The planning commission may, by a majority vote of its members, adopt
a sub-plan for a geographic area less than the entire city if, because of the
unique physical characteristics of that area, more intense planning is
necessary for the purposes set forth in section
50-31 and section 35 of the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, 2008 PA 33.
(Ord. No. 38-A-95, § 7, 12-18-1995; Ord. 157, 11-6-2006; Ord. 171, 5-4-2009;
Ord. No. 260, 2-17-2025)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 125.3831 et seq.
Sec. 50-36. Contents of master plan.
   A master plan shall address land use and infrastructure issues and may
project 20 years or more into the future. A master plan shall include maps,
plats, charts, and descriptive, explanatory, and other related matter and shall
show the planning commission's recommendations for the physical development of
the city. A master plan shall also include those of the following subjects that
reasonably can be considered as pertinent to the future development of the
city.
   (1)   A land use plan that consists in part of a classification and
allocation of land for agriculture, residences, commerce, industry, recreation,
ways and grounds, public buildings, schools, soil conservation, forests,
woodlots, open space, wildlife refuges, and other uses and purposes.
   (2)   The general location, character, and extent of streets, railroads,
airports, bicycle paths, pedestrian ways, bridges, waterways, and waterfront
developments; sanitary sewers and water supply systems; facilities for flood
prevention, drainage, pollution prevention, and maintenance of water levels;
and public utilities and structures.
   (3)   Recommendations as to the general character, extent, and layout of
redevelopment or rehabilitation of blighted areas; and the removal, relocation,
widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use, or extension of
streets, grounds, open spaces, buildings, utilities, or other facilities.
   (4)   A zoning plan for various zoning districts controlling the height,
area, bulk, location, and use of buildings and premises. The zoning plan shall
include an explanation of how the land use categories on the future land use
map relate to the districts on the zoning map.
   (5)   Recommendations for implementing any of the master plan's proposals.
   (6)   If a master plan is or includes a master street plan, the means for
implementing the master street plan in cooperation with the county road
commission and the state transportation department shall be specified in the
master street plan in a manner consistent with the respective powers and duties
of and any written agreements between these entities and the city.
(Ord. No. 171, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 260, 2-17-2025)
Sec. 50-37. Functions and duties; zoning commission.
   The planning commission shall have and exercise all those powers and duties
of a zoning commission as provided by Article III of the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act, 2006 PA 110, and such other authority and duties as shall be
detailed and set forth by law.
(Ord. No. 171, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 260, 2-17-2025)
Sec. 50-38. Functions, duties; capital improvements.
   (a)   Construction of streets, squares, parks, public buildings, or other
public way, ground, or open space. A street; square, park, playground, public
way, ground, or other open space; or public building or other structure shall
not be constructed or authorized for construction in an area covered by the
municipal master plan unless the location, character, and extent of the street,
public way, open space, structure, or utility have been submitted to the
planning commission by the city council or other body having jurisdiction over
the authorization or financing of the project and has been approved by the
planning commission. The planning commission shall submit its reasons for
approval or disapproval to the body having jurisdiction. If the planning
commission disapproves, the body having jurisdiction may overrule the planning
commission by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership.
   (b)   Rescission of authorization for opening, widening or extension of
streets or acquisition or enlargement of park or other open space. If the
opening, widening, or extension of a street or the acquisition or enlargement
of any square, park, playground, or other open space has been approved by the
planning commission and authorized by the city council as provided above, the
council shall not rescind its authorization unless the matter has been
resubmitted to the planning commission and the rescission has been approved by
the planning commission. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on
the matter. The planning commission shall submit its reasons for approval or
disapproval of the rescission to the council. If the planning commission
disapproves of the rescission, the council may overrule the planning commission
by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. If the planning
commission fails to act within 63 days after submission of the proposed
rescission to the planning commission, the proposed rescission shall be
considered to be approved by the planning commission.
   (c)   Capital improvements program. To further the desirable future
development of the city under the master plan, the planning commission, after
adoption of a master plan, shall annually prepare a capital improvements
program of public structures and improvements. The capital improvements program
shall show those public structures and improvements, in the general order of
their priority, that in the commission's judgment will be needed or desirable
and can be undertaken within the ensuing six-year period. The capital
improvements program shall be based upon the requirements of the city for all
types of public structures and improvements. Consequently, each agency or
department of the city with authority for public structures or improvements
shall upon request furnish the planning commission with lists, plans, and
estimates of time and cost of those public structures and improvements.
(Ord. No. 171, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 260, 2-17-2025)
State law reference—Similar provisions, MCL 125.3861 et seq.
Sec. 50-39. Subdivision review.
   (a)   The planning commission may recommend to the city council provisions
of an ordinance or rules governing the subdivision of land authorized under
section 105 of the Land Division Act, 1967 PA 288, MCL 560.105.
   (b)   Recommendations for a subdivision ordinance or rule may address plat
design, including the proper arrangement of streets in relation to other
existing or planned streets and to the master plan; adequate and convenient
open spaces for traffic, utilities, access of firefighting apparatus,
recreation, light, and air; and the avoidance of congestion of population,
including minimum width and area of lots. The recommendations may also address
the extent to which streets shall be graded and improved and to which water and
sewer and other utility mains, piping, or other facilities shall be installed
as a condition precedent to the approval of a plat.
   (c)   Before recommending an ordinance or rule described in subsection (a),
the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance
or rule. The planning commission shall give notice of the time and place of the
public hearing not less than 15 days before the hearing by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city.
   (d)   The planning commission shall review and make recommendations on plats
before action thereon by the city council under section 109 et. seq. of the
Land Division Act, 1967 PA 288, MCL 560.112.
(Ord. No. 171, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 260, 2-17-2025)
State law reference—Similar provisions, MCL 125.3861 et seq.
Sec. 50-40. Annual report.
   The planning commission shall make an annual report to the city council
concerning its operations and the status of planning activities, including
recommendations regarding actions by the city council relating to planning and
development.
(Ord. No. 171, 5-4-2009; Ord. No. 260, 2-17-2025)
State law reference—Similar provisions, MCL 125.3819.
Chapter 51
RESERVED
Chapter 52
POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Article I. In General
Sec.
52-1.   Title.
Sec.
52-2.   Findings.
Sec.
52-3.   Purpose.
 
Article II. Definitions
Sec.
52-4.   Definition of terms.
 
Article III. General Provisions
Sec.
52-5   Applicability
Sec.
52-6.   Exemptions.
Sec.
52-7.   Liability.
Sec.
52-8.   Stormwater enforcement: powers and duties of enforcing officials.
 
Article IV. Post Construction Stormwater Management Concept Plan Requirements
(Stormwater Plan)
Sec.
52-9.   Pre-application conference.
Sec.
52-10.   Contents of post construction stormwater management concept plan
(stormwater plan).
Sec.
52-11.   Standards for post construction stormwater management concept plan
(stormwater plan) approval.
Sec.
52-12.   Stormwater management concept plan (stormwater plan) submission.
Sec.
52-13.   Stormwater management plan review procedures.
Sec.
52-14.   Review fees.
Sec.
52-15.   Reserved for future use.
Sec.
52-16.   Revision of stormwater management plan.
Sec.
52-17.   Drains under the jurisdiction of the drain commissioner.
 
Article V. Stormwater Best Management Practices - (BMP) Construction Plans
Sec.
52-18.   Submittal, review and approval procedures requirements.
Sec.
52-19.   As-built certification.
 
Article VI. Engineered Site Grading Plans
Sec.
52-20.   Contents of engineered site grading plans.
Sec.
52-21.   Grading plan review procedures and standards.
 
Article VII. Construction and Maintenance Inspection for Permanent Stormwater
Managment BMPs
Sec.
52-22.   Notice of construction commencement.
Sec.
52-23.   Construction inspections by city or its representatives.
Sec.
52-24.   Maintenance inspections.
 
Article VIII. Performance Guarantees, Easements and Maintenance
Sec.
52-25.   Applicability of requirements.
Sec.
52-26.   Performance guarantees.
Sec.
52-27.   Stormwater management easements.
Sec.
52-28.   Maintenance bond.
Sec.
52-29.   Maintenance agreement.
 
Article IX. Violations and Remedies
Sec.
52-30.   Reserved for future use.
Sec.
52-31.   Sanctions for violations.
Sec.
52-32.   Stop work order.
Sec.
52-33.   Failure to comply; completion.
Sec.
52-34.   Emergency measures.
Sec.
52-35.   Cost recovery for damage to storm drain system.
Sec.
52-36.   Collection of costs; lien.
Sec.
52-37.   Effect of approval on remedies.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 52-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "City of Mason Post Construction Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
Sec. 52-2. Findings.
The city finds that:
   (1)   The constitution and laws of the State of Michigan authorizes local
units of government to provide stormwater management services and systems that
will contribute to the protection and preservation of the public health,
safety, and welfare and to the protection of our natural resources.
   (2)   Water bodies, roadways, structures, and other property within and
downstream of city are at times subjected to flooding.
   (3)   Land development alters the hydrologic response of watersheds, which
may result in increased stormwater runoff rates volumes, and duration,
increased flooding, increased stream channel erosion, and increased sediment
transport and deposition.
   (4)   Stormwater runoff produced as a consequence of land development
contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants.
   (5)   Increases of stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and nonpoint source
pollution have occurred as a result of land development, and have impacted the
water resources of the Grand River Watershed.
   (6)   Increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, and the sediments and
pollutants associated with stormwater runoff from future development projects
within the city will, absent reasonable regulation and control, adversely
affect the city water bodies and water resources, and those of downstream
communities.
   (7)   Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized by the regulation of stormwater runoff from
development.
   (8)   Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil,
thereby decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow.
   (9)   Adopting the standards, criteria and procedures contained in this
chapter and implementing the same will address many of the deleterious effects
of stormwater runoff.
   (10)   Substantial economic losses can result from adverse impacts on the
waters of the city and the watershed.
   (11)   Improper design and construction of stormwater best management
practices (BMPs) can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff thereby
increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation.
   (12)   The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities is necessary in order to control and minimize increases in
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint
source pollution associated with stormwater runoff.
   (13)   The regulation of land development by means of stormwater management
policy and procedures and effective site planning will produce development that
is compatible with the natural functions of the land or an entire watershed and
thereby mitigate the adverse effects of excessive stormwater runoff from
development.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
Sec. 52-3. Purpose.
(a)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater management
requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety,
and welfare of the public residing in the city and the watersheds to which it
drains and to comply with the city's National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit and other applicable federal and state regulations.
(b)   This chapter seeks to meet that purpose by minimizing the negative
impacts of increased stormwater discharges from new land development and
redevelopment through the following objectives:
   (1)   To minimize increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes from
identified land development and redevelopment.
   (2)   To minimize nonpoint source pollution.
   (3)   To minimize the deterioration of existing watercourses, culverts and
bridges, and other structures.
   (4)   To encourage water recharge where geologically favorable conditions
exists.
   (5)   To maintain the ecological integrity of stream channels.
   (6)   To minimize the negative impacts of development on downstream channel
stability.
   (7)   To preserve and protect water supply facilities and water resources by
controlling increased flood discharges, stream erosion, and runoff pollution.
   (8)   To reduce the adverse impact of changing land use on water bodies and,
to that end, this chapter establishes minimum standards to protect water bodies
from degradation resulting from changing land use where storm water management
controls may be insufficient to meet water quantity and quality goals.
   (9)   To ensure that storm drains and stormwater BMPs are adequate to
address stormwater management needs within a proposed development, and for
protecting downstream landowners from flooding and degradation of water
quality. The procedures, standards, and recommendations set forth in this
chapter and thecity's post construction stormwater management guidance manual
(guidance manual) are designed for these purposes.
   (10)   To ensure that all stormwater facilities necessary for a proposed
development will have an appropriate governmental unit responsible in
perpetuity for performing maintenance or; for overseeing the performance of
maintenance by other entities.
   (11)   To facilitate the integration of stormwater management and pollution
control with other ordinances, programs, policies, and the comprehensive plans
of the city.
   (12)   To establish legal authority to carry out all of the inspection and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Sec. 52-4. Definition of terms.
The following terms, phrases, words, and derivatives shall have the meaning
defined below:
Applicant. Any person proposing or implementing the development or
redevelopment of land.
BMP or best management practice. A practice, or combination of practices and
design criteria that comply with the city construction stormwater management
guidance manual, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality's Guidebook
of BMPs for Michigan Watersheds, the Low Impact Development Manual for
Michigan, or equivalent practices and design criteria that accomplish the
purposes of this chapter (including, but not limited to minimizing stormwater
runoff and preventing the discharge of pollutants into stormwater) as
determined by the city and/or, where appropriate, the standards of the Ingham
County drain commissioner.
Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that
conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
Conveyance facility. A storm drain, pipe, swale, or channel.
Designer. The licensed professional engineer, landscape architect or
professional surveyor responsible for the design of the stormwater management
plan.
Detention. A system which is designed to capture stormwater and release it over
a given period of time through an outlet structure at a controlled rate. The
goals of this BMP are to control peak discharge rates and provide gravity
settling of pollutants.
Developed or development. The installation or construction of impervious
surfaces on a development site that require, pursuant to state law or local
ordinance, city approval of a site plan, site condominium, special land use,
planned unit development, rezoning of land, land division approval, private
road approval, or other approvals required for the development of land or the
erection of buildings or structures. Significant alteration of land topography
which increases the rate of water flow or concentration in a manner which
increases the likelihood of soil erosion and flooding; provided, however, that
for the purposes of this article only, developed or development shall not
include the actual construction of, or an addition, extension, or modification
to, an individual single-family or a two-family detached dwelling that disturbs
less than one acre.
Easement. A legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of
private land for conveyance or treatment of stormwater runoff and access to
stormwater practices.
Engineered site grading plan. A sealed drawing or plan and accompanying text
prepared by a designer which shows alterations of topography, alterations of
watercourses, flow directions of stormwater runoff, and proposed stormwater
management and measures, having as its purpose to ensure that the objectives of
this chapter are met.
Erosion and sediment control plan. A plan that is designed to minimize the
accelerated erosion and sedimentation runoff at a site during construction.
Fee in lieu contribution.  A payment of money in place of meeting all or part
of the stormwater performance standards required by this chapter.
Grading. Any stripping, excavating, filling, or stockpiling of soil or any
combination thereof and the land in its excavated or filled condition.
Impervious surface. Surface that does not allow stormwater runoff to slowly
percolate into the soil.
Infiltration. The percolation of water into the ground, expressed in inches per
hour.
Land disturbing activity. Any activity that changes the volume or peak flow
discharge of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the
grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill
materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any
activity that bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any
natural or man-made watercourse.
Maintenance agreement (covenant). A binding agreement that establishes the
terms, measures, and conditions for the maintenance of stormwater systems and
facilities.
MDEQ. Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge
permit. The permit issued to the city by the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources and Environment for point source discharges of stormwater from
municipal separate storm sewer systems.
Nonpoint source pollution. Any source of water pollution that does not meet the
legal definition of "point source" in section 502(14) of the Clean Water Act.
Non-structural measure.  A stormwater control and treatment technique that uses
natural processes, restoration or enhancement of natural systems, or design
approaches to control runoff and/or reduce pollutant levels. Such measures are
used in lieu of or to supplement structural practices on a land development
site.
Offsite facility. All or part of a drainage system that is located partially or
completely off the development site which it serves.
Peak rate of discharge.  The maximum rate of stormwater flow at a particular
location following a storm event, as measured at a given point and time in
cubic feet per second (CFS).
Permanent stormwater BMP. A stormwater best management practice (BMP) that will
be operational after the construction phase of a project and that is designed
to become a permanent part of the site for the purposes of managing stormwater
runoff.
Plan. Written narratives, specifications, drawings, sketches, written
standards, operating procedures, or any combination of these which contain
information pursuant to this chapter.
Post construction stormwater management concept plan (stormwater plan).
Drawings and written information prepared by a designer which describe the way
in which accelerated soil erosion and/or stormwater flows from a particular
site are proposed to be controlled, both during and after construction, having
as its purpose to ensure that the objectives of this chapter are met.
Post construction stormwater management guidance manual. A detailed explanation
of the policies, procedures and design criteria for complying with this
chapter.
Receiving stream or channel. The body of water or conveyance into which
stormwater runoff is discharged.
Recharge. The replenishment of underground water reserves through percolation.
Redevelopment. A change to a previously existing, improved property, including
but not limited to the demolition or building of structures, filling, grading,
paving, or excavating, but excluding ordinary maintenance activities,
remodeling of buildings on the existing footprint, resurfacing of paved areas,
and exterior changes or improvements that do not materially increase or
concentrate stormwater runoff or cause additional nonpoint source pollution.
Responsible party. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock, company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their representatives, agents, or assigns
that is named on a storm water maintenance agreement as responsible for long-
term operation and maintenance of one or more stormwater BMPs.
Retention. A holding system for stormwater, either natural or man-made, which
does not have a direct outlet to adjoining watercourses or wetlands.
Runoff. That part of precipitation, which flows over the land.
Sediment. Mineral or organic particulate matter that has been removed from its
site of origin by the processes of soil erosion, is in suspension in water, or
is being transported.
Stormwater BMP. Any facility, structure, channel, area, process or measure
which serves to control stormwater runoff in accordance with the purposes and
standards of this chapter.
Stream buffer. An area of land at or near a stream bank, wetland, or water body
that has intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological
processes it performs or is otherwise sensitive to changes which may otherwise
result in significant degradation to water quality.
Watercourse. Any natural or manmade waterway or other body of water having
reasonably well defined banks. Rivers, streams, creeks, brooks, and channels,
whether continually or intermittently flowing, as well as lakes and ponds are
watercourses for purposes of stormwater management.
Watershed. An area of land draining to a common outlet otherwise known as a
drainage or catchment area.
Wetlands. As defined by Michigan's wetland statute, Part 303, Wetlands
Protection, of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA
451, as amended.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
ARTICLE III. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 52-5. Applicability.
(a)   This chapter shall be applicable to all land development public or
private, including city projects, (new development and redevelopment),
including but not limited to, site plan, plot plan and plat applications as
well as any grading applications, that meet one or more of the following
criteria unless exempt pursuant to Sec.
52-6:
   (1)   Projects that disturb one acre or more.
   (2)   Projects less than one acre that are part of a larger common plan of
development or sale that would disturb one acre or more.
(b)   The procedures and standards set forth in this chapter and the policies,
procedures, and design data specified in the city's post construction
stormwater management guidance manual (guidance manual) provide the minimum
standards to be adhered to by developers and shall not be construed to limit
the authority of the city to adopt or publish and/or enforce higher standards
as a condition of approval of developments. Copies of the guidance manual shall
be available to the public at the Mason City Hall. This chapter shall be
construed as providing minimum standards and should be construed in conjunction
with the guidance manual. All plans and construction specifications shall be
approved by the city utilities director or the designee of the director, unless
the project involves an established county drain. Projects involving an
established county drain shall adhere to the requirement of the Ingham County
drain commissioner.
(c)   No site plan, plot plan, or plat disturbing one acre or more shall be
approved until that said development or redevelopment meets all of the
following:
   (1)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures consistent with the
requirements of the Ingham County drain commissioner,
   (2)   Requirements for an approved post construction stormwater management
concept plan stormwater plan) as outlined in article IV of this chapter, and
   (3)   Related land development regulations.
(d)   No certificate of occupancy for any building will be issued, unless the
applicant for said certificate shall have obtained a certification of
completion indicating compliance with all applicable grading plans,
specifications, and requirements, this chapter and the guidance manual.
(e)   For an existing retention or detention basin constructed prior to the
effective date of this chapter, an approved stormwater plan must be secured
prior to any significant expansion, repair, or maintenance of said basin.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 52-6. Exemptions.
(a)   Notwithstanding the requirements of Sec.
52-5,a stormwater plan shall not be required for activities protected by the
Right to Farm Act 93 of 1981, as amended.
(b)   The installation or removal of individual manufactured homes within a
manufactured home park. This exemption shall not be construed to apply to the
construction, expansion, or modification of a manufactured home park.
(c)   Plats that have received preliminary plat approval and other developments
with final land use approval prior to the effective date of this chapter, where
such approvals remain in effect.
(d)   Any emergency project that is immediately necessary for the protection of
life, property, or natural resources.
(e)   Linear construction projects, such as pipeline or utility line
installation, that do not result in the installation of any impervious cover,
as determined by the utilities director.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 52-7. Liability.
Any person who undertakes or causes to be undertaken any land development shall
ensure that soil erosion, sedimentation, increased pollutant loads and changed
water flow characteristics resulting from the activity are controlled so as to
minimize pollution of receiving waters, or erosion of channels connecting
thereto. The requirements of this chapter and other applicable city ordinances
are minimum standards and a person's compliance with the same shall not relieve
such person from the duty of enacting all measures necessary to minimize
pollution of receiving waters or such erosion to the maximum extent
practicable.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 52-8. Stormwater enforcement: powers and duties of enforcing officials.
(a)   The utilities director shall administer and enforce this chapter, and may
furnish additional policy, criteria and information including specifications
and standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this
chapter and may provide such information in the form of a guidance manual.
(b)   The guidance manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the
discretion of the city manager and with approval of the MDEQ based on
improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and local maintenance
experience.
(c)   Representatives of the city shall have the right to enter upon any land
for the purposes of making an inspection or acquiring information to determine
whether or not the property conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. 222, § 24, 12-3-2018; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
ARTICLE IV. POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONCEPT
PLAN REQUIREMENTS (STORMWATER PLAN)
Sec. 52-9. Pre-application conference.
A pre-application conference may be held with the city utilities department
prior to the submittal of a stormwater plan and before any alterations to the
land. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to provide information
about the city's regulations, plan submittal requirements, and any additional
requirements imposed on that site due to downstream restrictions.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 52-10. Contents of post construction stormwater management concept plan
(stormwater plan).
(a)   The stormwater management concept plan (stormwater plan) shall utilize to
the maximum extent practicable site planning and design techniques that reduce
runoff rates, volumes, and pollutant loads. Such techniques include, but are
not limited to, minimization and/or disconnection of impervious surfaces;
development design that reduces the rate and volume of runoff; restoration or
enhancement of natural areas such as riparian areas, wetlands, and forests; and
distributed practices that intercept and treat runoff from developed areas.
(b)   The stormwater plan shall be presented as follows:
   (1)   Through plans, illustrations, reports, and calculations, the
stormwater plan shall display the required information specified in the
guidance manual.
   (2)   The stormwater plan must be sufficiently detailed to specify the type,
location, and size of stormwater management facilities, using preliminary
calculations. Detailed construction drawings are not required at the stormwater
plan review stage.
   (3)   If it is proposed to develop a parcel in two or more phases, the
stormwater plan shall be prepared and submitted for the total project.
(c)   Plan preparation. The stormwater plan shall be prepared by a designer in
accordance with the requirements outlined in the city’s post construction
stormwater management guidance manual. Other persons and professionals may
assist in the preparation of the plan. All plans shall be properly sealed.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 52-11. Standards for post construction stormwater management concept plan
(stormwater plan) approval.
(a)   All developments requiring a stormwater plan shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained to prevent flooding, minimize stream channel
impacts, protect water quality, and achieve the purposes of this chapter, as
stated above. The city has adopted performance standards to meet the objectives
of managing the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff from a site as
detailed below and/or in the guidance manual.
(b)   Designers may select any combination of stormwater BMPs which meet the
performance standards provided the selections:
   (1)   Comply with the requirements identified in this chapter and the
guidance manual;
   (2)   Comply with all other local, county, state, or federal requirements;
and
   (3)   Do not conflict with the existing local stormwater management and
watershed plans.
(c)   The particular facilities and measures required on-site shall take into
consideration the natural features, upland areas, wetlands, and watercourses on
the site; the potential for on-site and offsite adverse stormwater impacts,
water pollution, and erosion; and the size of the site.
(d)   The following on-site stormwater management concepts shall be followed:
   (1)   Natural topography and site drainage shall be preserved and site
grading shall be minimized to the maximum extent reasonably achievable
considering the nature of the development.
   (2)   The preferred conveyance strategy is to transport, wherever possible,
untreated and treated runoff in conveyance facilities open to the atmosphere
(e.g. swales, vegetated buffer strips, energy-dissipating structures, etc.),
rather than through enclosed pipes, so as to decrease runoff velocity, allow
for natural infiltration, allow suspended sediment particles to settle, and to
remove pollutants.
   (3)   Watercourses shall not be deepened, widened, dredged, cleared of
vegetation, straightened, stabilized, or otherwise altered without applicable
permits or approvals from the utilities director, relevant county agencies and
the applicable State of Michigan department(s).
   (4)   The following channel protection criteria shall be met. There shall be
no net increase in runoff rate and volume from storm events up to the two-year,
24-hour event from predevelopment conditions. Specific details for compliance
with this requirement are outlined in the guidance manual.
   (5)   The following peak rate/flood control criteria shall be met. The peak
discharge rate from all storms up to the 100-year, 24-hour event shall not be
greater than predevelopment discharge rates. Where the runoff volume is not
increased from the predevelopment condition, the peak rate corresponding to the
same storms is considered controlled. If specific watershed conditions require
additional peak rate control, the city may, in its discretion, upon the
recommendation of its utilities director:
      a.   Restrict the peak discharge from the 100-year, 24 hour event to a
fixed release rate; or
      b.   Require additional runoff volume reduction.
      Specific details for compliance with this requirement are outlined in the
guidance manual.
   (6)   The following water quality criteria shall be met. Water quality
criteria are met when:
      a.   The minimum treatment volume control criteria of one inch of runoff
from the entire site is detained and
      b.   When the following total suspended solids criteria is met:
         1.   A minimum of 80% of total suspended solids has been removed as
compared with uncontrolled runoff, or
         2.   A maximum discharge concentration of TSS not to exceed 80 mg/l is
met.
      If the required minimum TSS levels are not met by the capture of one inch
of runoff from the entire site, then additional treatment methods must be
designed to meet the minimum TSS removal requirements. Specific details for
compliance with this requirement are outlined in the guidance manual.
   (7)   Under certain conditions, the city, upon recommendation by utilities
director, may impose the following additional restrictions on stormwater
discharges:
      a.   Peak discharge may be further restricted when it can be shown that a
probable risk to downstream structures or unique natural areas exists or that
existing severe flooding problems could be negatively impacted.
      b.   Measures may be imposed to protect against ground or surface water
pollution where the nature of the soils or bedrock underlying a stormwater
management structure constitutes substantial risk of contamination, such as
might be the case in limestone formations. Special provisions to be followed in
these cases will be provided by the utilities director.
      c.   Where groundwater yields are very low or where a groundwater supply
already is heavily used, the city may require that the entire volume of the
two-year, 24-hour rainfall event be retained and infiltrated. If substantial
irrigation needs are anticipated, portions of stored stormwater may be reused
for irrigation purposes.
   (8)   Stormwater "credits" for onsite stormwater management may be
considered in accordance with the provisions provided in the guidance manual.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 52-12. Stormwater management concept plan (stormwater plan) submission.
(a)   The stormwater plan shall be submitted to the department of utilities
director for review in accordance with the requirements specified in the
guidance manual, unless site plan review is required, in which case the
applicant need only apply to the planning commission for site plan review
pursuant to Article VII of Chapter 94, Zoning.
(b)   The utilities director shall forward the stormwater plan to the city
engineer for review, unless being reviewed by the planning commission in which
case the zoning and development director shall forward to the city engineer.
(c)   Compliance with the requirements of this chapter does not eliminate the
need for the proprietor to obtain required permits and approvals from county
and state agencies.
(d)   Compliance with the requirements of this chapter does not eliminate the
need for the proprietor to comply with other applicable city ordinances and
regulations.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 52-13. Stormwater management plan review procedures.
(a)   If the proposed plan is not sufficient as originally submitted, the
utilities director, or the designee of the director, shall notify the applicant
in writing, setting forth the reasons for withholding a recommendation for
approval.
(b)   Planning commission review.
   (1)   The planning commission shall apply and incorporate the city utilities
department review and approval of the stormwater plan prior to proceeding with
its formal action on the proposed development or redevelopment.
   (2)   If the planning commission determines that all of the required
information has not been received, the proprietor may request that the matter
be tabled to allow for the submittal of the required information.
   (3)   If all the required information has been received, the planning
commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny approval of the
development/redevelopment and its accompanying stormwater plan.
   (4)   If the stormwater plan is approved, the planning commission shall
require the following as a condition of approval:
      a.   Before approval of the final stormwater BMP construction plans,
copies of all necessary wetland, floodplain, inland lakes and streams, erosion
control or other needed state, federal, or local permits relating to stormwater
management have been provided by the applicant for the city files.
      b.   A satisfactory maintenance agreement in accordance with this chapter
that assures long-term maintenance of all drainage improvements will be in
place before approval of the final plan. Documentation of maintenance agreement
will be supplied to the city utilities department and approved by the utilities
director.
      c.   Before approval of the final stormwater BMP construction plans, the
applicant will post cash or a letter of credit in an amount not less than 10%
of the cost of the stormwater facilities for projects of less than $100,000 or
5% of the cost for projects over $100,000. This maintenance guarantee will be
held for one year after the date of completion of construction and final
inspection of the stormwater facilities, or until construction on all phases in
the development are completed, whichever time period is longer (see Sec.
52-28).
      d.   This deposit will be returned to the applicant (in the case of cash)
or allowed to expire (in the case of a letter of credit), as provided above,
provided all stormwater facilities are clean, unobstructed, and in good working
order, as determined by the utilities director.
      e.   Electronic files (in AutoCAD and pdf format) of the as-built storm
drains and stormwater BMPs will be submitted by the applicant or his/her
engineer to the city utilities department along with the final plan for
existing systems, or upon completion of system construction for new systems.
      f.   Complete development agreements (including deed restrictions) must
be submitted for the city review and approval prior to recording.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 52-14. Review fees.
The city council shall establish and from time to time may revise application
fees and escrow requirements by resolution. Fees and escrow account payments
shall be sufficient to cover administrative and technical review costs
anticipated to be incurred by the city including the costs of on-site
inspections.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
Sec. 52-15. Reserved for future use.
Sec. 52-16. Revision of stormwater management plan.
(a)   If it becomes necessary to alter a development or earth change proposal
after the stormwater plan has been approved, a revised stormwater plan must be
submitted, reviewed, and approved in accordance with the procedure set forth
above. All requirements and standards for a stormwater plan shall apply.
(b)   If the site plan, subdivision plat, or other earth change plan is
revised, then the stormwater management concept plan shall also be revised and
reviewed by the city utilities department and/or planning commission to ensure
continued compliance with all other applicable ordinances.
(c)   A minor change in the post construction stormwater management plan may be
approved administratively by the utilities director or the director's designee.
For purposes of this section, a minor change" shall mean a revision that does
not relate to the function or intent of applicable standards.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 52-17. Drains under the jurisdiction of the drain commissioner.
(a)   Drainage districts will not be altered when designing development
drainage, except as provided under Sections 425 or 433 of Act 40, Public Act
1956 as amended.
(b)   Existing county drain easements will be indicated on the stormwater plan
as well as the final stormwater bmp construction plans and will be designated
as "Ingham County Drain". County drain easements prior to 1956 were not
required by statute to be recorded immediately; therefore, it may be necessary
to check the permanent records of the drain office to see if a drain easement
is in existence on the subject property.
(c)   A permit will be obtained from the Ingham County drain commissioner's
office prior to discharging into, tapping or crossing any county drain. The
permit must be obtained prior to final plan approval.
(d)   Proposed relocations of county drains will be processed through the
office of the drain commissioner.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
ARTICLE V. STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES -
(BMP) CONSTRUCTION PLANS
Sec. 52-18. Submittal, review and approval procedures requirements.
(a)   The applicant will submit five copies of the stormwater BMP construction
plans with a letter of transmittal to the city utilities department with the
final site plan for the development/redevelopment.
(b)   The stormwater BMP construction plan submittal shall contain a completed
application form provided by the city; the fee required by Sec.
52-14; stormwater BMP construction plans that satisfy the requirements of this
section and the city’s post construction stormwater management guidance manual
(guidance manual); a stormwater maintenance plan; and a certification stating
that all requirements of the approved plan will be complied with. Failure of
the owner to demonstrate that the project meets these requirements, as
determined by the city, shall be reason to deny approval of the stormwater BMP
construction plans.
(c)   The city engineer shall check the stormwater BMP construction plans for
consistency with the post construction stormwater management concept plan
(stormwater plan) and may require a revised stormwater plan if substantive
changes in the site development proposal have been made.
(d)   The grading and soil erosion sedimentation control permit shall be
obtained from the appropriate jurisdiction.
(e)   The stormwater BMP construction plans shall be prepared in accordance
with the provisions provided in this chapter.
(f)   Construction drawings and engineering specifications shall be subject to
review and approval by the city utilities department in order to ensure that
the construction plan conforms with the approved stormwater plan; that adequate
storm drainage will be provided; that the proposed stormwater management system
provides adequately for water quantity and quality management; and to ensure
protection of property owners and watercourses both within the proposed
development and downstream.
(g)   The following information is required to be submitted where applicable:
   (1)   A grading and soil erosion permit under " The Michigan Soil Erosion
and Sedimentation Control Act", P.A. 451, Part 91 Public Acts of 1994 as
amended, will be obtained from the Ingham County drain commissioner prior to
any construction.
   (2)   For developments that will result in disturbance of five or more acres
of land, a complete notice of coverage must be submitted to the Michigan
department of environmental quality, water bureau, to have the discharge deemed
authorized under a national pollutant discharge elimination system permit.
   (3)   The applicant will make arrangements acceptable to the city utilities
department for inspection during construction and for final verification of the
construction by the designer and the city engineer prior to approving
certificate of occupancy.
   (4)   Review of final construction plans by the city utilities department
and the city engineer will not proceed until site plan approval has been
granted.
   (5)   Approval of the stormwater BMP construction plans by the city is valid
for one calendar year. If an extension beyond this period is needed, the
applicant will submit a written request to the city for an extension. The city
may grant one-year extensions of the approval, and may require updated or
additional information if needed. City action under this provision may be taken
administratively provided that no changes to the stormwater BMP construction
plans and/or standards have occurred. In the event one or more such changes
have occurred, city action under this provision shall be taken by the final
reviewing body. Financial guarantees pursuant to Sec.
52-13(b)(4) and deposits shall remain in place during all such extension
periods.
   (6)   For site condominiums, complete master deed documents (including
"exhibits" drawings) must be submitted for the city’s review and approval prior
to recording.
(h)   No substantive changes shall be made to an approved stormwater BMP
construction plan without review and written approval by the city. The city
utilities department may request additional data with a plan amendment as may
be necessary for a complete review of the stormwater BMP construction plan and
to ensure that changes to the plan will comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
(i)   The stormwater BMP construction plans shall be prepared by a designer and
must be signed by the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify that
the design of all stormwater BMPs meet the requirements of this chapter.
(j)   The owner shall agree that all land clearing, construction, land
development and drainage will be done according to the approved stormwater BMP
construction plan.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 52-19. As-built certification.
An as-built certification for stormwater BMPs must be provided to the city
utilities department prior to final approval of the development. The
certification shall include all of the requirements noted in the guidance
manual applicable to the specific project involved.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
ARTICLE VI. ENGINEERED SITE GRADING PLANS.
Sec. 52-20. Contents of engineered site grading plans.
(a)   The engineered site grading and soil erosion and sedimentation control
plans for a development shall be submitted by the owner to the appropriate
county agency.
(b)   In addition to the requirements outlined in the engineered site grading
plan shall include the following information:
   (1)   The general stormwater management scheme for the proposed development
indicating how stormwater management will be provided and where drainage will
outlet.
   (2)   A description of the off-site outlet and evidence of its adequacy. If
no adequate watercourse exists to effectively handle a concentrated flow of
water from the proposed development, discharge will be reduced to sheet flow
prior to exiting the site, and shall not exceed the allowable outlet rate
defined in the engineering design standards. Additional volume controls may be
required in such cases and/or acquisition of rights-of-way from downstream
property owners receiving the stormwater flow.
   (3)   Identification of any on-site and/or off-site stormwater management
facilities and appropriate easements, granted to the entity that will be
responsible for future maintenance.
   (4)   Any drainage originating outside of the development limits that flows
onto or across the development. (In general, drainage from off-site shall not
be passed through on-site stormwater BMPs).
   (5)   Any natural watercourses, the city and county drains that traverse or
about the property.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
Sec. 52-21. Grading plan review procedures and standards.
(a)   The following standards shall be met by the applicant:
   (1)   The increased volume of water discharged from a development shall not
create adverse impacts to downstream property owners, wetlands and watercourses
(e.g., flooding; excessive soil saturation; crop damage; erosion; degradation
in water quality or habitat).
   (2)   Natural topography and site drainage shall be preserved and site
grading shall be minimized to the maximum extent reasonably achievable
considering the nature of the development.
   (3)   Watercourses shall not be deepened, widened, dredged, cleared of
vegetation, straightened, stabilized, or otherwise altered without applicable
permits or approvals from the city, relevant county agencies and the applicable
state department(s).
(b)   Review procedures.
   (1)   Engineered site grading plans shall be subject to review and approval
by the utilities director or his/her designee(s) to assure compliance with this
chapter.
   (2)   Engineered site grading plans shall be reviewed and approved by the
utilities director or his/her designee prior to the issuance of a building
permit.
   (3)   Construction plans shall be reviewed by the department of public works
to ensure that the construction plan conforms to the approved post construction
stormwater management concept plan.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
ARTICLE VII. CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE INSPECTION
FOR PERMANENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BMPs
Sec. 52-22. Notice of construction commencement.
The applicant must notify the city utilities department before the commencement
of construction. In addition, the applicant must notify the department of
public works in advance of construction of critical components of the
stormwater practices shown on the approved stormwater BMP construction plans.
The city may, at its discretion, issue verbal or written authorization to
proceed with critical construction steps, such as installation of permanent
stormwater BMPs based on stabilization of the drainage area and other factors.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 52-23. Construction inspections by city or its representatives.
The city utilities department or its representatives may conduct periodic
inspections of the stormwater practices shown on the approved stormwater BMP
construction plan, and especially during critical installation and
stabilization steps. All inspections shall be documented in writing. The
inspection shall document any variations or discrepancies from the approved
plan, and the resolution of such issues. Additional information regarding
inspections can be found in the city’s stormwater management guidance manual. A
final inspection by the city is required before any construction performance
bond or guarantee, or portion thereof, shall be released.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 52-24. Maintenance inspections.
The city utilities department or its representatives may conduct periodic
inspections for all stormwater practices constructed as part of the approved
BMP construction plans. All inspections will be documented in writing. The
inspection shall document maintenance and repair needs and discrepancies from
the stormwater maintenance agreement and stormwater maintenance plans. Failure
to list a defect shall not relieve the owner of requirements for compliance
with applicable regulations.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
ARTICLE VIII. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES, EASEMENTS AND MAINTENANCE.
Sec. 52-25. Applicability of requirements.
Requirements of this article concerning performance guarantees, easements, and
maintenance agreements shall apply to owners required to submit a post
construction stormwater management concept plan (stormwater plan) to the city
for review and approval.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
Sec. 52-26. Performance guarantees.
(a)   The applicant shall post an acceptable construction performance bond or
irrevocable letter of credit or cash to guarantee compliance with standard
construction practices and laws, and also with construction requirements of
approved facility specific BMPs. The construction performance bond shall be in
the amount of 100% of the cost of constructing the treatment train or system
components. Required construction performance bonds shall be provided to the
city after the stormwater plan, but prior to the final approval of the
stormwater BMP construction plans and initiation of any earth change.
(b)   After determination by the utilities director that all facilities are
completed in compliance with the approved stormwater plan and the stormwater
BMP construction plans, the posted construction performance bond remaining
shall be released.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 52-27. Stormwater management easements.
(a)   Necessity of easements for on-site stormwater BMPs. Stormwater management
easements shall be provided in a form required by the city and the city
attorney (see guidance manual), and recorded as directed as part of the
approval of the city to assure access for inspections; (1) access to stormwater
BMPs for maintenance purposes; and (2) preservation of primary and secondary
drainageways which are needed to serve stormwater management needs of other
properties.
(b)   Easements for off-site stormwater BMPs. The owner shall obtain easements
assuring use of and access to all areas used for off-site stormwater
management, including undeveloped or undisturbed lands.
(c)   Recording of easements. Easements required by this article shall run with
the land and shall be recorded with the county register of deeds according to
county requirements.
(d)   Recording prior to building permit issuance. The applicant must provide
the city clerk with evidence of the recording of the easement prior to final
subdivision plat or condominium approval or other applicable final construction
approval.
(e)   Right-of-entry. The easements must contain a provision granting the city
and its representatives the right-of-entry for the purposes of conducting
periodic inspections of stormwater BMPs at reasonable times and in a reasonable
manner. In addition, such easements shall be deemed to include the right to
enter a property when the city has a reasonable basis to believe that a
violation of this chapter is occurring or has occurred and to enter when
necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
Sec. 52-28. Maintenance bond.
(a)   A maintenance bond shall be provided to the city.
(b)   The maintenance bond shall be provided for a period of one year after the
date of completion of construction and final inspection of the stormwater
facilities, or until construction on all phases in the development are
completed, whichever time period is longer.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
Sec. 52-29. Maintenance agreement.
(a)   Purpose of maintenance agreement. The purpose of the maintenance
agreement is to provide the means and assurance that maintenance of stormwater
BMPs shall be undertaken.
(b)   Responsible party.
   (1)   The responsible party named in the recorded stormwater maintenance
agreement shall maintain in good condition and promptly repair and restore all
structural and non-structural stormwater BMPs and all necessary access routes
and appurtenances. Such repairs or restoration and maintenance shall be in
accordance with the approved stormwater management design plan, the stormwater
maintenance agreement, and the stormwater maintenance plan.
   (2)   The responsible party shall make records of installation and of all
maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least five years.
These records shall be made available to the city during inspection of the
practice and at other reasonable times upon request.
(c)   Maintenance agreement required.
   (1)   A maintenance agreement shall be submitted to the city, for review by
the utilities director and his/her designee and the city attorney, for all
development, and shall be subject to approval in accordance with the stormwater
plan. A formal maintenance plan shall be included in the maintenance agreement.
   (2)   Maintenance agreements shall be approved by the city manager prior to
final subdivision plat or condominium approval, as applicable, and prior to
construction approval in other cases.
   (3)   A maintenance agreement is not required to be submitted to the city
for drains that will be maintained by the county drain commissioner.
(d)   Maintenance agreement provisions.
   (1)   The maintenance agreement shall include a plan for routine, emergency,
and long-term maintenance of all stormwater BMPs, with a detailed annual
estimated budget for the initial three years, and a clear statement that,
except for maintenance required as a result of an emergency, only future
maintenance activities in accordance with the maintenance agreement plan shall
be permitted without the necessity of securing new permits. Written notice of
the intent to proceed with non-routine maintenance shall be provided by the
party responsible for maintenance to the city utilities department at least 14
days in advance of commencing work. The property owner shall give the city a
certification annually that the required maintenance has been completed.
   (2)   The maintenance agreement shall be binding on all subsequent owners of
land served by the stormwater BMPs and shall be recorded in the office of the
county register of deeds prior to the effectiveness of the approval of the city
manager.
   (3)   If it has been found by the city manager, following notice and an
opportunity to be heard by the property owner, that there has been a material
failure or refusal to undertake maintenance as required under this chapter and/
or as required in the approved maintenance agreement as required hereunder, the
city utilities department shall then be authorized, but not required, to hire
an entity with qualifications and experience in the subject matter to undertake
the monitoring and maintenance as so required, in which event the property
owner shall be obligated to advance or reimburse payment (as determined by the
city) for all costs and expenses associated with such monitoring and
maintenance, together with reasonable administrative fees. The maintenance
agreement required under this chapter shall contain a provision spelling out
this requirement and, if the applicant objects in any respect to such provision
or the underlying rights and obligations, such objection shall be resolved
prior to the commencement of construction of the proposed development on the
property.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016; Ord. 222, § 25, 12-3-2018; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
ARTICLE IX. VIOLATIONS AND REMEDIES
Sec. 52-30. Reserved for future use.
Sec. 52-31. Sanctions for violations.
(a)   Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be responsible
for a municipal civil infraction and subject to a fine for a first offense and
enhanced fines for subsequent offense(s), plus costs, damages, expenses, and
other sanctions authorized by the Mason City Code and Chapter
82-291 and other applicable laws, including, without limitation, equitable
relief. Each day such violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate
offense and shall make the violator liable for the imposition of a fine for
each day. The rights and remedies provided for in this section are cumulative
and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. An admission or
determination of responsibility shall not exempt the offender from compliance
with the requirements of this chapter.
For purposes of this section, subsequent offense means a violation of the
provisions of this chapter committed by the same person within 12 months of a
previous violation of the same provision of this chapter for which said person
admitted responsibility or was adjudicated to be responsible.
The city is authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations to any
person alleged to be violating any provision of this chapter.
(b)   Any person who neglects or fails to comply with a stop work order issued
under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500 per day or imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 93 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, and
such person shall also pay such costs as may be imposed in the discretion of
the court.
(c)   Any person who aids or abets a person in a violation of this chapter
shall be subject to the sanctions provided in this section.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
Sec. 52-32. Stop work order.
(a)   Unless otherwise specified, any person violating any provision of this
chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to a
fine or fines provided by Chapter
82-291, of the Mason City Code, including equitable remedies to enjoin such
conduct.
(b)   Any person who neglects or fails to comply with a stop work notice or
order issued under this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as
provided in Chapter
82-291 of the Mason City Code.
(c)   Any person who aids or abets a person in violation of this chapter shall
be subject to the sanctions provided in this section.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
Sec. 52-33. Failure to comply; completion.
In addition to any other remedies, should any owner fail to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, the city may, after the giving of reasonable notice
and opportunity for compliance, have the necessary work done, and the owner
shall be obligated to promptly reimburse the city for all costs of such work,
and the amount thereof, if unpaid, may be placed as a lien against the property
and collected at the time and by the method available for collection of
property taxes.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
Sec. 52-34. Emergency measures.
When emergency measures are necessary to abate or moderate a nuisance, to
protect public safety, health and welfare, and/or to prevent loss of life,
injury or damage to property, the city is authorized to carry out or arrange
for all such emergency measures, including the obtaining of injunctive relief.
Property owners shall be responsible for the cost of such measures made
necessary as a result of a violation of this chapter, and shall promptly
reimburse the city for all such costs.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
Sec. 52-35. Cost recovery for damage to storm drain system.
A discharger shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city as the result
of causing a discharge that produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage
to, or impairs a storm drain or receiving waters, or violates any of the
provisions of this chapter. Costs include, but are not limited to, those
penalties levied by the Environmental Protection Agency or Michigan Department
of Environmental Quality for violation of an NPDES permit, actual attorney
fees, and other costs and expenses.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
Sec. 52-36. Collection of costs; lien.
Costs incurred by the city and the drain commissioner pursuant to this chapter
shall be a lien on the premises which shall be enforceable in accordance with
Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended from time to time. Any such
charges which are delinquent for six months or more may be certified annually
to the city treasurer who shall enter the lien on the next tax roll against the
premises and the costs shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the
same manner as provided for in the collection of truces assessed upon the roll
and the enforcement of a lien for taxes. In addition to any other lawful
enforcement methods, the city or the drain commissioner shall have all remedies
authorized by Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
Sec. 52-37. Effect of approval on remedies.
The approval or disapproval of any post construction stormwater management
concept plan shall not have any effect on any remedy which may be available to
any person at law or in equity.
(Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
Chapter 53
RESERVED
Chapter 54
SECONDHAND GOODS*
*Cross References: Businesses, ch. 10.
Article I. In General
Secs. 54-1--54-30. Reserved.
Article II. Garage Sales
Sec.
54-31.     Sales regulations.
Sec.
54-32.     Advertising regulations.
Sec.
54-33.     Exceptions.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 54-1--54-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. GARAGE SALES
Sec. 54-31. Sales regulations.
No person shall conduct any garage sale within the city except pursuant to the
following regulations:
   (1)   No more than three garage sales may be conducted at any residential
premises within any one calendar year.
   (2)   No garage sale may be conducted, nor any goods publicly displayed, for
a period of more than 72 consecutive hours.
   (3)   No goods or personal property may be displayed or exhibited in the
front yard of any residence, nor in the side yard, except upon a regularly
constructed driveway.
(Ord. No. 97, § 2, 2-7-1977)
Sec. 54-32. Advertising regulations.
Signs advertising sales shall comply with the regulations listed in chapter 58
of this code.
(Ord. No. 97, § 3, 2-7-1977; Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Sec. 54-33. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following persons or
sales:
   (1)   Persons selling goods pursuant to court order or license to sell.
   (2)   Persons acting in accordance with their duties as public officials.
   (3)   Any person selling or advertising for sale items of personal property
which are each specifically named or described in the advertisement for sale
and which separate items do not exceed five in number.
(Ord. No. 97, § 4, 2-7-1977)
Chapters 55--57
RESERVED
Chapter 58
SIGNS*
*Charter References: Authority to regulate signs, §
2.2(o).
Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; planning, ch. 50.
State Law References: Highway advertising, MCL 252.301 et seq.
Article I. Intent and Purpose
Sec.
58-1.   Intent and purpose.
Sec.
58-2.   Applicability; conduct, premises and persons regulated.
Sec.
58-3.   Signs not regulated by this chapter.
Secs. 58-4—58-35. Reserved.
Article II. Administration and Enforcement*
Division 1. Overview
Sec.
58-36.   Service of notices, orders.
Sec.
58-37.   Failure to comply with chapter, notice, correction period.
Sec.
58-38.   Abatement of prohibited signs.
Sec.
58-39.   Civil remedies.
Secs. 58-40—58-60. Reserved.
Division 2. Permits
Sec.
58-61.   Permit required.
Sec.
58-62.   Application.
Sec.
58-63.   Liability insurance.
Sec.
58-64.   Permit fee.
Secs. 58-65—58-85. Reserved.
Division 3. Board of Appeals, Appeals and Variances
Sec.
58-86.   Board of appeals.
Sec. 58-87—58-125. Reserved.
Article III. Requirements and Restrictions
Sec.
58-126.   Signs prohibited.
Sec.
58-127.   On-premise signs.
Sec.
58-128.   Design and placement standards.
Sec.
58-129.   Off-premise signs.
Sec.
58-130.   Temporary and portable signs.
Sec.
58-131.   Nonconforming signs.
Sec.
58-132.   Discontinuance or abandonment.
__________
   *Charter reference—Authority to regulate signs, §
2.2(o).
   Cross references—Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; planning, ch.
50.
   State law reference—Highway advertising, MCL 252.301 et seq.
ARTICLE I. INTENT AND PURPOSE
Sec. 58-1. Intent and purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to permit such signs as will not, by reason of
their size, location, construction or manner of display, endanger life and
limb, confuse or mislead traffic, obstruct vision necessary for pedestrian and
traffic safety, or otherwise endanger the public morals, health or safety; to
preserve and enhance the community character; to minimize the adverse effect of
signs on nearby public and private property; and further, to regulate such
permitted signs in such a way as to create land use patterns compatible with
other major land use objectives and to prevent such signs from causing
annoyance or disturbance to the citizens and residents of the city.
(Ord. No. 101, § 1, 11-21-1977; Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Sec. 58-2. Applicability; conduct, premises and persons regulated.
This chapter shall apply to all persons owning, occupying or having control or
management of any premises located within the city limits.
(Ord. No. 101, § 2, 11-21-1977; Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Sec. 58-3. Signs not regulated by this chapter.
The following signs are not regulated by the provisions of this chapter:
   (1)   Memorial signs or tablets, name of a building and date of erection
when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other
incombustible material.
   (2)   Signs of governmental agencies and public utilities required in
rendering essential services.
   (3)   The flag, emblem, pennant or insignia of any nation, state, city or
other governmental unit; or of any political, educational, charitable,
philanthropic, civic, professional, religious or like organization when
displayed in connection with a campaign, drive, movement or event sponsored by
such an organization subject to prior notice to the city manager and subject to
such reasonable time, place and manner restrictions as the city manager may
deem necessary to protect the public safety or welfare.
   (4)   Parades, holiday sales by civic groups, merchant sidewalk sales and
similar temporary events utilizing signs when authorized by the city council or
laws of this state.
   (5)   No hunting, no trespassing signs and on-premise directional signs not
exceeding four square feet in area.
   (6)   Any identification, address, or for sale sign affixed to a wall,
mailbox, post, lamp post, or pillar; and which is not larger than two square
feet in sign area; and not for the purpose of advertising a home occupation.
   (7)   Any sign communicating that a business is open, provided the sign area
does not exceed four square feet and contains no advertising matter. Said sign
shall not count against a businesses window or other sign area calculation.
   (8)   Municipal signs required by law, traffic control signs, directional
signs placed in a right-of-way, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger
and other temporary emergency signs.
   (9)   Parking or directional signs not over two square feet in area not
exceeding two per driveway provided the sign contains no advertising matter.
Drive-in businesses may in addition utilize individual signs, not exceeding
three in number, but which shall not together aggregate more than 12 square
feet, and which are necessary in such businesses.
   (10)   Way finding signs for ancillary uses or divisions of an existing use
including automobile repair shops, docking stations, service doors,
instructional boards, or overhead dimensional limits. Each sign shall not
exceed six square feet in area and shall be subject to administrative review
and approval. Said signs shall contain no advertising matter.
   (11)   Historical markers issued and approved by the Michigan Historical
Marker Program of the State Historic Preservation Office describing designation
of an historic site or structure that does not exceed 18 square feet.
   (12)   Signs on public property or in public parks in conjunction with
sporting events, holidays, etc., when said public property has administrative
rules regulating such signage.
(Ord. No. 101, § 14, 11-21-1977; Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007; Ord. 222, § 26, 12-3-
2018)
Secs. 58-4—58-35. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT*
DIVISION 1.
OVERVIEW
Sec. 58-36. Service of notices, orders.
Unless noted otherwise, the service of all notices and orders pursuant to this
chapter shall be by first class mail addressed to the last known place of
residence of the addressee. If any person to whom a notice or order is
addressed cannot be found after diligent effort to do so, service may be had
upon such person by posting a copy of the notice or order in or about the
premises described in the notice or order, or by causing such notice or order
to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city for three
consecutive days.
(Ord. No. 101, § 28, 11-21-1977; Ord. No. 159, 9-17-07)
Sec. 58-37. Failure to comply with chapter, notice, correction period.
(a)   Whenever the zoning official determines that any premises or sign on a
premises fails to comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter,
notice shall be given setting forth the alleged noncompliance and ordering that
said noncompliance must be corrected. This notice shall:
   (1)   Be in writing and served in accordance with section
58-36.
_________
   *Cross reference—Administration, ch. 2.
   (2)   Set forth the alleged violations.
   (3)   Describe the premises where the violations are alleged to exist or to
have been committed.
   (4)   Provide a reasonable time, not to exceed 15 days, for the correction
of any violation alleged, provided that the zoning official may grant an
extension of time such as may be necessary, for good cause shown.
   (5)   State that noncompliance with the order may result in the imposition
of civil and/or criminal penalties provided by law.
(b)   It is unlawful for any person given notice pursuant to this chapter to
fail to either correct the noncompliance or appeal to the sign board of appeals
within the time prescribed by this chapter. If appealed to the board of
appeals, the violation must be corrected within 30 days of a denial of an
appeal.
(Ord. No. 101, § 4, 11-21-1977; Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Sec. 58-38. Abatement of prohibited signs.
If any person fails to comply with an order issued pursuant to section
58-37, the zoning official may cause removal of the sign in noncompliance at
the expense of the property owner or person having the beneficial use of the
property or sign and the cost of abating such nuisance may be assessed against
the property in the manner provided by §
11.9 of the city charter. These procedures are optional and shall not preclude
resorting to other legal remedies for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 101, § 5, 11-21-1977; Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Sec. 58-39. Civil remedies.
Any sign or sign structure erected, used or maintained in violation of this
chapter or in disobedience to any order validly issued by the zoning official
pursuant to this chapter is declared to be a nuisance per se, and the person
owning or maintaining such sign shall be responsible for a municipal civil
infraction punishable as set forth in Section
1-8(d) in chapter 1 of this code.
(Ord. No. 101, § 7, 11-21-1977; Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Secs. 58-40—58-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
PERMITS
Sec. 58-61. Permit required.
Except as provided in section
58-3, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, relocate or replace
within the city any sign without first obtaining a permit from the zoning
official, and making payment of the fee as provided for in this division. No
permit or fee shall be required for the change of copy on any sign designed for
periodic changes, such as message board signs and electric reader boards, or
the incidental change of a sign face, including painted signs, provided there
is no increase of the sign area.
(Ord. No. 101, § 10(a), 11-21-1977; Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Sec. 58-62. Application.
Application for permits required in this division shall be made upon forms
provided by the zoning official and when submitted shall contain or have
attached the following information:
   (1)   Name, address, telephone number and, if applicable, facsimile
telephone number and email address, of the applicant.
   (2)   Location of the building, structure and parcel to which the sign is to
be attached or erected.
   (3)   Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures and
property lines and existing or proposed rights-of-way.
   (4)   Two copies of the following: site plan drawings, sign plans and
specifications, illumination specifications, materials description, and method
of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground.
   (5)   Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the structure as
designed for dead load and wind pressure, if deemed necessary by the zoning
official.
   (6)   Name, address, and telephone number of the person erecting the sign.
   (7)   Evidence of liability insurance as required by section
58-63.
   (8)   Such other information as the zoning official may require to show full
compliance with this chapter and all other applicable laws of the city and this
state.
   (9)   If the applicant is anyone other than the property owner, the request
must be accompanied by a signed letter of authorization from the property
owner.
(Ord. No. 101, § 10(b), 11-21-1977; Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Sec. 58-63. Liability insurance.
(a)   Before a permit is issued for any sign, the applicant shall file with the
zoning official satisfactory evidence that a policy of general liability
insurance with a combined single limit of not less than $1,000,000.00 per
occurrence has been obtained to cover the permitted work.
(b)   Signs less than six feet in height above grade and less than 16 square
feet in sign area are exempt from the provisions for liability insurance for
the purpose of obtaining a sign permit.
(Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Sec. 58-64. Permit fee.
A permit fee shall be paid to the city treasurer for each permit required by
this division according to the rate schedule established by city council
resolution.
(Ord. No. 101, § 10(d), 11-21-1977; Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Secs. 58-65—58-85. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
BOARD OF APPEALS, APPEALS AND VARIANCES
Sec. 58-86. Board of appeals.
The zoning board of appeals as prescribed in Chapter 94, Article XI of this
code shall serve as the board of appeals for hearing and deciding appeals and
considering and granting variances under this chapter. The procedures and
conditions for hearing appeals and granting variances shall be as prescribed in
Chapter 94, Article XI.
(Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007; Ord. No. 241, 3-6-2023)
Secs. 58-87—58-125. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS
Sec. 58-126. Signs prohibited.
The following signs shall not be permitted, erected or maintained in any
district:
   (1)   Any sign or structure which:
      a.   Is structurally unsafe;
      b.   Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment;
      c.   Is not kept in good repair; or
      d.   Is capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come
into contact with it.
   (2)   Any sign which, by reason of its size, location, content, coloring or
manner of illumination, constitutes a traffic hazard or detriment to pedestrian
or traffic safety by obstructing the vision of drivers, or by obstructing or
detracting from the visibility of any traffic sign or control device on public
streets and roadways.
   (3)   Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a door,
window, fire escape or other required exit way.
   (4)   Signs which make use of words such as "Stop," "Look," "Danger" or
other words, phrases, symbols or characters in such a manner as to interfere
with, mislead or confuse traffic.
   (5)   Any sign unlawfully installed, erected or maintained.
   (6)   Any sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted,
service rendered, or a product sold.
   (7)   Any sign or structure encroaching on or projecting into or over a
public right-of-way, street, alley, or sidewalk unless otherwise allowed in
this chapter.
   (8)   Moving or animated signs or signs having flashing red, blue or high
intensity strobe type lighting.
   (9)   Roof signs unless otherwise permitted in this chapter.
   (10)   The use of a motor vehicle, trailer, boat or other surface normally
not a sign when parked and used as an additional advertising sign in
circumvention of the requirements of this chapter.
   (11)   Signs emitting sounds.
   (12)   Off-premise signs, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter.
   (13)   Any sign or other advertising structure depicting or describing
sexual intercourse, specified anatomical areas, or specified sexual activities
as defined in sec.
94-173(h) of this code.
   (14)   Hand painted signs not of a commercial or a non-professional quality.
   (15)   Any sign not expressly permitted in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 101, § 15, 11-21-1977; Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Sec. 58-127. On-premise signs.
(a)   Residential (RS-1, RS-2, RS-3, R2F, MH and RM) and single-family
agricultural (AG) zoning districts.
   (1)   Home occupation signs.  One non-illuminated sign shall be permitted on
the parcel for the purpose of advertising a home occupation. Said sign shall
not exceed four square feet in sign area and shall be a wall sign affixed flat
against a building wall unless the sign is recognized as a historic marker
consistent with section
58-3(11) of this chapter.
   (2)   Farm enterprise signs. A farm enterprise consisting of one or more
contiguous parcels shall be permitted to use the following:
      a.   One freestanding sign for the purpose of identifying or advertising
the farm. Freestanding signs permitted in this subsection shall have a sign
area of not more than 34 square feet, and an overall height of not more than
eight feet.
      b.   Wall signs placed flat against a building for the purpose of
identifying the owner, operator, and/or name of a farm enterprise. Such signs
shall be permitted up to a size equivalent to one and one-half square feet of
sign area for each one lineal foot of wall width.
      c.   Seed plot signs in compliance with section
58-130(9).
   (3)   Housing development signs. Housing developments shall be permitted not
more than two freestanding signs per street entrance. Said signs shall not
exceed 40 square feet in combined sign area, shall not exceed six feet in
height and shall comply with the following:
      a.   Where two freestanding signs are utilized, only one sign face shall
be used per sign.
      b.   Where one freestanding sign is utilized, the sign may have two sign
faces.
   (4)   Institutional signs. Educational institutions, religious institutions,
child care centers, human care facilities, privately owned cemeteries,
privately owned parks, and privately owned golf courses and country clubs shall
be permitted one wall sign and one on-premise freestanding sign in accordance
with the following:
      a.   The sign area of a wall sign shall not exceed one and one-half
square feet for each one lineal foot of wall width.
      b.   A freestanding sign shall have a sign area of not more than 34
square feet and an overall height of not more than eight feet.
(b)   Commercial (C-1 and C-3) zoning districts.
   (1)   Window signs.  Window signs shall be permitted up to a size equivalent
to 30 percent of the total window pane area.
   (2)   Freestanding on-premise signs.
      a.   Number. One freestanding on-premise sign shall be permitted per
parcel. A second on-premise freestanding sign will be permitted if the subject
parcel has frontage on more than one public street, provided there shall not be
more than one sign on any single street.
      b.   Height. The overall height of any freestanding sign, measured from
grade to the highest part of the sign, shall not exceed 20 feet.
      c.   Area. The maximum allowable sign area is 30 square feet.
   (3)   Wall signs.
      a.   Number. One wall sign shall be permitted per each ground level store
front. A second wall sign will be permitted if the subject tenant/owner is
located in a ground level store front and has frontage on more than one public
street, provided there shall not be more than one sign on any single street.
      b.   Area. Wall signs shall be permitted up to a size equivalent to one
and one-half square feet of sign area for each one lineal foot of wall width up
to a maximum of 30 square feet.
      c.   Multi-tenant buildings.
         1.   For ground level store fronts, the allowable sign area for each
individual tenant sign will be determined based on the length of the outside
wall that tenant unit occupies in accordance with the requirements for sign
area in subsection (3)b.
         2.   For tenants without store fronts, including all tenants not
located on the ground floor, one sign per tenant shall be permitted not
exceeding three square feet in sign area and located within 18 inches of the
outside building entry door.
   (4)   Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall be permitted in the C-
1 zoning district only.
      a.   Number. One projecting sign shall be permitted per ground level
business having a distinct and separate storefront. A street level business may
be permitted a second projecting sign, provided the business has storefront
frontage on more than one public street provided there shall not be more than
one sign on any single street.
      b.   Clearance and height. For a projecting sign, including structural
components and ornamentation, there shall be a minimum of eight feet clearance
above a pedestrian walkway and the sign shall not exceed a height of 14 feet
above grade.
      c.   Area and projection. The sign area of a projecting sign shall not
exceed six square feet. No part of a sign, sign structure or ornamentation
shall project farther than three feet from the face of the building.
      d.   Structural and ornamental components. The area of structural and
ornamental components, including brackets, scrolls, polls and finials, shall
not exceed 50 percent of the sign area.
   (5)   Sidewalk signs may be permitted pursuant to section
58-130(7).
   (6)   No business shall have more than three of the five types of signs
listed in this subsection at any given time.
   (7)   This subsection shall not be construed as to prohibit the use of a
single sign by two or more businesses located on the same parcel of land,
provided said sign complies with the standards listed in this section.
(c)   Commercial (C-2) zoning district.
   (1)   Window signs. Window signs shall be permitted up to a size equivalent
to 30 percent of the total window pane area.
   (2)   Freestanding on-premise signs.
      a.   Number. One freestanding on-premise sign shall be permitted per
parcel. A second on-premise freestanding sign will be permitted if the subject
parcel has frontage on more than one public street, provided there shall not be
more than one sign on any single street.
      b.   Height. The overall height of any freestanding sign shall not exceed
20 feet above grade.
      c.   Area. On signs in excess of 30 square feet, the minimum front yard
setback shall be increased by two and one-half feet for each additional five
square feet of sign area or portion thereof.
      d.   Placement.
         1.   Front yard setback. The minimum setback for signs shall be ten
feet from the front property line.
         2.   Side and rear yard setback. The minimum setback for signs shall
be five feet from a side or rear property line.
      e.   Multiple business signs. Two or more businesses located on the same
parcel of land shall be permitted to share a single freestanding sign. Said
sign shall be permitted an additional 30 percent sign area.
      f.   Freestanding on-premise signs shall be exempt from the design and
placement standards of section
58-128.
   (3)   Wall signs.
      a.   Number. One wall sign shall be permitted per ground level store. A
second wall sign will be permitted if the subject tenant/owner is located in a
ground level store front and has frontage on more than one public street,
provided there shall not be more than one sign on any single street.
      b.   Area. Wall signs shall be permitted up to a size equivalent to one
and one-half square feet of sign area for each one lineal foot of wall width.
      c.   Multi-tenant buildings.
         1.   For ground level store fronts, the allowable sign area for each
individual tenant sign will be determined based on the length of the outside
wall that tenant unit occupies in accordance with the requirements of
subsection (3)b.
         2.   For tenants without store fronts, including all tenants not
located on the ground floor, one sign per tenant shall be permitted not
exceeding three square feet in sign area and located within 18 inches of the
outside building entry door.
   (4)   Roof signs.
      a.   Number. One roof sign shall be permitted per building.
      b.   Area. Roof signs shall be permitted up to a size equivalent to one
and one-half square feet of sign area for each one lineal foot of the front
wall width.
      c.   Height. Roof signs shall not exceed 20 feet above grade.
(d)   Manufacturing (M-1 and M-2) zoning districts.
   (1)   Window signs. Window signs shall be permitted up to a size equivalent
to 20 percent of the total window pane area.
   (2)   Freestanding on-premise signs.
      a.   Number. One freestanding on-premise sign shall be permitted per
parcel. A second on-premise freestanding sign will be permitted if the subject
parcel has frontage on more than one public street, provided there shall not be
more than one sign on any single street.
      b.   Height. The overall height of any freestanding sign shall not exceed
20 feet above grade.
      c.   Area. The maximum allowable sign area shall not exceed the
following:
         1.   For signs with an overall height of ten feet or less, 42 square
feet in area.
         2.   For signs with an overall height exceeding ten feet, 24 square
feet in area.
      d.   Multiple business signs. Two or more businesses located on the same
parcel of land shall be permitted to share a single freestanding sign
identifying those individual businesses, provided said sign does not exceed 52
square feet in sign area and ten feet in height above grade.
   (3)   Wall signs.
      a.   Number. One wall sign shall be permitted per ground level store. A
second wall sign will be permitted if the subject tenant/owner is located in a
ground level store front and has frontage on more than one public street,
provided there shall not be more than one sign on any single street.
      b.   Area. Wall signs shall be permitted up to an aggregate size
equivalent to one and one-half square feet of sign area for each one lineal
foot of wall width.
      c.   Multi-tenant buildings.
         1.   For ground level store fronts, the allowable sign area for each
individual tenant sign will be determined based on the length of the outside
wall that tenant unit occupies in accordance with the requirements of
subsection (3)b.
         2.   For tenants without store fronts, including all tenants not
located on the ground floor, one sign per tenant shall be permitted not
exceeding three square feet in sign area and located within 18 inches of the
outside building entry door.
(e)   Office (O-1 and O-2) zoning districts.
   (1)   Freestanding on-premise signs.
      a.   Number. One freestanding on-premise sign shall be permitted per
parcel. A second on-premise freestanding sign will be permitted if the subject
parcel has frontage on more than one public street, provided there shall not be
more than one sign on any single street.
      b.   Height. The overall height of any freestanding sign shall not exceed
five feet above grade.
      c.   Area. The maximum allowable sign area shall not exceed 20 square
feet.
   (2)   Multiple business signs.  Two or more businesses located on the same
parcel of land shall be permitted to share a single freestanding sign
identifying those individual businesses, provided said sign does not exceed 30
square feet in sign area and five feet in height above grade.
   (3)   Wall signs.
      a.   Number. One wall sign shall be permitted per parcel. A second wall
sign will be permitted if the subject parcel has frontage on more than one
public street, provided there shall not be more than one sign on any single
street.
      b.   Area. Wall signs shall be permitted up to a size equivalent to one
and one-half square feet of sign area for each one lineal foot of wall width up
to a maximum of 30 square feet.
      c.   Multi-tenant buildings.
         1.   For ground level store fronts, the allowable sign area for each
individual tenant sign will be determined based on the length of the outside
wall that tenant unit occupies in accordance with the requirements of
subsection (3)b.
         2.   For tenants without store fronts, including all tenants not
located on the ground floor, one sign per tenant shall be permitted not
exceeding three square feet in sign area and located within 18 inches of the
outside building entry door.
(f)   Planned unit development (PUD) zoning district. Sign regulations for the
PUD zoning district shall be determined by applying the sign regulations for
the conventional zoning district classification in which the types of
development and/or land uses are customarily permitted.
(Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Sec. 58-128. Design and placement standards.
On-premise freestanding signs shall comply with the design and placement
requirements listed in this section, unless otherwise exempted in this chapter.
   (1)   Address numbers. The street address number of the parcel shall be
placed on the sign face or sign structure. The individual numbers indicating
the address shall be uniform in style and size and shall be a minimum of three
inches in height. The overall area of the street address number shall not count
against the maximum allowable area of the sign, provided the street address
number does not exceed two square feet.
   (2)   Appearance standards. Signs with a height of ten feet or less shall
comply with the following standards:
      a.   Sign structure. Support for the sign face shall be provided by a
structure consisting of either a continuous base with a width equal to or
greater than that of the sign face, or by two supports placed closer to the
ends than the middle of the sign face. The use of a single pole to support the
sign shall not be permitted.
      b.   Width of structure. The overall width of the sign structure, as
measured between the outermost extremes of the sign structure, shall not exceed
the width of the sign face by more than 50 percent.
      c.   Material. When designing the sign structure, the use of materials
that are complementary and compatible with the building design and the existing
and intended character of the area is encouraged.
   (3)   Illumination. A freestanding sign may be directly or indirectly
illuminated. All indirectly illuminated signs shall be constructed, designed,
installed and maintained so as to concentrate the illumination upon the sign
surface. The light source shall not be visible beyond the property line of the
site or from any public or private road right-of-way.
   (4)   Setback requirements.
      a.   Front yard setback. Freestanding signs with an overall height of ten
feet or less shall be placed not closer than one foot from the road right-of-
way. Signs with an overall height of more than ten feet shall be placed not
closer than 10 feet from the road right-of-way.
      b.   Side and rear yard setback. Freestanding signs shall be placed not
closer than five feet from the side or rear property line.
   (5)   Clear vision area. Freestanding signs shall comply with the clear
vision area described in section 94-172(d)(3) in chapter 94 of this code and
figure
100-103 in chapter 100 of this code.
   (6)   An on-premise and an off-premise sign shall not be permitted together
on the same lot or parcel of land in any zoning district.
(Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Sec. 58-129. Off-premise signs.
Off-premise signs, including billboards, shall be permitted only in the C-
2 General Commercial, M-1 Light Manufacturing and M-2 General Manufacturing
zoning districts, and shall comply with the requirements listed in this
section.
   (1)   Off-premise signs located within 900 feet of a limited access highway
interchange shall comply with the following:
      a.   Number. Not more than one off-premise sign shall be permitted on a
single parcel, provided each off-premise sign shall be spaced a distance of 600
feet from another off-premise sign on the same side of a street or 300 feet
from another off-premise sign on the opposite side of a street. Sign spacing
shall be measured along a line parallel to the right-of-way of said street.
      b.   Height and area. An off-premise sign and its structure shall not
exceed an overall height of 25 feet. The sign area shall not exceed 300 square
feet.
      c.   Placement. An off-premise sign shall be setback at least 35 feet
from a public or private road right-of-way and shall not be closer than 500
feet from the property line of a residentially zoned or used property.
   (2)   Off-premise signs located farther than 900 feet from a limited access
highway interchange shall comply with the following:
      a.   Number. Not more than one off-premise sign shall be permitted on a
single parcel.
      b.   Height and area. An off-premise sign and its structure shall not
exceed an overall height of ten feet. The sign area shall not exceed 40 square
feet.
      c.   Placement. Setback standards shall be consistent with section 58-128
(4).
   (3)   For the purposes of this section, distance to a highway interchange
shall be measured by a straight line drawn from the nearest point of the
interchange right-of-way of an on or off ramp to the farthest point of the
sign.
   (4)   Illumination. Off-premise signs may be directly or indirectly
illuminated. All indirectly illuminated signs shall be constructed, designed,
installed and maintained so as to concentrate the illumination upon the sign
surface. The light source shall not be visible beyond the property line of the
site or from any public or private road right-of-way.
   (5)   Clear vision area. Off-premise signs shall comply with the clear
vision area described in section
94-172(d)(3) in chapter 94 of this code and figure
100-103 in chapter 100 of this code.
   (6)   Nothing contained in this ordinance shall permit a sign or sign
structure that is otherwise prohibited by the State Highway Advertising Act of
1972, 1972 PA 106, or shall require or cause the removal of lawfully erected
signs or sign structures permitted under said act.
(Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Sec. 58-130. Temporary and portable signs.
Temporary and portable signs shall be permitted, provided the requirements of
this section and sections
58-128(2), (3), (4), and (5) are met. A permit and fee shall be required for
temporary and portable signs unless otherwise waived in this section.
   (1)   Residential garage sales.
      a.   No more than two off-premise signs of not more than four square feet
of sign area per face and not taller than four feet above grade shall be
permitted.
      b.   No more than one on-premise sign of not more than four square feet
in sign area per face shall be permitted.
      c.   All signs or posters advertising the sale shall be removed within 24
hours after the sale has ended.
      d.   No off-premise sign shall be placed within a public road right-of-
way or affixed to utility poles, utility structures, or other public property.
No off-premise sign shall be installed on private property without the property
owner's consent.
      e.   All off-premise signs shall comply with the clear vision area
described in section
94-172(d)(3) of chapter 94 of this code and figure
100-103 of chapter 100 of this code.
      f.   No permit or fee shall be required.
   (2)   Sale or lease of real property.
      a.   Parcels used or zoned for single- and two-family residences are
permitted one sign per unit not exceeding six square feet of sign area per sign
face for up to five days after occupancy.
      b.   Multiple family developments are permitted one sign not exceeding
ten square feet of sign area per sign face for up to five days after occupancy.
Multiple family developments utilizing a permanent freestanding sign, as
permitted in section
58-127(a)(3), shall incorporate the notice of advertising, sale, leasing or
vacancy of individual apartments or units into the allowable sign face of said
sign so that only one sign is used for both purposes.
      c.   All other uses are permitted one sign not exceeding 32 square feet
per sign face for up to five days after occupancy.
      d.   A second sign will be permitted if the subject parcel has frontage
on more than one public street, provided there shall not be more than one sign
on any single street.
      e.   Real estate open house signs shall comply with the standards listed
in section
58-130(1).
      f.   No sale or lease of real property signs shall be taller than six
feet above grade.
      g.   No permit or fee shall be required.
   (3)   Building construction.
      a.   Single- and two-family residences are permitted one sign per
construction company not exceeding six square feet in sign area each and not
exceeding an aggregate of 20 square feet.
      b.   Single- and two-family developments are permitted one sign per
entrance per street not exceeding 20 square feet in sign area per sign face and
the sign shall be removed upon the sale of 90 percent of the lots within the
development.
      c.   Multiple family developments are permitted one sign per entrance per
street not exceeding 32 square feet of sign area per sign face and the sign
shall be removed upon first occupancy.
      d.   All other districts are permitted one sign per entrance per street
not to exceed 32 square feet in sign area and the sign shall be removed upon
first occupancy.
      e.   Building construction signs shall not be taller than six feet above
grade.
      f.   No permit or fee shall be required.
   (4)   Political signs. Political signs shall be permitted when not exceeding
12 square feet in sign area per sign, an aggregate of 72 square feet of sign
area per premises, and six feet in height above grade. No permit or fee shall
be required.
   (5)   Commercial, office, and industrial uses. One sign shall be permitted
not exceeding 40 square feet in sign area and 10 feet in height above grade for
up to two periods per year not exceeding 30 days in each period. No permit or
fee shall be required.
   (6)   New businesses. If no permanent signage has yet been installed, a new
business may have a temporary sign located on the premises for up to 60
consecutive calendar days prior to opening, not to exceed five days after
opening. New business signs shall also comply with the standards listed in
section
58-127. No permit or fee shall be required.
   (7)   Sidewalk signs.
      a.   A sidewalk sign must be of A-frame construction with a minimum base
spread of two feet and a maximum height of four feet. A sidewalk sign may not
exceed eight square feet per side.
      b.   One sidewalk sign is permitted per establishment.
      c.   The sidewalk sign must be placed in front of the establishment that
the sign promotes.
      d.   A minimum of four feet of unobstructed sidewalk must remain between
the sidewalk sign and the building.
      e.   A sidewalk sign may not be placed in a way that obstructs pedestrian
circulation, interferes with the opening of doors of parked vehicles, or
interferes with snow removal operations.
      f.   A sidewalk sign may not be illuminated by any means and may not have
any moving parts.
      g.   A sidewalk sign may only be in place during the business hours of
the establishment that the sign promotes.
      h.   The person displaying the sidewalk sign must sign a document that
indemnifies and holds the city harmless from any accidents, damages, or
personal injuries involving the sign.
   (8)    Electronic message signs, shall comply with both of the following:
      a.   The sign shall not utilize any scrolling or moving text or images.
      b.   The message shown on the sign shall remain fixed for a period of not
less than 15 seconds.
      c.    No permit or fee shall be required.
   (9)   Agricultural seed plot signs shall comply with the following:
      a.   Signs shall be permitted for the purpose of advertising an
agricultural seed plot. One freestanding sign shall be permitted for each
distinct seed plot. A second freestanding sign will be permitted if the seed
plot has frontage on more than one public street, provided there shall not be
more than one sign for each distinct seed plot on any single street.
      b.   Each sign shall be permitted a sign area of not more than six square
feet and a height of not more than six feet.
      c.   No permit or fee shall be required.
   (10)   Wind blown devices such as pennants, spinners, streamers, and flags.
Wind blown devices shall be permitted not exceeding 45 days in any 90 day
period. No permit or fee shall be required.
   (11)   Balloons, and inflatable devices. Balloons and inflatable devices
shall not be permitted except during promotional sales which shall not to
exceed 14 days in a 90 day period. No permit or fee shall be required.
(Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Sec. 58-131. Nonconforming signs.
This ordinance is intended to encourage the eventual elimination over time of
signs which do not comply with the ordinance while avoiding any unreasonable
invasion of established property rights. Where a lawful sign exists on the
effective date of this chapter, or an amendment thereof, that is made no longer
permissible under the requirements of this chapter, such sign may be continued
so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   (1)   The sign shall be maintained in good condition.
   (2)   The sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign or be
structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign.
   (3)   Should the sign be damaged by any means to an extent equivalent to
more than 50 percent of the replacement cost at the time of damage, as
determined by the zoning official. Said sign shall be reconstructed only in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Sec. 58-132. Discontinuance or abandonment.
Whenever an activity, business, or use that a sign advertises or relates to has
been discontinued for a period of 90 days or longer, such discontinuance shall
be considered conclusive evidence of an intention to legally abandon the sign.
At the end of this period of abandonment, the sign permit shall become invalid
and the sign shall either be removed or altered to conform with the provisions
of this chapter and a new permit obtained. This section shall not be construed
to prohibit replacement of a sign face for an individual tenant on a sign that
advertises multiple tenants.
(Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Chapter 59
RESERVED
Chapter 60
RESERVED
Chapter 61
RESERVED
Chapter 62
SOLID WASTE*
*Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; environment, ch.
22; natural resources, ch. 38; utilities, ch. 82.
State Law References: Solid waste management, MCL 324.11501 et seq.; solid
waste management programs, MCL 324.11508; hazardous waste management, MCL
324.11101 et seq.
Article I. In General
Secs. 62-1--62-30. Reserved.
Article II. Collection and Disposal
Sec.
62-31.     Definitions.
Sec.
62-32.     Collection by city.
Sec.
62-33.   Collection from structures in excess of four dwelling units.
Sec.
62-34.     Collection supervised by director of public works.
Sec.
62-35.    Precollection practices.
Sec.
62-36.     Storing of refuse.
Sec.
62-37.     Collection practices.
Sec.
62-38.     Fees.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 62-1--62-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL*
*State Law References: Authority to provide garbage disposal system, MCL
123.362, 324.4301.
Sec. 62-31. Definitions.
In this article, "director" means the director of public works of the city.
(Ord. No. 82, § 3, 7-10-1972; Ord. No. 82-A-95, § 1, 12-18-1995; Ord. No. 178,
12-21-2009)
Cross References: Definitions generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 62-32. Collection by city.
(a)   Required. All refuse from buildings with dwelling units, not exceeding
four in number, accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and
disposed of only by a contractor designated by the city. No other person shall
collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the city or dispose of any
refuse except in the manner as set forth in this section.
(b)   Refuse collection. The collection of refuse by the city shall be confined
to residential premises not exceeding four dwelling units. The city shall
contract with one licensed hauler, who shall exclusively collect refuse from
the dwellings.
(c)   Rubbish collection. This article shall not prohibit other licensed
collectors from collecting rubbish within the city nor prohibit the actual
producers of rubbish, or the owner of the premises upon which rubbish has
accumulated from personally collecting, conveying and disposing of such
rubbish, provided such persons dispose of such rubbish in an authorized and
approved sanitary landfill.
(d)   Other refuse collection. This article shall not prohibit licensed haulers
from collecting refuse and rubbish from premises containing in excess of four
dwelling units, or from trailer parks, commercial, industrial or institutional
businesses, provided that such disposal of refuse and rubbish is in an approved
sanitary landfill and does not violate the provisions of this chapter and the
regulations issued under this chapter.
(Ord. No. 82, § 3, 7-10-1972; Ord. No. 178, 12-21-2009)
Sec. 62-33. Collection from structures in excess of four dwelling units.
The owner and/or person in control of premises containing in excess of four
dwelling units shall provide or employ a refuse collection service which
collects refuse on at least a weekly basis, or show a receipt evidencing the
proper disposal of refuse by the owner or person in control of the premises
within the previous week. The failure of the owner and/or person in control of
the premises to produce such evidence within seven days, shall constitute in
evidence a presumption that the refuse is not being disposed of in accordance
with this section. Receptacles for the temporary storage of refuse shall be in
accordance with Section
94-173(b).
(Ord. No. 178, 12-21-2009)
Sec. 62-34. Collection supervised by director of public works.
(a)   Authority. All refuse accumulated in the city from a dwelling unit shall
be carted, conveyed and disposed of by a licensed contractor under contract
with the city and under the supervision of the director of public works. The
director shall have the authority to make regulations concerning the days of
collection, type and location of waste containers, and such other matters
pertaining to the collection, conveyance and disposal as he shall find
necessary, and to change and modify the regulations, after public notice in a
legal newspaper, provided that such regulations are not contrary to the
provisions of this article.
(b)   Appeals. Any person aggrieved by regulation of the director shall have
the right to appeal to the city manager, who shall have the authority to
confirm, modify or revoke any such rule or regulation.
(Ord. No. 82, § 4, 7-10-1972; Ord. No. 178, 12-21-2009; Ord. 222, § 27, 12-3-
2018)
Sec. 62-35. Precollection practices.
(a)   Preparation of refuse. All refuse shall be prepared as required by the
city's designated licensed refuse hauler.
(b)   Refuse containers. Refuse containers shall be provided by the city's
designated licensed refuse hauler for residential properties with four
dwellings or less. Refuse containers shall be maintained in good condition; and
any container that does not conform to the provisions of this article, or that
may have ragged or chipped edges or any other defect liable to hamper or injure
the person collecting the contents, shall be promptly replaced upon notice. The
licensed hauler selected by the city shall have authority to refuse collection
service for failure to comply with this section, after giving notice to the
director of public works. All refuse containers shall be of substantial
material and equipped with suitable handles and covers and shall be watertight.
All such containers shall be kept in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at
all times.
(c)   Points of collection. In all areas of the city not served by public
alleys, refuse containers shall be placed for collection at ground level
between the front curb and the sidewalk of dwelling units, and where there is
no curb or sidewalk, the front property line of the dwelling unit.
   (1)   Refuse containers shall not be placed on the traveled portion of the
street or highway so as to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   (2)   The occupant or person in control of the premises shall not place any
refuse containers for collection before 5:00 p.m. of the day preceding the day
of collection, nor later than 7:00 a.m. the day of collection, and the empty
containers shall be removed by 9:00 p.m. on the day of collection, such
collection days to be determined by the director.
(Ord. No. 82, § 5(1), (2), (4), 7-10-1972; Ord. No. 82-A-75, § 1, 6-16-1975;
Ord. No. 82-A-78, § 1, 10-16-1978; Ord. No. 82-A-81, § 1, 6-1-1981; Ord. No.
178, 12-21-2009; Ord. No. 210, 7-3-2017; Ord. 216, 4-9-2018)
Sec. 62-36. Storing of refuse.
(a)   Public places. No person shall place any refuse or rubbish in any street,
alley or other public place or upon any private property, whether owned by such
person or not, within the city, unless it is placed in proper containers for
collection, or placed under express approval granted by the director, nor shall
any person throw or deposit any refuse or rubbish in any stream or other body
of water.
(b)   Unauthorized accumulation. No person shall permit any refuse or rubbish
to accumulate on any premises owned or controlled by such person for a period
longer than the interval between the collection dates established for the
neighborhood or the premises. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse or
rubbish on any premises is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure
to remove any existing accumulation of refuse or rubbish shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter.
(c)   Scattering of refuse. No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit
anywhere within the city refuse or rubbish in such a manner that it may be
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer,
parkway or other public place, or in any occupied premises within the city.
(Ord. No. 82, § 5(3), 7-10-1972; Ord. No. 178, 12-21-2009)
   State law reference—Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq.
Sec. 62-37. Collection practices.
(a)   Frequency of collection.
   (1)   Residential. Refuse accumulated from dwelling units shall be collected
at least once each week.
   (2)   Commercial. Hotels, restaurants, institutions and such other places as
deem it necessary may enter into an agreement for a greater frequency of
collection. Where necessary to protect the public health, the director shall
have the authority to require that more frequent collections be made.
(b)   Limits on quantity. Refuse collection for dwelling units shall be
unlimited; and the property owner may present for disposal as many containers,
not exceeding the size described in this article, as may be necessary for the
disposal of household refuse.
(c)   Special refuse and rubbish problems.
   (1)   Contagious disease. The removal of wearing apparel, bedding or other
refuse or rubbish from homes or other places where highly infectious or
contagious diseases have prevailed shall be performed under the supervision and
direction of the county health officer. Such refuse and rubbish shall not be
placed in containers for regular collections.
   (2)   Flammables or explosives. Highly flammable or explosive materials
shall not be placed in containers for regular collection, but shall be disposed
of as directed by the director at the expense of the owner or possessor of such
materials.
(d)   Requirements of collectors. The actual producers of refuse or the owner
of the premises upon which refuse is accumulated, who desire personally to
collect and dispose of such refuse, and the collectors of refuse from outside
of the city and who are licensed by the city, who desire to haul over the
streets of the city, shall use a watertight vehicle, provided with a tight
cover as approved by the director, and so operated as to prevent offensive
odors from escaping and refuse from being blown, dropped or spilled. The
director shall have the authority to make such other reasonable regulations
concerning individual collection and disposal relating to the hauling of
rubbish by licensed haulers, as he shall find necessary, subject to the right
of appeal, as set forth in section
62-34.
(e)   Refuse property of the city. Ownership of refuse material set out for
collection and collected by a duly licensed hauler approved by the city shall
be vested in the city.
(Ord. No. 82, § 6, 7-10-1972; Ord. No. 178, 12-21-2009)
Sec. 62-38. Fees.
(a)   Residential. The fees for collection and disposal of refuse from dwelling
units shall be set by the city council, based on its contract with a licensed
hauler, and subject to such increases or decreases as established by the city
council.
(b)   Nonresidential. For the collection and disposal of refuse and rubbish not
otherwise provided for in this section, the property owner may make such
agreement with a licensed hauler as deemed to his best advantage.
(c)   Payment. For all premises containing four or fewer dwelling units, the
city shall levy an annual refuse service collection fee per unit, which shall
be due and payable on July 1 of the city's fiscal year, in advance, and not
later than August 31 of the fiscal year. Payment shall be the obligation of the
property owner, as shown by the tax rolls of the city; shall be included in the
property tax statement; and, if unpaid, shall become a lien against the
property and collected in the same manner as provided by law for delinquent and
unpaid taxes. If not paid on or before August 31, service to the property shall
be terminated and no further collections shall be made from the premises. Any
property owner failing to pay within the time set forth in this subsection
shall not be granted further service in the collection and disposal of refuse
until the amount is paid, together with a reinstatement charge in the amount
established by resolution.
(d)   Legal remedy. The stoppage of service authorized for nonpayment of
collection charges shall be in addition to the right of the city to proceed for
the collection of such unpaid charges in any manner provided by law for the
collection of a municipal claim.
(Ord. No. 82, § 7, 7-10-1972; Ord. No. 178, 12-21-2009)
Chapters 63--65
RESERVED
Chapter 66
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS*
*Charter References: Special assessments, ch. 11.
Cross References: Any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessments
saved from repeal, §
1-11(a)(15); administration, ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places,
ch. 70.
Sec.
66-1.     Authorized.
Sec.
66-2.    Duties of city assessor.
Sec.
66-3.    Public improvements; petition; resolution of council.
Sec.
66-4.    Estimates; plats; public examination, notice, objections.
Sec.
66-5.    Cost of surveys, plans, preparation of assessment rolls and cost of
construction, legal expenses, publication costs.
Sec.
66-6.    Assessment to be levied before making improvement.
Sec.
66-7.    Council's directory resolution.
Sec.
66-8.    Assessment roll, preparation; unknown owners.
Sec.
66-9.    Equitable rules: certificate, form.
Sec.
66-10.    Special assessment roll: notice of meeting to review assessments.
Sec.
66-11.    Review; correction and disposition of roll.
Sec.
66-12.    Collection of special assessments.
Sec.
66-13.    Special assessment accounts.
Sec.
66-14.    Disposition of excessive special assessments.
Sec.
66-15.    Correction of invalid special assessments.
Sec.
66-16.    Contested assessments.
Sec.
66-17.    Assessments for sidewalks and abatement of hazards or nuisance.
Sec.
66-18.    Additional assessments in case of a deficiency.
Sec.
66-19.    Hardship deferments.
Sec. 66-1. Authorized.
When by the provisions of the Charter of the city and the laws of the state the
cost and expenses of any public improvement or repairs, in whole or in part,
are to be defrayed by a special assessment upon lands abutting upon or adjacent
to, or otherwise benefitted by such improvement, such assessment shall be made
as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 37, § 1, 9-17-1951)
Sec. 66-2. Duties of city assessor.
Special assessment rolls authorized by this chapter shall be made by the city
assessor. Should the city assessor be interested in any special assessment
directed by the council, the council shall appoint some other person to act in
his stead in making the assessment, who for the purposes of that assessment
shall be city assessor.
(Ord. No. 37, § 2, 9-17-1951)
Sec. 66-3. Public improvements; petition; resolution of council.
When 51 percent of the owners of the lands liable to be assessed in any special
assessment district shall petition the council for any public improvement, the
council may, by majority vote, order such improvement to be made. In other
cases, public improvements shall be made in the discretion of the council, upon
concurrence of five of the councilmembers. When the council shall determine to
make any public improvement or repairs upon petition or at the exercise of its
discretion, and defray the whole or any part of the cost and expenses by
special assessment, they shall so declare by resolution, stating the
improvement.
(Ord. No. 37, § 3, 9-17-1951; Ord. No. 37-A-95, § 1, 12-18-1995)
Charter References: Mandatory provisions, § 11.2(3).
Sec. 66-4. Estimates; plats; public examination, notice, objections.
Before ordering any public improvement or repairs, any part of the expense of
which is to be defrayed by special assessment, the council shall cause an
estimate of the expenses, and also plats, plans and diagrams when practicable
of the work, and of the locality to be improved, together with a description of
the proposed assessment district to be made, and deposit the estimate with the
city clerk for public examination. They shall give notice of the estimate and
of the proposed improvement or work, and of the district to be assessed, by
publishing once in such newspaper; and proof of publication may be made as
specified in Section 17.7 of the Charter. The date of publication shall be at
least ten full days prior to the date set for hearing in such order and notice.
Section 17.7 of the Charter is made a part of this section. In such notice the
time and place when the council will meet and consider any objections shall be
set forth. In addition to such notice, notice by mail shall be given as
provided under Section 11.2(1) of the Charter.
(Ord. No. 37, § 4, 9-17-1951; Ord. No. 37-A-95, § 2, 12-18-1995)
Charter References: Mandatory notice, § 11.2(1).
Sec. 66-5. Cost of surveys, plans, preparation of assessment rolls and cost of
construction, legal expenses, publication costs.
The cost and expenses of any improvement which shall be defrayed by special
assessment shall include the cost of surveys, plans, preparation of assessment
rolls and cost of construction, legal expenses and publication costs.
(Ord. No. 37, § 5, 9-17-1951)
Sec. 66-6. Assessment to be levied before making improvement.
Special assessments to defray the estimated cost of any improvement shall be
levied before the making of the improvement.
(Ord. No. 37, § 6, 9-17-1951)
Charter References: Mandatory provisions, § 11.2(4).
Sec. 66-7. Council's directory resolution.
If, after considering any objections to proposed improvements as provided for
in section 66-4, the council shall determine to make such improvement or
repairs, it shall, by resolution:
   (1)   Declare its intention to do so;
   (2)   State what portion of the cost and expenses shall be defrayed by
special assessment;
   (3)   State whether such special assessment shall be made according to
benefits, which may be determined according to frontage, area or otherwise;
   (4)   Designate the lots, premises or locality constituting the district to
be assessed; and
   (5)   Direct the city assessor to prepare a special assessment roll and
report the roll to the council within 30 days.
(Ord. No. 37, § 7, 9-17-1951)
Sec. 66-8. Assessment roll, preparation; unknown owners.
Upon receiving such order and directions as provided in section
66-7, the city assessor shall make an assessment roll, entering and describing
in the roll all the lots, premises and parcels of land to be assessed, with the
names of the person, if known, chargeable with the assessments; and shall enter
on the roll and against such persons the amount to be assessed, in the manner
directed by the council and the provisions of this chapter, applicable to the
assessment. In all cases where the ownership of any description is unknown to
the city assessor, he shall, in lieu of the name of the owner, insert the word
"Unknown"; and if by mistake or otherwise any person shall be improperly
designated as the owner of any lot, parcel of land or premises, or if the lot,
parcel or premises shall be assessed without the name of the owner, or in the
name of a person other than the owner, such assessment shall not, for any such
cause, be vitiated, but shall, in all respects, be as valid upon and against
such lot, parcel of land or premises as though assessed in the name of the
proper owner, and when the assessment roll shall have been confirmed, be a lien
on such lot, parcel of land or premises, and collected as in other cases.
(Ord. No. 37, § 8, 9-17-1951)
Sec. 66-9. Equitable rules: certificate, form.
If an assessment is directed to be according to benefits, the city assessor
shall assess upon each lot such relative portion of the whole sum to be levied
as shall be proportionate to the estimated benefit resulting to such lot from
the improvement. When the assessor shall have completed the assessment, he
shall report it to the council; such report, to be signed by the city assessor,
may be in the form of a certificate, endorsed on the assessment roll, as
follows:
STATE OF MICHIGAN,
COUNTY OF INGHAM, ss.
To the Council of the City of Mason.
I hereby certify and report that the foregoing is the special assessment roll,
and the assessment made by me pursuant to a resolution of the council of said
city, adopted (give date), for the purpose of paying that part of the cost
which the council decided should be paid and borne by special assessment for
the (here insert the object of the Assessment); that in making such assessment
I have, as near as may be, and according to my best judgment, conformed in all
things to the directions contained in the resolution of the council
hereinbefore referred to, and the Charter of the city relating to such
assessment.
Dated____
   ____ City Assessor
(Ord. No. 37, § 9, 9-17-1951)
Sec. 66-10. Special assessment roll: notice of meeting to review assessments.
When any special assessment shall be reported by the city assessor to the
council as provided in sections
66-8 and
66-9, it shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and numbered. Before
confirming the assessment, the council shall give notice to all persons
interested by publishing such notice of a meeting of the council to review the
assessment roll once in such newspaper and proof of publication shall be made
as specified in Section 17.7 of the Charter; provided that the date of
publication shall be at least ten full days prior to the date set for such
hearing in such order and notice. Any person objecting to his assessment may
file his objections in writing with the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 37, § 10, 9-17-1951; Ord. No. 37-A-95, § 3, 12-18-1995)
Charter References: Mandatory notice, § 11.2(2).
State Law References: Notice of special assessment, MCL 211.741 et seq.
Sec. 66-11. Review; correction and disposition of roll.
At the time appointed for the purpose stated in section
66-10, the council and city assessor shall meet, and there, or at some
adjourned meeting, review the assessment; and the council shall correct the
assessment if necessary and confirm it as reported, or as corrected; or they
may refer the assessment back to the assessor for revision; or annul it and
direct a new assessment, in which case the same proceedings shall be had as in
respect to the previous assessment. When the special assessment shall be
confirmed, the clerk shall endorse a certificate upon the roll showing the date
of confirmation. In confirming the assessment roll, the council shall, in its
resolution, state the number of installments in which the assessment is to be
paid, the due date of the first and subsequent installments, and the rate of
interest to be charged on unpaid installments.
(Ord. No. 37, § 11, 9-17-1951)
Sec. 66-12. Collection of special assessments.
(a)   Upon the confirmation of each special assessment roll, the special
assessments shall become a debt due to the city from the persons to whom they
are assessed from the amount of such assessment and all interest and charges.
Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as created by the Charter
for city taxes. Such assessments shall become due upon confirmation of the
special assessment roll, except as may be provided by the council.
(b)   Each special assessment, or each installment of such assessment when
installment payments are provided for, shall be collected by the treasurer
without collection fee for a period ending on the last day of the second month
following each such due date; and the treasurer shall add to all assessment or
installments paid thereafter a collection fee of four percent of the amount of
the assessment. All collection fees shall belong to the city and be collectible
in the same manner as the collection fee on city taxes.
(c)   Special assessments which become due other than on July 1 shall, if
unpaid for 90 days or more on April 1 of any year, be certified as delinquent
to the council by the treasurer; and the council shall order such delinquent
assessments to be placed on the tax roll of the city for that year, together
with accrued collection fees. Thereafter, the total amount of such assessment
and fees shall be collected in all respects as are city taxes due on July 1 of
that year, and such total amounts shall be subject to the same fees and
penalties as are city taxes due on that date, and, if uncollected on the
following March 1, shall be returned to the county treasurer with unpaid taxes,
as provided in Charter Section 9.18.
(Ord. No. 37, § 12, 9-17-1951)
Charter References: Similar provisions, § 11.7.
Sec. 66-13. Special assessment accounts.
Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, moneys raised by special
assessment for any public improvement shall be segregated in a special fund or
account and may be used only to pay for the costs of the improvement for which
the assessment was levied, and incidental expenses, and to repay any money
borrowed, together with interest which has accrued.
(Ord. No. 37, § 13, 9-17-1951)
Charter References: Similar provisions, § 11.8.
Sec. 66-14. Disposition of excessive special assessments.
If any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the improvement
and incidental expenses, such excess may be placed in the general fund of the
city if such excess is five percent or less of the assessment; but should the
assessment prove larger than necessary by more than five percent, the entire
excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the then owner of the property
assessed. Such refund may be made by credit against future unpaid installments
to the extent such installments then exist, and the balance of such refund
shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any
outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or part by such special
assessment.
(Ord. No. 37, § 14, 9-17-1951)
Charter References: Similar provisions, § 11.4.
Sec. 66-15. Correction of invalid special assessments.
(a)   Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the council, be
invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any
court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal,
the council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any
part of the assessments have been paid or not, have power to cause a new
assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was
made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for its collection shall be
conducted in the same manner as provided for the original assessment; except it
shall not again be necessary to prepare plans and estimates of cost, nor to
hold any hearing on the necessity of the improvement, unless and to the extent
that the cause of the irregularity arose in such proceedings. Whenever any sum
levied upon any property for the assessment so set aside has been paid and not
refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment; or, if
the payments exceed the amount of the reassessment, refunds shall be made in
the manner prescribed in Section 11.4 of the Charter.
(b)   No judgment or decree, nor any act of the council, vacating a special
assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises
assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against
the premises had such charges been lawfully assessed in accordance with the
procedure established or authorized in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 37, § 15, 9-17-1951)
Charter References: Similar provisions, § 11.5.
Sec. 66-16. Contested assessments.
No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose
of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment unless:
   (1)   Within 30 days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll,
written notice is given to the council of intention to file such suit or
action, stating the ground on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal;
and
   (2)   Such suit or action shall be commenced within 60 days after
confirmation of the roll for such assessment.
(Ord. No. 37, § 16, 9-17-1951)
Charter References: Similar provisions, § 11.6.
Sec. 66-17. Assessments for sidewalks and abatement of hazards or nuisance.
(a)   The assessment for the cost of the construction or maintenance of any
sidewalk, or the abatement of any hazard or nuisance, to be made pursuant to
Charter Section
2.2(18) or (19) shall be made by resolution of the council. Notice of the time
at which the council will act shall be given by publication, and sent by
registered mail to all property owners of the property, constituting or
creating such nuisance or hazard, as shown by the current tax roll of the city;
but failure of any owner to receive such notice shall not invalidate any such
assessment. For the purposes of collection of such assessment, the adoption of
such resolution shall be equivalent to the confirmation of a special assessment
roll. The amount of any such assessment shall become a debt due to the city
upon adoption of such resolution, be payable and subject to the collection
fees, and shall become a lien, all as provided in Charter Section 11.7.
(b)   Every such assessment shall also be subject to Section 11.5 and 11.6 of
the Charter.
(Ord. No. 37, § 17, 9-17-1951)
Charter References: Similar provisions, § 11.9.
Sec. 66-18. Additional assessments in case of a deficiency.
The council may make additional pro rata assessments when any special
assessment roll proves insufficient to pay for the improvement for which it was
levied and the expenses incident thereto; but the additional pro rata
assessment shall not exceed 25 percent of the assessment, as originally
confirmed, unless a meeting of the council is held to review such additional
assessment. Notice of any such meeting shall be published as provided in the
case of review of the original special assessment roll.
(Ord. No. 37, § 18, 9-17-1951)
Charter References: Power to so provide, § 11.3(5).
Sec. 66-19. Hardship deferments.
The city manager may grant a deferment of the annual installment payments due
on special assessments for street and sidewalk improvements on homestead
properties in case of hardship, subject to the following:
   (1)   The payment of special assessment installments may be deferred for
owners who meet the terms and conditions of this section annually for a period
not to exceed ten years or until the property is sold or until one year after
the owner's death, however, the death of a spouse shall not terminate deferral
of an assessment on homestead property owned by a husband and wife. The gross
amount of the annual special assessment installment eligible for deferment
under this section shall not be less than $300.00.
   (2)   To receive deferment, the owner shall annually certify to the city
manager on or before July 1st that his annual household income does not exceed
HUD Section 8 income limits.
   (3)   The owner shall execute and deliver to the city clerk a lien in
recordable form in favor of the City indicating the amount of the annual
special assessment deferred, plus interest as provided in subsection (4), and
identifying the homestead.
   (4)   The payment of special assessment installments deferred under this
section which are subsequently made by the owner or owner's estate shall
include interest computed at the rate of one-half of one percent (0.005) per
month or fraction of a month.
   (5)   The city treasurer shall not report as delinquent any special
assessment installment which is deferred under this section for which a lien
has been recorded in favor of the city, until such time as the term of the
deferment expires as provided in subsection
66-19(1) above.
   (6)   A hardship deferment shall not be granted by the city manager where
the owner of homestead property is eligible for a deferment of special
assessments on that homestead pursuant to 1976 PA 225, MCL 211.761 et seq.
(Ord. 222, § 28, 12-3-2018)
Chapters 67--69
RESERVED
Chapter 70
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES*
*Charter References: General powers relative to streets, § 2.2(e)--(g), (r).
Cross References: Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street,
sidewalk or alley saved from repeal, §
1-11(a)(16); any ordinance establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk
saved from repeal, §
1-11(a)(17); buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; peddlers, solicitors,
transient merchants and related businesses, §
10-31 et seq.; cemeteries, ch. 14; environment, ch. 22; floods, ch. 30; natural
resources, ch. 38; parks and recreation, ch. 46; planning, ch. 50; special
assessments, ch. 66; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 74; traffic
and vehicles, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; vehicles for hire,
ch. 90.
Article I. In General
Sec.
70-1.    Obstructing limited.
Sec.
70-2.     Removal of snow, ice; removal by city.
Secs. 70-3--70-35. Reserved.
Article II. Excavations and Curb Cuts
Sec.
70-36.     Permit required for curb cut.
Sec.
70-37.     Permit required for excavations.
Sec.
70-38.    Warning of street opening.
Sec.
70-39.     Payment of costs.
Sec.
70-40.    Plat or map required for laying of pipes, conduits, erection of
poles.
Sec.
70-41.    Bond, certificate of insurance.
Secs. 70-42--70-75. Reserved.
Article III. Parades
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
70-76.     Violations declared misdemeanor.
Sec.
70-77.     Public conduct during parades.
Secs. 70-78--70-100. Reserved.
Division 2. Permit
Sec.
70-101.     Required.
Sec.
70-102.     Application.
Sec.
70-103.     Standards for issuance.
Sec.
70-104.     Notice of rejection.
Sec.
70-105.     Appeal procedure.
Sec.
70-106.     Alternative permit.
Sec.
70-107.     Notice to city and other officials.
Sec.
70-108.     Contents of permit.
Sec.
70-109.     Duties of permittee.
Sec.
70-110.     Revocation.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 70-1. Obstructing limited.
No person shall obstruct or encumber any portion of a public street, alley,
sidewalk or other public space, with any article or thing whatsoever; however,
this section shall not be construed to prevent merchants and other business
persons occupying buildings in the highway commercial and central business
zoning districts from using and occupying that portion of the sidewalk next to
their respective places of business for the purpose of displaying their goods
or wares.
(Ord. No. 16-A-95, § 2, 12-18-1995)
Sec. 70-2. Removal of snow, ice; removal by city.
(a)   The occupant of any nonresidential building or lot, or the owner of any
unoccupied nonresidential building or lot within the central business district
as defined in chapter 94 of this Code shall remove or cause to be removed from
the sidewalk adjacent to such building or lot, snow which has accumulated in
excess of two inches, or ice that may have fallen, formed, or be remaining upon
such sidewalk before the hour of 10:00 a.m. of each day, except Sunday.
(b)   If all accumulated snow or ice is not removed from such sidewalks before
10:00 a.m., the city is authorized to remove the snow and ice; and all such
expenses for the removal shall become a charge against the property owner
abutting upon such sidewalk. The owner and occupant shall be billed such
expense by registered or certified mail addressed to their last known address
and, if not paid within 30 days, shall be reported to the city council and may
thereafter by resolution be levied against the property as a special assessment
pursuant to Section 11.9 of the Charter.
(Ord. No. 21-A-98, §§ 2, 3, 5-4-1998)
Secs. 70-3--70-35. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. EXCAVATIONS AND CURB CUTS
Sec. 70-36. Permit required for curb cut.
No person shall make any opening in or through any curb in any city street,
alley or public place without first obtaining a written permit from the
director of public works. The fee for such permit shall be as established by
resolution but if such permit is requested at the time of making application
for a building permit for the same premises, the payment of such fee shall not
be required; however, the waiver of the fee shall not void any other provisions
of this article. No permit shall be granted in the following cases, except by
special permission of the council:
   (1)   When such curb cut is to serve a one-car garage and is intended to be
more than 12-feet wide.
   (2)   When such cut is to serve a two-car garage and is intended to be more
than 20-feet wide.
   (3)   When such cut is to be made permanent, for any other purpose, and is
intended to be more than 24-feet wide.
   (4)   When such cut is to be made permanent, and in the opinion of the
director of public works, will interfere with the safety of the public.
All such curb cuts shall be performed under the supervision of the director of
public works or his inspector, and as he shall direct and to his satisfaction.
(Ord. No. 47-A-95, § 2, 12-18-1995)
Sec. 70-37. Permit required for excavations.
No person other than a city department shall make any excavations or openings
in or under any street, alley or public place without first obtaining a written
permit from the director of public works. No such permit shall be granted until
the plans and specifications for the work proposed to be done shall have been
approved by the director of public works as conforming to uniform grades and
locations, until a bond or certificate of insurance has been filed with the
city clerk as provided in section
70-41, and until it is shown that there is compliance with Public Act No. 53 of
1974 (MCL 460.701 et seq.).
(Ord. No. 47-A-95, § 3, 12-18-1995)
Sec. 70-38. Warning of street opening.
Any person to whom a permit is issued shall be responsible for making any
opening in any street, alley or public place under this article and shall
himself, or by his agent, provide an adequate warning of such opening, at all
times, for the protection of the safety of the public. Before refilling such
opening or excavation, notice shall be given to the director of public works,
who shall immediately cause an inspector to supervise the refilling of such
opening or excavation; and such refilling shall not proceed until the director
of public works or his inspector shall be present. Any person making or causing
to be made any opening or excavation in any street, alley or public place
shall, as speedily as possible, repair, refill and put the street, alley or
public place in as good condition as before; provided, that in case of a paved
street, alley or public place, such refilling shall be made only to the
subgrade, and repairing and replacing of such pavement shall be made by the
director of public works or his assistant. All such work shall be performed
under the supervision of the director of public works or his inspector, and as
he shall direct and to his satisfaction.
(Ord. No. 47-A-95, § 4, 12-18-1995)
Sec. 70-39. Payment of costs.
The director of public works shall keep or cause to be kept an accurate account
of the cost of inspection, labor and materials expended and used in work
governed in this article, which shall be borne by the person having such
permission; and such costs shall be deducted from the amount of the deposit so
made. If in the judgment of the director of public works such sum so required
to be deposited will not be sufficient to cover the probable cost of such work,
he may require a deposit sufficient, in his judgment, to cover such cost; and
on the completion of such work, any balance shall be returned to the person
entitled thereto. In case of a deficiency, such person shall pay the balance
due to the city.
(Ord. No. 47-A-95, § 5, 12-18-1995)
Sec. 70-40. Plat or map required for laying of pipes, conduits, erection of
poles.
It shall be the duty of any person having a franchise or privilege to lay
underground pipes or conduits or to install power or telephone poles or other
transmission structures in the streets, alleys or other public places of the
city, to file in the office of the director of public works a plat or map
showing the streets, alleys or other public places in which such pipes and
conduits are laid and the exact location and approximate depths of such pipes
and conduits in each street; and thereafter all applications for permits to lay
any pipes or conduits or to install any poles shall specify the proposed
location in the streets, alleys or other public places of all such pipes or
conduits and poles.
(Ord. No. 47-A-95, § 6, 12-18-1995)
Sec. 70-41. Bond, certificate of insurance.
Whenever a bond or certificate of insurance is called for as a condition
precedent to the granting of any permit required by this article, such bond
shall be in the sum of $10,000.00 and/or certificate of insurance in the amount
of $1,000,000.00 or such larger sum as the director of public works shall
specify as commensurate with risk to the permit applicant arising out of any
injury to or death of members of the public or property damage which might be
suffered through the negligent exercise of the privilege granted under such
permit. If a bond or certificate of insurance is furnished, it shall be
conditioned to save harmless the permit applicant from loss resulting from the
death of or injury to persons or damage to property which is caused or is
occasioned by the doing of the thing or exercise of the privilege for which the
permit is required.
(Ord. No. 47-A-95, § 7, 12-18-1995)
Secs. 70-42--70-75. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PARADES*
*Cross References: Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 70-76. Violations declared misdemeanor.
Violations of this article are a misdemeanor.
Sec. 70-77. Public conduct during parades.
(a)   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or
interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or
animal participating or used in a parade.
(b)   Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle, streetcar or trackless
trolley shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when
such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a
parade.
(c)   Parking on parade route. The chief of police shall have the authority,
when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles
along a highway constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of
police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person
to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation of such signs. No person
shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this section.
(Ord. No. 87, § 12, 3-4-1974)
Secs. 70-78--70-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
PERMIT
Sec. 70-101. Required.
(a)   Obtaining permit. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or
start any parade unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the city
manager.
(b)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:
   (1)   Funeral processions.
   (2)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities if such conduct is under the immediate direction and
supervision of the proper school authorities.
   (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
(Ord. No. 87, § 3, 3-4-1974; Ord. 222, § 29, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 70-102. Application.
(a)   Filing. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an
application with the city manager on forms provided by such officer.
(b)   Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the
city manager not less than 20 days, nor more than 60 days before the date on
which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
(c)   Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:
   (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade.
   (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the
organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization.
   (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the
parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct.
   (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted.
   (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
   (6)   The approximate number of persons who and animals and vehicles which
will constitute such parade; the type of animals and description of the
vehicles.
   (7)   The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
   (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion
of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed.
   (9)   The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade.
   (10)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area.
   (11)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade.
   (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any
person other than the applicant, a communication which the applicant for such
permit shall file with the city manager in writing from the person proposing to
hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his
behalf.
   (13)   Any additional information which the city manager shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be
issued.
(d)   Late applications. The city manager, where good cause is shown, shall
have the authority to consider any application under this section which is
filed less than five days before the date such parade is proposed to be
conducted.
(e)   Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a
parade permit a fee in the amount established by resolution.
(Ord. No. 87, § 4, 3-4-1974; Ord. 222, § 30, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 70-103. Standards for issuance.
(a)   The city manager shall issue a permit as provided for under this division
when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information
as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
   (1)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.
   (2)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement
and contiguous areas as to prevent normal police protection to the city.
   (3)   The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great
a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of
the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and
contiguous areas.
   (4)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection
of or ambulance service to areas contiguous to such assembly areas.
   (5)   The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire.
   (6)   The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to
persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct, or to create a disturbance.
   (7)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
   (8)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private
profit.
(b)   Where in the sound discretion of the city manager it is deemed necessary
by reason of the nature of the parade and the number of persons, vehicles or
animals involved, there is a reasonable likelihood of damage to a person or
property, accumulations of waste or debris on the streets and unusual demands
on police, fire or other city services, the city manager shall estimate the
cost to the city by virtue of such parade activities; and the applicant shall
post a security deposit for payment to the city of actual costs of cleaning the
streets, providing necessary police, fire and other protective services and
such estimated costs as may arise from parade activities. Any sum not expended
shall be returned to the applicant. In addition, the applicant shall file with
the city a policy of liability and property damage insurance indemnifying the
city against any liability to persons or property, including property owned by
the city, arising out of the parade.
(Ord. No. 87, § 5, 3-4-1974; Ord. 222, § 31, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 70-104. Notice of rejection.
The city manager shall act upon the application for a parade permit within ten
days after its filing. If the city manager disapproves the application, he
shall mail to the applicant within five days after the date upon which the
application was filed a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his
denial of the permit.
(Ord. No. 87, § 6, 3-4-1974; Ord. 222, § 32, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 70-105. Appeal procedure.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within five days after
notice. The city council shall act upon the appeal at its next regular council
meeting.
(Ord. No. 87, § 7, 3-4-1974)
Sec. 70-106. Alternative permit.
The city manager in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be
empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over
a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to
accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action
of the city manager, file a written notice of acceptance with the city manager.
An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have
the effect of a parade permit under this article.
(Ord. No. 87, § 8, 3-4-1974; Ord. 222, § 33, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 70-107. Notice to city and other officials.
Immediately upon the application of a parade permit, the city manager shall
notify the mayor, the fire chief, the postmaster and the general manager, or
responsible head of each public transportation utility, the regular routes of
whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the proposed parade, when, in
his judgment the foregoing parties may be affected by the proposed parade; and
immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, he shall notify all of the
above-named parties which he deems will be affected by the proposed parade in
their capacities and duties as city officers, or otherwise.
(Ord. No. 87, § 9, 3-4-1974 ; Ord. 222, § 34, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 70-108. Contents of permit.
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
   (1)   Starting time.
   (2)   Minimum speed.
   (3)   Maximum speed.
   (4)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade.
   (5)   The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by
the parade.
   (6)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions of miles.
   (7)   Such other information as the city manager shall find necessary to the
enforcement of this article.
(Ord. No. 87, § 10, 3-4-1974; Ord. 222, § 35, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 70-109. Duties of permittee.
(a)   A permittee under this division shall comply with all permit directions
and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinance.
(b)   The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity
shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade.
(c)   No person who is engaged or participating in any parade shall throw or
distribute candy, money or other articles of value to any person assembled
along the parade route.
(d)   The permittee, parade chairman, marshal and any other person leading the
parade shall make a reasonable and diligent effort to make the prohibition of
subsection (c) of this section known to all persons engaged or participating in
any parade permitted under this article.
(Ord. No. 87, § 11, 3-4-1974; Ord. No. 87-A-95, § 2, 12-18-1995)
Sec. 70-110. Revocation.
The city manager shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
under this division upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth
in this division.
(Ord. No. 87, § 13, 3-4-1974; Ord. 222, § 36, 12-3-2018)
Chapters 71--73
RESERVED
Chapter 74
SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER DIVISIONS OF LAND*
*Cross References: Any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or
subdivision saved from repeal, §
1-11(a)(18); buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; environment, ch. 22;
floods, ch. 30; natural resources, ch. 38; planning, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks
and other public places, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; zoning,
ch. 94.
State Law References: Land Division Act, MCL 560.101 et seq.
Article I. In General
Sec.
74-1.     Violation of chapter.
Secs. 74-2--74-31. Reserved.
Article II. Subdivisions
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
74-32.     Purpose.
Sec.
74-33.     Scope.
Sec.
74-34.     Application of state law.
Sec.
74-35.     Nonresidential subdivisions.
Secs. 74-36--74-60. Reserved.
Division 2. Plats
Subdivision I. In General
Sec.
74-61.     Plat restrictions.
Secs. 74-62--74-75. Reserved.
Subdivision II. Preliminary Plat
Sec.
74-76.     Filing of preliminary plat with planning commission.
Sec.
74-77.     Data required.
Sec.
74-78.     Preliminary plat review by planning commission.
Sec.
74-79.     Preliminary plat review by city council.
Sec.
74-80.     Final approval of the preliminary plat by the city council.
Secs. 74-81--74-100. Reserved.
Subdivision III. Final Plat
Sec.
74-101.     Procedure.
Sec.
74-102.     Data required.
Sec.
74-103.     Review of the final plat by the planning commission.
Sec.
74-104.     Review of the final plat by the city council.
Secs. 74-105--74-125. Reserved.
Division 3. Design Standards
Sec.
74-126.     Generally.
Sec.
74-127.     Streets.
Sec.
74-128.     Easements and utilities.
Sec.
74-129.     Underground wiring.
Sec.
74-130.     Blocks.
Sec.
74-131.     Public walkways.
Sec.
74-132.     Public reservations.
Sec.
74-133.     Lots.
Secs. 74-134--74-155. Reserved.
Division 4. Required Improvements
Sec.
74-156.     Generally.
Sec.
74-157.     Streets.
Sec.
74-158.     Water supply.
Sec.
74-159.     Sanitary sewer system.
Sec.
74-160.     Storm drainage system.
Sec.
74-161.     Street trees.
Sec.
74-162.     Monuments.
Sec.
74-163.     Guarantee of completion of required improvements.
Secs. 74-164--74-195. Reserved.
Article III. Divisions
Sec.
74-196.     Definitions.
Sec.
74-197.     Purpose.
Sec.
74-198.     Prior approval requirement for land divisions.
Sec.
74-199.     Application for land division approval.
Sec.
74-200.     Procedure for review of applications for land division approval.
Sec.
74-201.     Standards for approval of land divisions.
Sec.
74-202.     Allowance for approval of other land divisions.
Sec.
74-203.     Rights of appeal.
Sec.
74-204.     Consequences of noncompliance with land division approval
requirement.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 74-1. Violation of chapter.
Any sale of lands divided or subdivided in violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be voidable at the option of the purchaser and shall subject the
seller to the forfeiture of any and all consideration received or pledged,
together with any damages sustained by the purchaser, recoverable in an action
at law.
(Ord. No. 73, § 22, 3-4-1968)
Secs. 74-2--74-31. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. SUBDIVISIONS*
*State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(m).
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 74-32. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate and control the subdivision of land
within the corporate limits of the city in order to:
   (1)   Promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and the
general welfare of the inhabitants of the city;
   (2)   Provide a means for carrying out the city's responsibilities relative
to the platting of land under the laws of the state, and provide for the
orderly growth and harmonious development of the city, consistent with the
comprehensive development plan and the zoning ordinances;
   (3)   Secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems
so as to lessen congestion on the streets and highways;
   (4)   Ensure adequate provisions for water, drainage, sanitary sewer
facilities, and other health requirements;
   (5)   Achieve the safety and welfare of individual lots; and
   (6)   Provide logical and reasonable procedures for the achievement of these
purposes.
(Ord. No. 73, § 2, 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-33. Scope.
This article shall not apply to any lot forming a part of a subdivision created
or recorded prior to March 24, 1968. Nor is it in any way intended to repeal,
abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing and unrepealed
provisions of other laws or ordinances, or with private restrictions placed
upon property by deed, covenant or other private agreement, or with the land to
which the city is a party.
(Ord. No. 73, § 3, 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-34. Application of state law.
The provisions of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) not specifically
referred to in this article shall apply to the development of all subdivisions
in the city.
(Ord. No. 73, § 23, 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-35. Nonresidential subdivisions.
(a)   The street and lot layout of a nonresidential subdivision shall be
appropriate to the land use for which the subdivision is proposed and shall
conform to the proposed land use and standards established in the comprehensive
development plan, master street plan and zoning ordinance. For the purposes of
this article, nonresidential subdivisions shall include industrial parks and
office parks, and may include neighborhood, community and/or general commercial
districts.
(b)   In addition to the principles and standards contained in this article,
the subdivider shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning commission
that the street, parcel and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to
the uses anticipated and takes account of other uses in the vicinity. The
following additional principles and standards shall also be observed:
   (1)   Proposed parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to
accommodate the types of uses anticipated.
   (2)   Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the
type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated.
   (3)   Special requirements may be imposed by the city in respect to the
installation of public utilities.
   (4)   Special requirements may be imposed by the city council with respect
to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction.
   (5)   Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from
potential nuisance resulting from the proposed nonresidential subdivision,
including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up to existing or
potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped
buffer strip when necessary.
   (6)   Streets carrying nonresidential traffic shall not be extended to the
boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas or connected to
streets intended for predominately residential traffic.
   (7)   Nonresidential subdivisions shall be located on either a major
thoroughfare or secondary street.
(Ord. No. 73, § 19, 3-4-1968)
Secs. 74-36--74-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
PLATS
Subdivision I. In General
Sec. 74-61. Plat restrictions.
Any restriction required to be placed on platted land by the city council shall
vest in the council the right to enforce the restriction in a court of
competent jurisdiction against any one who has or acquired an interest in the
land subject to the restriction. The restriction may be waived or released in
writing but only by the city council having the right of enforcement.
(Ord. No. 73, § 21, 3-4-1968)
Secs. 74-62--74-75. Reserved.
Subdivision II. Preliminary Plat*
*State Law References: Preliminary plats, MCL 560.105, 560.111 et seq.
Sec. 74-76. Filing of preliminary plat with planning commission.
(a)   Before a preliminary plat is submitted to the city council, it shall
first receive the recommendations of the planning commission in conformance
with the regulations of this section.
(b)   The subdivider or developer shall submit a preliminary plat to the
secretary of the planning commission at least 20 days prior to the regular
planning commission meeting at which he is scheduled to appear. In filing, the
subdivider shall submit the following:
   (1)   Ten copies of a letter of application for a preliminary plat review.
   (2)   Ten copies of a preliminary plat.
(Ord. No. 73, § 6, 3-4-1968; Ord. No. 172, 5-4-2009)
State Law References: Specifications of preliminary plat to be submitted, MCL
560.112(1).
Sec. 74-77. Data required.
The preliminary plat shall contain the following information:
   (1)   Proposed name of the subdivision.
   (2)   Location by legal description.
   (3)   Names and addresses of the proprietor and the engineer or surveyor who
designed the subdivision layout.
   (4)   Date, north point, and scale (scale of the preliminary plat shall be
one inch equals 100 feet as an acceptable minimum).
   (5)   Layout of streets, including proposed names, rights-of-way widths, and
connections to adjoining platted streets, and easements, public walkways, lot
lines, within the plat; and easements and street rights-of-way on land within
200 feet of the proposed plat.
   (6)   Topography drawn as contours with an interval of not more than two
feet. Where existing ground surface will remain substantially unchanged,
proposed grades of streets will be shown by superimposed contours in a
characteristic clearly distinguishable from the existing ground contours. Where
substantial alteration of the existing ground surface is proposed, a separate
contour map shall show the proposed revised ground surface and street grades.
   (7)   Layout, numbers, and dimensions of lots, including building setback
lines showing dimensions, and a closed boundary. If any outlots are proposed in
the plat, the specific purpose of each outlot shall be indicated.
   (8)   Indication of the proposed uses of parcels to be dedicated or set
aside for public use, or for the use of the property owners in the subdivision,
or lands set aside for future street connections.
   (9)   An indication of the system proposed for sewage disposal by a method
approved by the state department of environmental quality, the county health
department, and the city council.
   (10)   An indication of the storm drainage proposed by a method approved by
the city council; and, if involving county drains, the proposed drainage shall
be acceptable to the county drain commission.
   (11)   If the proprietor wishes to subdivide a given area but wishes only to
begin with a portion of the total area, the preliminary plat shall include a
proposed general layout for the entire area. The part which is proposed to be
subdivided first shall be clearly superimposed upon the overall plan in order
to illustrate clearly the method of development which the proprietor intends to
follow. Each subsequent plat shall follow the same procedure until the entire
area controlled by the proprietor is subdivided.
(Ord. No. 73, § 7, 3-4-1968)
State Law References: Specifications for preliminary plats, MCL 560.111.
Sec. 74-78. Preliminary plat review by planning commission.
(a)   The proposed preliminary plat shall be placed on the agenda of the next
regular planning commission meeting which follows the submittal, by no less
than 20 days. Should any required data be omitted, the proprietor shall be
notified in writing of the specific data required; and the planning commission
shall delay further action until the data are received.
(b)   The planning commission shall not take action on a proposed plat without
affording an opportunity for a public hearing thereon. A plat submitted to the
planning commission shall contain the name and address of the proprietor or
other person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent. It shall be the duty of
the planning commission via the city clerk's office, to send notice by first
class mail to the proprietor and to property owners immediately adjacent to the
property to be platted, of presentment of the preliminary plat and the date,
time and place of the meeting of the planning commission to consider the
preliminary plat. The notice shall be sent not less than 15 days before the
public hearing date and shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city.
(c)   The planning commission shall recommend approval, conditional approval,
or rejection of the preliminary plat. The planning commission shall review the
preliminary plat in the following manner:
   (1)   All details of the proposed preliminary plat shall be reviewed with
reference to the requirements of the zoning ordinance, the various elements of
the plan, and the design standards set forth in this article. The planning
commission may, at its discretion, transmit copies of the preliminary plat to
the city engineer and the city manager for their review. The planning
commission shall transmit copies of the preliminary plat to all city
departments concerned with the development, and may transmit a copy to the
school board for review and recommendation.
   (2)   The planning commission shall act on the preliminary plat in
sufficient time to permit the city council to act within the time limit
required by section 112 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.112).
      a.   Should the recommendation be a conditional approval and, therefore,
tentative, and if the proprietor shall in writing have waived the time
requirement set forth by this article, the preliminary plat shall not be
forwarded to the city council until the conditions have been satisfied by the
proprietor. The revised preliminary plat shall be marked as a revision and
shall follow the filing procedure set forth in this article.
      b.   Should the planning commission recommend rejection of the
preliminary plat, it shall record the reasons in the minutes of that meeting. A
copy of the minutes and all copies of the preliminary plat shall be forwarded
to the city council.
      c.   Should the planning commission find that all standards under the
Land Division Act, 1967 PA 288, the design standards of this article, the
requirements of the zoning ordinance, and the applicable elements of the master
plan are met and all conditions have been satisfied, it shall recommend
approval of the preliminary plat. The chairman or secretary of the planning
commission shall make a notation to that effect on each copy of the preliminary
plat, returning one copy to the proprietor, forwarding four copies to the city
council via the city clerk's office, and retaining one copy for its files.
   (3)   The planning commission shall recommend approval, approval with
conditions, or disapproval of a plat within 63 days after the plat is submitted
to the planning commission. If the planning commission fails to act within the
required period, the plat shall be considered to have been recommended for
approval and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the planning
commission upon request of the proprietor. However, the proprietor may waive
this requirement and consent to an extension of the 63-day period.
(Ord. No. 73, § 8, 3-4-1968; Ord. No. 172, 5-4-2009; Ord. 222, § 37, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 74-79. Preliminary plat review by city council.
(a)   The city council shall not review a preliminary plat until it has
received a recommendation on the plat from the planning commission. Following
the receipt of such recommendations, the city council shall consider the
preliminary plat at a meeting at which the matter is placed on the regularly
scheduled meeting agenda. Such meeting shall be held within 30 days of the date
of the regular planning commission meeting at which the preliminary plat was
considered; except that the entire review process of the planning commission
and the city council, barring an extension agreed to in writing by the
proprietor, shall not exceed a period of 90 days from the date of submittal by
the proprietor to the planning commission, to the date of approval or rejection
by the city council.
(b)   Should the city council issue tentative approval of the preliminary plat,
it shall be deemed to confer upon the proprietor for a period of one year from
the date, approval of lot sizes, lot orientation, and street layout. Such
tentative approval may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted
by the city council in writing.
(c)   Should the city council reject the preliminary plat, it shall record the
reasons for such action in the minutes of the meeting at which the preliminary
plat was rejected, and notify the proprietor in writing of such action with its
reasons.
(Ord. No. 73, § 9, 3-4-1968)
State Law References: Review time limits, MCL 560.112(2); effect of tentative
approval, MCL 560.112(4).
Sec. 74-80. Final approval of the preliminary plat by the city council.
(a)   The proprietor shall submit to the city council, via the city clerk,
copies of all preliminary plats approved by the reviewing authorities listed in
Sections 112--119 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.112--560.119).
(b)4The city council shall review the preliminary plat at its next meeting, or
within 20 days from the date of submission, and approve it if the proprietor
has met all conditions laid down for approval of the preliminary plat.
(c)   The city council shall instruct the city clerk to notify the proprietor
of approval or rejection in writing and, if rejected, to give the reasons.
(d)   The city council shall instruct the city clerk to note all proceedings
relative to the preliminary plat in the minutes of the meeting, which minutes
shall be open for public inspection.
(e)   Final approval of the preliminary plat under this section shall confer
upon the proprietor for a period of two years from the date of approval the
conditional right that the general terms and conditions under which preliminary
plat approval was granted will not be changed. The two-year period may be
extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the city council in
writing. Written notice of such extension shall be sent by the city council via
the city clerk's office to all approving authorities.
(f)   After receiving final approval of his preliminary plat but before
proceeding with the construction of any public improvements, the proprietor
shall submit four copies of complete street, streetlighting, water, storm, and
sanitary sewer plans, and specifications prepared and sealed by an engineer
registered in this state. The method indicated for the disposal of sewage shall
be acceptable to the state department of environmental quality, the county
health department, and the city council; and the proposed method of storm
drainage involving county drains shall be acceptable to the county drain
commission.
(Ord. No. 73, § 10, 3-4-1968)
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 560.120.
Secs. 74-81--74-100. Reserved.
Subdivision III. Final Plat*
*State Law References: Final plats, MCL 560.105, 560.131 et seq.
Sec. 74-101. Procedure.
(a)   Following final approval of the preliminary plat by the city council, the
proprietor shall cause a survey and five true plats to be made by a registered
land surveyor.
(b)   A final plat shall not be accepted after the date of expiration of the
final preliminary plat approval.
(c)   The proprietor shall submit a final plat to the city clerk at least ten
days prior to the regular meeting of the planning commission at which he is
scheduled to appear. In filing, the proprietor shall submit the following:
   (1)   A filing and recording fee which the city clerk shall forward to the
county plat board upon approval of the final plat and in accordance with
Section 241 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.241).
   (2)   A city filing fee in the amount established by resolution which the
city clerk shall forward to the city treasurer for deposit in the general fund.
   (3)   Five linen backed copies of the proposed final plat.
(Ord. No. 73, § 11, 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-102. Data required.
The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the Land Division Act (MCL
560.101 et seq.) and shall contain, in addition, the following information:
   (1)   The necessary easements along side lot lines for streetlight dropouts
have been granted to the appropriate public or private utility.
   (2)   The subdivider shall submit an abstract of title certified to date
with an opinion from an attorney at law as to title showing all interests of
record, or, at the option of the subdivider, a policy of title insurance for
examination in order to ascertain as to whether or not the proper parties have
signed the plat.
(Ord. No. 73, § 12, 3-4-1968)
State Law References: Requirements for plats, MCL 560.132 et seq.
Sec. 74-103. Review of the final plat by the planning commission.
(a)   The final plat documents shall be transmitted to the secretary of the
planning commission for review as to compliance with the approved preliminary
plat. The planning commission shall act on the final plat within 30 days from
the date of submission to the city clerk or at its next regularly scheduled
meeting.
(b)   Should the planning commission find that the final plat is in substantial
agreement with the preliminary plat, it shall approve the plat and notify the
city council of this action.
(c)   Should the planning commission find that the plat does not conform to the
previously approved preliminary plat, and that it is not acceptable, it shall
state the reasons in its official minutes and forward its findings to the city
council and recommend that the city council disapprove the final plat until the
objections are removed.
(Ord. No. 73, § 13, 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-104. Review of the final plat by the city council.
(a)   Upon receipt of the final plat from the planning commission, the city
council shall review the final plat and all recommendations of the planning
commission and shall take action to approve or disapprove the final plat at its
next regular meeting, or at a meeting called within 20 days of the date of
receipt.
(b)   The city council shall require of the proprietor, as a condition of final
plat approval, a cash deposit, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of
credit, whichever the proprietor elects, running to the city to insure, within
the time specified in the contract, the performance of any contract relation
with the city relative to improvement of public places that have not been
completely installed or constructed at the time of final plat approval, and
shall require either a cash deposit, certified check, or irrevocable bank
letter of credit, whichever the proprietor elects, running to the city for the
full cost, as estimated pursuant to section
74-163(b)(1), of any required public improvements that have not been completely
installed or constructed at the time of final plat approval, to insure the
installation of such required public improvements within the time specified in
the contract, after approval of the plat; provided the city shall refund to the
proprietor as the work progresses, amounts of any cash deposits, or allow the
appropriate reduction in security, in amounts equal to the cost of completed
units of work stipulated in the agreement prepared pursuant to section
74-163(b)(1), and satisfactory accomplishment of the construction milestones
noted in that section.
(c)   After the city council has approved the final plat, no change shall be
made in the plat unless the plat is resubmitted for review and approval in
accordance with all the provisions of this article.
(d)   Upon approval of the final plat, the subsequent approvals shall follow
the procedure set forth in the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.).
(e)   A certificate of approval of the final plat shall be affixed to the plat
by the surveyor, and all copies of the final plat signed by the city clerk on
behalf of the city council upon approval of the final plat by that body.
(f)   Once the final plat has been approved by the city and recorded under
section 172 of the Land Division Act, 1967 PA 288, MCL 560.172, it shall be
considered to be an amendment to the master plan of the city and a part
thereof. Approval of a plat by the city does not constitute or effect an
acceptance by the public of any street or other open space shown upon the plat.
(Ord. No. 73, § 14, 3-4-1968; Ord. No. 172, 5-4-2009)
Secs. 74-105--74-125. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
DESIGN STANDARDS
Sec. 74-126. Generally.
The subdivision design standards set forth in this division are development
guides for the assistance of the developer. All final plans shall be reviewed
and meet the approval of the city council.
(Ord. No. 73, § 17, 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-127. Streets.
(a)   Major streets. The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various
elements of the zoning ordinance and the comprehensive development plan and
shall be considered in relation to existing and planned major thoroughfares and
secondary thoroughfares; and such streets shall be platted in the location and
the width indicated on such plan.
(b)   Minor streets. The proposed subdivision street layout shall include minor
streets so laid out that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged. The
street layout shall provide for a continuation of streets adjoining
subdivisions or for the proper projections of streets into adjoining property
which may be subject to future subdivision.
(c)   Streets in relation to other right-of-way. Should a proposed subdivision
border on or contain an expressway or other limited access highway right-of-
way, the city council may require the location of a street approximately
parallel to and on each side of the right-of-way at a distance suitable for the
development of an appropriate use of intervening land as for residential parks
in residence districts, or for commercial, industrial or public purposes in
appropriate districts. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration
of the minimum distance required for approach grades and future grade
separation.
(d)   Marginal-access streets. Should a proposed subdivision border on or
contain an existing or proposed major thoroughfare, the city council may
require marginal-access streets, reverse frontages with approved screen
planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along real property line having a
minimum width of 15 feet, or such other treatment as may be necessary for
adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation and
reduction of traffic hazards.
(e)   Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be
prohibited.
(f)   Street rights-of-way widths. Street rights-of-way widths shall conform to
at least the following minimum standards:
      Street Type   Right-of-Way Width (feet)
   (1)   Major thoroughfare    120
   (2)   Secondary street    86
   (3)   Minor street    66
   (4)   Marginal-access street    66
   (5)   Cul-de-sac street (terminated
      with a 150-foot diameter turnaround)   66
   (6)   Loop street (terminated with a
      50-foot diameter turnaround)    110
   (7)   Turnaround or eyebrow   150
(g)   Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where absolutely
essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with
the other requirements of this article and where the city council finds it will
be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is developed. Wherever there exists adjacent to the tract to be
subdivided a dedication or platted and recorded half street, the other half
will be platted.
(h)   Alleys. Alleys shall be prohibited.
(i)   Street grades. For adequate drainage, the minimum street grade of all
streets shall be no less than one-half of one percent and not greater than five
percent. The planning commission may approve an alteration of this standard
subject to the recommendation of the city engineer clearly indicating the
purpose for requiring the alteration.
(j)   Horizontal street curves. The radii of the minimum horizontal centerline
curvature for major, secondary, and minor thoroughfares shall be as follows:
 
    Street                 Curvature
(1) Major thoroughfare.... 750-foot radius
(2) Secondary street....   400-foot radius
(3) Minor street....       200-foot radius
 
(k)   Horizontal street visibility. The minimum horizontal visibility for
curves and intersections (measured on centerline) shall be:
   (1)   On major thoroughfares, 500 feet.
   (2)   On secondary streets, 300 feet.
   (3)   On minor streets, 300 feet.
(l)   Vertical street visibility. Major, secondary and minor thoroughfares
shall have profile grade change, where the grade change is over two percent,
connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent to the following
algebraic differences:
   (1)   Major thoroughfare, 800 feet.
   (2)   Secondary street, 500 feet.
   (3)   Minor street, 300 feet.
Distances required shall be measured between points five feet above the
centerline of the street.
(m)   Street intersections. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as
nearly as possible to 90 degrees. Curved streets intersecting with major
thoroughfares and secondary streets shall do so with a tangent section of
centerline 50 feet in length, measured from the right-of-way line of the major
or secondary thoroughfare.
(Ord. No. 73, § 17(1), 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-128. Easements and utilities.
Location of utility line easements shall be provided along rear or side lot
lines as necessary for utilities. Easements shall give access to every lot,
park or public ground. Such easements shall be a total of not less than 12 feet
wide, usually six feet dedicated from each lot or parcel. The proprietor shall
grant such additional public utility easements as may be necessary to
effectuate the purposes of section
74-129. Recommendations on the proposed layout of public utility easements
shall be sought from all of the public utility companies serving the area. It
shall be the responsibility of the proprietor to submit copies of the
preliminary plat to all appropriate public utility companies.
(Ord. No. 73, § 17(2), 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-129. Underground wiring.
In all residential subdivisions, all wires, cables and lines for the
distribution of electrical energy or telecommunication service in and to
buildings and light poles in such subdivision shall be located underground or
along rear lot lines.
(Ord. No. 73, § 17(3), 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-130. Blocks.
Blocks within subdivisions shall not exceed 1,320 feet except where, in the
opinion of the planning commission, physical conditions may justify a
variation. Maximum length of a street terminating with a cul-de-sac shall be
600 feet measured from the nearest intersection to the beginning of the
turnaround.
(Ord. No. 73, § 17(4), 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-131. Public walkways.
Locations of public walkways may be required by the planning commission to
obtain satisfactory pedestrian circulation within the subdivision, where blocks
are approved to exceed the standard maximum length. Right-of-way width of all
such public walkways shall be at least 12 feet and shall be a dedicated
easement.
(Ord. No. 73, § 17(5), 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-132. Public reservations.
(a)   When consideration is given by the proprietor to the allocation of areas
suitably located and of adequate size for playgrounds, school sites, parks and
recreation facilities, as indicated in the comprehensive development plan and
the zoning ordinance, such areas shall be provided by one of the following
methods:
   (1)   Dedication to the city.
   (2)   Reservation of land for the use by property owners by deed or
covenants.
   (3)   Reservation for acquisition by the city or school board within a
period of two years. This reservation shall be made in such a manner as to
provide for a release of the land to the proprietor if the city or school board
does not proceed with the purchase within the prescribed time limit.
(b)   Due regard shall be shown by the planning commission and the city council
for preserving outstanding natural features such as scenic spots, watercourses,
or stands of trees. Every effort shall be made by the proprietor to preserve
any nondiseased tree whose trunk is five inches in diameter or more, regardless
of its location within the plat.
(Ord. No. 73, § 17(6), 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-133. Lots.
(a)   Lot sizes and shapes. Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the
following standards:
   (1)   Lot widths, areas, and building setback lines shall conform to at
least the minimum requirements of the city's zoning ordinance.
   (2)   Residential lots having excessive depth in relation to width shall be
avoided, and under no circumstances shall a depth-to-width ratio exceed three
to one.
   (3)   Corner lots for residential use shall be provided with extra width to
permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets. Lots
abutting a pedestrian walkway shall be treated as corner lots.
   (4)   Lots intended for purposes other than single-family or two-family
residential use shall be specifically designated for such purposes.
(b)   Lot division. Lots, outlots or other parcel of land in a recorded plat
shall not be divided for the purpose of sale or lease for building development
unless approved by the planning commission.
   (1)   Procedures. Application for lot divisions shall be submitted in
writing to the planning commission and be accompanied by a sketch drawn to
scale showing the original lot, the proposed division, all pertinent dimensions
and the proposed legal descriptions.
   (2)   Conformance to minimum size. The proposed divisions shall not create
lots which would be less than the minimum sizes required by the zoning
ordinance and shall not have the effect of increasing the number of buildable
lots in a subdivision. This provision shall not apply to nonresidential
subdivisions.
(c)   Lot arrangement. Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following
standards:
   (1)   Every lot shall front or abut on a public street.
   (2)   Side lot sides shall be at right angles or radial to the street
centerline, or as nearly as possible thereto.
   (3)   Residential lots abutting major thoroughfares or secondary streets,
where marginal-access streets are not desirable or possible to attain, shall be
platted with reverse-frontage lots with an approved screen planting contained
in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line having a minimum width
of 15 feet, or such other treatment as may be adequate for the protection of
residential properties, or with side lot lines parallel to the major traffic
streets.
(d)   Uninhabitable lots. Lots located wholly within the floodplain or lots
deemed by the city council to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for
residential occupancy, nor for such other purposes as may increase danger to
health, life or property or aggravate the flood hazard; but such land within
the plat shall be set aside for such uses as shall not produce unsatisfactory
living conditions.
(e)   Lot remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after
platting of a larger tract shall be added to adjacent lots rather than allowed
to remain as unusable parcels.
(f)   Modifications. Variations, exceptions and/or modifications of this
division may be made by the planning commission in specific cases where it is
determined that unusual topographical conditions or other physical conditions
justify such modifications.
(Ord. No. 73, § 17(7), 3-4-1968)
Secs. 74-134--74-155. Reserved.
DIVISION 4.
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 74-156. Generally.
It is the purpose of this division to establish and define the public
improvements which will be required to be provided by the proprietor as
conditions for final plat approval.
(Ord. No. 73, § 15, 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-157. Streets.
(a)   Surfacing and curb and gutter. All streets shall be surfaced and curb and
gutter installations completed in accordance with current specifications of the
city.
(b)   Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed along both sides of
every street shown on the plat. Sidewalks shall not be less than four feet
wide, four inches thick except over driveways, which shall be six inches thick,
and shall be placed one foot off property lines.
(c)   Street signs. Street name signs shall be placed at all intersections
within or abutting the subdivision at places designated by the city engineer.
Street name signs shall conform to the standard type (color, size and print)
used by the city at the time of installation; except that the city council may
provide written approval for a modification of this subdivision to allow the
installation of street name signs which are unique from a design standpoint but
do not violate their intended purpose.
(d)   Streetlighting. All streets shall be lighted in accordance with the
current lighting standards and specifications of the city.
(Ord. No. 73, § 15(1), 3-4-1968; Ord. No. 73-A-77, § 1, 2-7-1977)
Sec. 74-158. Water supply.
(a)   Accessible water supply. Where a public water supply system is accessible
to the subdivision, provisions shall be made by the subdivider to supply each
lot in the subdivision with water from the public supply by means of a water
supply system which meets current city specifications.
(b)   Nonaccessible water supply. Where a public water supply system is not
accessible to the subdivision by reason of absence of feeder mains, the
subdivider shall bear the cost of installation of a new feeder main from the
source of supply to the subdivision in accordance with current city
specifications.
(Ord. No. 73, § 15(2), 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-159. Sanitary sewer system.
(a)   Accessible sewerage system. Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably
accessible, each lot within the subdivision shall be provided with a connection
to the system. All connections shall be subject to the approval of the city
engineer, and all materials used in such system shall meet current city
specifications.
(b)   Nonaccessible sewerage system. If a public sanitary sewer is not
reasonably accessible to the subdivision, the subdivider shall pay the cost of
extending the sanitary sewer lines from the area platted to the nearest public
sanitary sewer trunk line of adequate capacity to carry the additional flow. In
addition, the subdivider shall install public sanitary sewer facilities within
the platted area in accordance with the current city specifications.
(Ord. No. 73, § 15(3), 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-160. Storm drainage system.
(a)   Accessible public drainage system. Where a storm drain is reasonably
accessible, each lot within the subdivided area shall be provided with a
connection to the system. All connections shall be subject to the approval of
the city engineer, and all materials used in such system shall be subject to
current city specifications.
(b)   Nonaccessible public drainage system. If a public storm drain is not
reasonably accessible to the subdivision, the subdivider shall pay the cost of
extending the storm sewer lines from the area platted to the nearest public
storm sewer trunk of adequate size to carry the additional flow. In addition,
the subdivider shall install public storm drain facilities within the platted
area in accordance with the current city specifications.
(Ord. No. 73, § 15(4), 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-161. Street trees.
Existing trees near street rights-of-way shall be preserved by the subdivider.
Street trees from the varieties listed in the city specifications on file with
the city clerk shall be provided at least one per lot in the planting strip
between the sidewalk and curb and planted by the proprietor in accordance with
the city tree planting specifications.
(Ord. No. 73, § 15(5), 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-162. Monuments.
Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points and points of
curves in the street. Fee for the inspection by the city of all monuments shall
be set by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. No. 73, § 15(6), 3-4-1968)
Sec. 74-163. Guarantee of completion of required improvements.
(a)   The developer shall be responsible for the provision of all required
improvements to the subdivision.
(b)   The final plat should not be submitted until all of the required
improvements within the plat have been completed according to plans and
specifications as set forth in this division, or until satisfactory
arrangements have been made to complete them. This may be accomplished by
either the full installation of all required improvements by the developer at
the time the final plat is forwarded to the city council with a recommendation
of approval by the planning commission, or by the provision of a financial
guarantee of performance in the following manner:
   (1)   Performance guarantee.
      a.   Any requests made of the city council to accept a performance
guarantee deposit in lieu of completing all required improvements prior to
having the city council approve the final plat shall be confirmed in writing
and shall be accompanied by an estimate of costs of the remaining required
improvements. This estimate shall be furnished by the proprietor's engineer. It
shall be complete in all respects, including estimated quantities and unit
prices, and bear the engineer's seal of registration. If approved by the city
council, this estimate will provide the basis for the amount of performance
deposit and written agreement. Generally, the amount of performance guarantee
required will be equal to 100 percent of the proprietor's engineer's estimate,
following review by the city engineer's estimate and agreement, plus 25 percent
of such estimate for contingencies. The agreement may further stipulate that
the deposit shall be rebated to the proprietor, or an appropriate reduction in
the security, in the amounts equal to the cost of completed units of work
stipulated in the agreement prepared pursuant to this section, and satisfactory
accomplishment of the construction milestones.
      b.   The performance guarantee shall either be a cash deposit or a
certified check, or an irrevocable letter of credit, deposited by the
subdivider with the city treasurer or a responsible escrow agent or trust
company, subject to the approval of the city council and the city attorney.
      c.   The agreement will be so written that any part of the performance
deposit, as required, may be used to reimburse the city for costs incurred in
connection with the examination and inspection of the required improvements.
      d.   If the developer shall in any case fail to complete such work within
such period, as required by the conditions of the guarantee, the city shall
have such work completed. In order to reimburse itself for the cost expense,
the city council may appropriate funds from the deposit which the subdivider
deposits in lieu of the required improvements.
   (2)   Maintenance bond. Prior to acceptance by the city of required
improvements, a one-year maintenance bond in an amount set by the city council
shall be posted by the subdivider.
   (3)   Inspections.
      a.   Inspectors authorized by the city council shall be required to
review construction of all required improvements on a continuous basis. In no
case shall the same engineer provide services to both the city and the
subdivider.
      b.   It shall be the responsibility of the improvements contractors to
notify the office of the city manager at least three days in advance for the
following periodic inspections:
          1.   Storm and sanitary sewers, water lines, mains, laterals, and
catch basins before the trenches are backfilled.
          2.   Forms set for curb and gutter subbase has been put in place and
before the concrete is poured.
          3.   Forms set for sidewalks before any concrete is poured.
          4.   All subgrade that has been shaped and rolled, before compaction
test is made.
         5.   Forms for pavement before any concrete is poured.
           6.   All base courses.
       c.   No work covered by the bond shall be accepted or bond released
until these inspections have been made and work found satisfactory.
       d.   The agreement to install required public improvements shall also
provide for the checking of improvements and plans and continuous inspections
of all improvements by the city and for costs of such services which shall be
borne by the subdivider.
    (4)   Sidewalks and street trees.  For required improvements consisting of
sidewalk and street trees, the proprietor may elect to provide a performance
guarantee deposit in an amount equal to 15 percent of the engineers' estimates
of such cost, plus 25 percent of such deposit for contingencies, provided the
proprietor shall:
       a.   Submit for approval with the final plat building and use
restrictions in recordable form, approved by the city attorney, requiring that
each owner construct sidewalks to city specifications along all street rights-
of-way abutting the lot or parcel and to plant according to city specifications
required street trees within the right-of-way before occupying any residence on
any lot. These building and use restrictions shall be recorded with the
register of deeds with the final plat.
       b.   Provide to each purchaser of any undeveloped lot or parcel within
the subdivision prior to closing written notice that the owner shall bear the
legal and financial responsibility of constructing public sidewalks and
installing required street trees within the public right-of-way according to
city specifications as a prior condition to lawful occupancy of any dwelling to
be constructed. This duty shall be binding on the proprietor and his heirs,
personal representatives, successors or assigns; and no such person shall fail
to provide such notice.
       c.   Agree that should any required sidewalks or street trees within the
subdivision not be constructed or installed by subsequent purchasers within six
years following final plat approval, that the city may proceed to complete the
improvements; and the city council may appropriate the costs from the
performance guarantee deposit as provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section.
(Ord. No. 73, § 16, 3-4-1968; Ord. No. 73-A-92, § 2(16), 1-21-1992; Ord. 222, §
38, 12-3-2018)
Secs. 74-164--74-195. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. DIVISIONS*
*State Law References: Approval of divisions, MCL 560.108 et seq.
Sec. 74-196. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
Applicant means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation,
limited liability company, or combination of any of them that holds an
ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not.
Parent parcel or parent tract means a parcel or tract, respectively, lawfully
in existence on the effective date of Ord. No. 131.
State Law References: Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(i).
(Ord. No. 131, § 3, 2-2-1998)
Sec. 74-197. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to:
   (1)   Carry out the provisions of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et
seq.);
   (2)   Prevent the creation of parcels of property which do not comply with
applicable ordinances and the act;
   (3)   Minimize potential boundary disputes;
   (4)   Maintain orderly development of the city; and
   (5)   Otherwise provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents
and property owners of the city;
by establishing reasonable standards for prior review and approval of land
division within the city.
(Ord. No. 131, § 2, 2-2-1998)
Sec. 74-198. Prior approval requirement for land divisions.
Land in the city shall not be divided without the prior review and approval of
the city assessor or other official designated by the city council in
accordance with this article and the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.).
The following shall be exempted from this requirement:
   (1)   A parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat pursuant to
article II of this chapter and the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.).
   (2)   A lot in a recorded plat proposed to be divided in accordance with
article II of this chapter and the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.).
   (3)   An exempt split.
(Ord. No. 131, § 4, 2-2-1998)
Sec. 74-199. Application for land division approval.
An applicant shall file all of the following with the city assessor for review
and approval of a proposed land division before making any division either by
deed, land contract, lease for more than one year, or for building development:
   (1)   A completed application form on such form as may be provided by the
city.
   (2)   Proof of fee ownership of the land proposed to be divided.
(3)   a.   A survey map of the land proposed to be divided, prepared pursuant
to the survey map requirements of Public Act No. 132 of 1970 (MCL 54.211 et
seq.) by a land surveyor licensed by the state and showing the dimensions and
legal descriptions of the existing parcel and the parcels proposed to be
created by the division, the location of all existing structures and other land
improvements, and the accessibility of the parcels for vehicular traffic and
utilities from existing public roads.
      b.   In lieu of such survey map, at the applicant's option, the applicant
may waive the 45-day statutory requirement for a decision on the application
until such survey map and legal description are filed with the city and submit
a tentative preliminary application form, including an accurate legal
description of each proposed division, and showing the boundary lines,
dimensions and the accessibility of each division from existing or proposed
public roads for automobile traffic and public utilities for preliminary
review, approval and/or denial by the city assessor prior to a final
application under this section.
      c.   The city assessor may waive the certified survey map requirement
where the tentative parcel map is deemed to contain adequate information to
approve a proposed land division considering the size, simple nature of the
divisions, and the undeveloped character of the territory within which the
proposed divisions are located. An accurate legal description of all the
proposed divisions, however, shall at all times be required.
   (4)   Proof that all standards of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et
seq.) and this article have been met.
   (5)   The history and specifications of any previous divisions of land of
which the proposed division was a part sufficient to establish the parcel to be
divided was lawfully in existence as of March 31, 1997.
   (6)   Proof that all due and payable taxes or installments of special
assessments pertaining to the land proposed to be divided are paid in full.
   (7)   If transfer of division rights are proposed in the land transfer,
detailed information about the terms and availability of the proposed division
rights transfer.
   (8)   Unless a division creates a parcel which is acknowledged and declared
to be not buildable under section
74-202, all divisions shall result in buildable parcels containing sufficient
buildable area outside of unbuildable wetlands, floodplains, and other areas
where buildings are prohibited, and with sufficient area to comply with all
required setback provisions, minimum floor area, off-street parking spaces, on-
site sewage disposal and water well locations (where private wells and on-site
sewage disposal is permitted by the city), and maximum allowed area coverage of
buildings and structures on the site.
   (9)   The required fee as may be established by resolution of the city
council for land division pursuant to this article to cover the costs of review
of the application and administration of this article and the Land Division Act
(MCL 560.101 et seq.).
(Ord. No. 131, § 5, 2-2-1998)
Sec. 74-200. Procedure for review of applications for land division approval.
(a)   Upon receipt of a land division application package, the city clerk or
other official designated by the city council shall forthwith submit the
package to the city assessor or other designated official for decision. The
city assessor or other designee shall determine whether the application is
complete within ten working days and shall approve, approve with reasonable
conditions to assure compliance with applicable ordinances and the protection
of public health, safety and general welfare, or disapprove the land division
applied for within 45 days after receipt of a complete application package
conforming to this article's requirements, and shall promptly notify the
applicant of the decision and the reasons for any denial. If the application
package does not conform to this article's requirements and the Land Division
Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.), the city assessor or other designee shall return the
package to the applicant for completion and refiling within five business days
in accordance with this article and the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et
seq.).
(b)   The city assessor or his designee shall maintain an official record of
all approvals and accomplished land divisions or transfers.
(Ord. No. 131, § 6, 2-2-1998)
Sec. 74-201. Standards for approval of land divisions.
A proposed land division shall be approved if the following criteria are met:
   (1)   All the parcels to be created by the proposed land division fully
comply with the applicable lot (parcel), yard and area requirements of the
zoning ordinance, including but not limited to the provisions of section 94-121
of this Code for minimum lot (parcel) width, minimum road frontage, minimum lot
(parcel) area, minimum lot depth-to-width ratio, and maximum lot (parcel)
coverage and minimum setbacks for existing buildings/structures.
   (2)   The proposed land division complies with all requirements of the Land
Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and this article.
   (3)   All parcels created and remaining have existing adequate
accessibility, or an available access to a public road for public utilities and
emergency and other vehicles not less than the requirements of the zoning
ordinance, major thoroughfare plan, or this article. In determining adequacy of
accessibility, the standards applicable to plats shall also apply as a minimum
standard whenever a parcel or tract is proposed to be divided to create four or
more parcels.
   (4)   Parcel depth and width requirements.
      a.   The ratio of depth to width of any parcel created by the division
shall comply with the requirements of section
74-133(a)(2) exclusive of access roads, easements or nonbuildable parcels
created under section 74-202, and parcels added to contiguous parcels that
result in all involved parcels complying with that ratio.
      b.   The permissible depth of a parcel created by a land division shall
be measured within the boundaries of each parcel from the abutting road right-
of-way to the most remote boundary line point of the parcel from the point of
commencement of the measurement.
      c.   The permissible minimum width shall be as defined in article II of
this chapter for each resulting parcel of ten acres or less.
   (5)   In the case of any proposed land division resulting in four or more
residential developmental parcels, each parcel shall have frontage on or shall
abut a public street or highway or a private road constructed in accordance
with a final site plan approved pursuant to chapter 94 of this Code.
   (6)   In the absence of applicable zoning or other ordinances providing a
different standard, all parcels created by a land division shall comply with
the following minimum standards:
      a.   Where accessibility is to be provided by a proposed new dedicated
public road, proof that the city engineer, county road commission, or state
department of transportation has approved the proposed layout and construction
design of the road and of utility easements and connected drainage facilities.
      b.   Where accessibility by vehicle traffic and for utilities is
permitted through other than a dedicated and accepted public road or easement,
or private road approved by the planning commission pursuant to a community
unit plan, such accessibility shall comply with the following:
         1.   Design standards for minor streets prescribed in Division 3 of
Article II of this chapter.
         2.   Required improvements for minor streets prescribed in Division 4
of Article II of this chapter.
          3.   If accessibility is by a private road or easement, a document
acceptable to the city manager shall be recorded with the county register of
deeds and filed with the city assessor or his designee specifying the method of
private financing of all maintenance, improvements and snow removal, the
apportionment of these costs among those benefited, and the right of the city
to assess such costs against those properties benefited, plus a 25 percent
administrative fee, and to perform such improvements in the event of a failure
of those benefited to privately perform these duties for the health, safety and
general welfare of the area.
          4.   No private road shall or easement shall extend for more than
1,000 feet from a public road.
          5.   No private road shall serve more than 25 separate parcels.
    (7)   In the case of each resulting parcel that is a development site,
satisfactory evidence of adequate easements for public utilities from the
parcel to existing public utilities.
(Ord. No. 131, § 7, 2-2-1998; Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. 222, § 39, 12-3-
2018)
State law references—Approval standards for divisions, MCL 560.109.
Sec. 74-202. Allowance for approval of other land divisions.
Notwithstanding disqualification from approval pursuant to this article, a
proposed land division which does not fully comply with the applicable lot,
yard, accessibility and area requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance or
this article may be approved in any of the following circumstances:
   (1)   Where the applicant executes and records an affidavit or deed
restriction with the county register of deeds in a form acceptable to the city
designating the parcel as not buildable. Any such parcel shall also be
designated as not buildable in the city records, and shall not thereafter be
the subject of a request to the zoning board of appeals for variance relief
from the applicable lot and/or area requirements, and shall not be developed
with any building or aboveground structure exceeding four feet in height, and
shall not be used for human habitation.
   (2)   Where, in circumstances not covered by subsection (1) of this section,
the zoning board of appeals has, previous to this article, granted a variance
from the lot, yard, depth-to-width ratio, frontage and/or area requirements
with which the parcel failed to comply.
   (3)   Where the proposed land division involves only the minor adjustment of
a common boundary line or involves a conveyance between adjoining properties
which does not result in either parcel violating this article, any applicable
zoning ordinance, or the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.).
(Ord. No. 131, § 8, 2-2-1998)
Sec. 74-203. Rights of appeal.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city assessor or his designee made
pursuant to this article may, within 30 days of such decision, appeal the
decision to the planning commission, which shall consider and resolve such
appeal by a majority vote at its next regular meeting or session affording
sufficient time for a 20-day written notice to the applicant (and appellant
where other than the applicant) of the time and date of the meeting and
appellate hearing.
(Ord. No. 131, § 9, 2-2-1998)
Sec. 74-204. Consequences of noncompliance with land division approval
requirement.
Any parcel created in noncompliance with this article shall not be eligible for
any building permits or zoning approvals such as special land use approval or
site plan approval, and shall not be recognized as a separate parcel on the
assessment roll. In addition, violation of this article shall subject the
violator to the penalties and enforcement actions provided by law or ordinance.
(Ord. No. 131, § 10, 2-2-1998)
Chapter 75
TAX EXEMPTIONS
Article I. In General
Secs. 75-1—75-10. Reserved.
Article II. Jefferson Square Apartments Tax Exemption Ordinance
Sec.
75-11.   Purpose.
Sec.
75-12.   Definitions
Sec.
75-13.   Class of housing developments.
Sec.
75-14.   Establishment of annual service charge.
Sec.
75-15.   Limitation on the payment of annual service charge.
Sec.
75-16.   Contractual effect of article.
Sec.
75-17.   Payment of service charge.
Sec.
75-18.   Duration.
Sec.
75-19.   Severability.
Sec.
75-20.   Audit.
Sec.
75-21.   Repeal.
Secs. 75-22—75-30. Reserved.
Article III. Green Park Townhomes Tax Exemption Ordinance
Sec.
75-31.   Purpose.
Sec.
75-32.   Definitions.
Sec.
75-33.   Class of housing developments.
Sec.
75-34.   Establishment of annual service charge.
Sec.
75-35.   Limitation on the payment of annual service charge.
Sec.
75-36.   Contractual effect of article.
Sec.
75-37.   Payment of service charge.
Sec.
75-38.   Duration.
Sec.
75-39.   Severability.
Sec.
75-40.   Audit.
Sec.
75-41.   Repeal.
Secs. 75-42—75-50. Reserved.
Article IV. Temple Senior Housing Apartments Tax Exemption Ordinance
Sec.
75-51.   Purpose.
Sec.
75-52.   Definitions.
Sec.
75-53.   Class of housing developments.
Sec.
75-54.   Establishment of annual service charge.
Sec.
75-55.   Limitation on the payment of annual service charge.
Sec.
75-56.   Contractual effect of article.
Sec.
75-57.   Payment of service charge.
Sec.
75-58.   Duration.
Sec.
75-59.   Severability.
Sec.
75-60.   Audit.
Secs. 75-61—75-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 75-1—75.10. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. JEFFERSON SQUARE APARTMENTS TAX EXEMPTION ORDINANCE
Sec. 75-11. Purpose.
(a)   It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of
low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a
service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing
Development Authority Act of 1966 [1966 P.A. 345, as amended, MCLA 125.1401 et
seq., MSA 16.114(1) et seq.]. The City of Mason is authorized by this Act to
establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or
all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it
chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is
further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income is a public
necessity, and as the City of Mason will be benefitted and improved by such
housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax
exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the
provisions of this chapter for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of
taxes during the period contemplated in this article are essential to the
determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are
constructed and financed in reliance on such tax exemption.
(b)   The City of Mason acknowledges that MHS Limited Dividend Housing
Association Limited Partnership (the “sponsor") has offered subject to receipt
of a reservation of low income housing tax credits ("LIHTC") under Section 42
of the Code and/or mortgage loan financing from the Michigan state housing
development authority, to acquire, rehabilitate, own and operate a housing
development identified as Jefferson Square Apartments, to serve elderly persons
of low and moderate income on certain property located in the City of Mason and
more particularly described as Exhibit "A" attached to Ord. No. 252 and
incorporated herein ("housing development") to serve elderly persons of low
income, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the City of Mason on account of
this housing development an annual service charge for public services in lieu
of all taxes.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-12. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966, being P.A. 346
of 1966.
Annual shelter rent means the total collections during an agreed annual period
from all occupants of a housing development representing rent or occupancy
charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat, or other utilities
furnished to the occupants.
Authority means the Michigan state housing development authority.
Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended.
Elderly means a single person who is 55 years of age or older or a household in
which at least one member is 55 years of age or older and all other members are
50 years of age or older.
Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of
housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing,
commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as
the authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates
to housing for persons of low income.
Mortgage loan means a loan to be made by the authority to the sponsor for the
rehabilitation and/or permanent financing of the housing development.
Sponsor means person(s) or entities which have applied to the authority for
benefits under the Act, including LIHTCs and/or a mortgage loan to develop and/
or finance a housing development.
Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service
which are paid by the housing development.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-13. Class of housing developments.
It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of
such taxes shall be housing developments of multiple dwellings for elderly
persons or two households of low income, which are financed or assisted
pursuant to the Act. It is further determined that Jefferson Square Apartments
are of this class.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-14. Establishment of annual service charge.
The housing development identified as Jefferson Square Apartments and the
property on which it is constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes
from and after the date of closing on a new mortgage loan given by the
authority to the sponsor to refinance the existing mortgage loan and to provide
for improvements to the housing development. The city, acknowledging that the
sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the
housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of
this chapter and the qualification of the housing development for exemption
from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established herein,
and in consideration of the sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of a mortgage
loan from the authority, to rehabilitate, reconstruct, own and operate said
housing development, hereby agrees to accept payment of an annual service
charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service
charge shall be as follows:
   (1)   Commencing January 1 of the year following closing on the authority
mortgage, 4% of the total annual shelter rents collected for the preceding
calendar year;
   (2)   An amount equal to 50% of the net operating income in excess of
$20,000 which is earned for the preceding year after payment or funding of
expenses, reserves, and debt service on the authority mortgage and the HOME
second mortgage. Provided, however, in no event shall the total service charges
payable based upon net operating income exceed that amount which would be
payable on the housing development if it were not exempt and paying full real
property taxes.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-15. Limitation on the payment of annual service charge.
(a)   Notwithstanding Section 5 of the Act, service charge to be paid each year
in lieu of taxes for that part of the housing development which is tax exempt
and which is occupied by other than low income persons or families shall be
equal to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of
the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt. The
sponsor shall certify to the city on or before February 1 of each year the
units occupied by persons other than "low income persons or families" as of
December 31 of the prior year. A service charge equal to full taxes shall be
paid on such units. For purposes of determining the full tax service charge to
be paid on such units, the city assessor shall annually determine the state
equalized value and taxable value of all units in the same manner as for non-
exempt property of a like kind.
(b)   The term "low income" as used herein shall be the same meaning found in
Section 5(a)(7) of the Act.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-16. Contractual effect of article.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5(a)(5) of the Act to the contrary, a
contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as third party
beneficiary thereunder to provide tax payments in lieu thereof as previously
described, is effectuated by enactment of this chapter. Notwithstanding the
contractual effect of this chapter, this chapter may be repealed by further
ordinance of the Mason City Council in the event payment of the service charge
in lieu of taxes, including all accrued interest, shall remain delinquent for
more than two years.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-17. Payment of service charge.
The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined hereunder shall be payable
and collected in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the
city, shall become payable on July 1 of each year and shall be distributed to
the several units levying the general property tax in the same proportion as
prevailed with the general property tax in the previous calendar year. Failure
to pay the service charge on or before July 1 of each year shall result in the
service charge being subject to 1% interest per month until paid. If any amount
of the annual service charge or accrued interest shall remain unpaid as of
December 31 of each year, the amount unpaid shall be a lien upon the real
property constituting the Jefferson Square Apartments housing development upon
the city treasurer filing a certificate of non-payment of the service charge,
together with an affidavit of proof of service of the certificate of non-
payment upon the sponsor with the Ingham County register of deeds, and
proceedings may then be had to enforce the lien as provided by law for the
foreclosure of tax liens upon real property.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-18. Duration.
This chapter shall remain in effect and shall not terminate for a period of 30
years following closing on the authority mortgage provided, (1) that the
rehabilitation of the housing development commences within one year of the
effective date of this chapter; and, (2) is completed within 18 months of
commencement and (3) there is filed within 13 months of the effective date of
this article the appropriate affidavit with the city assessor accompanied by a
certificate of authority that the project is eligible for the exemption, in the
manner provided by Sec. 15(a)(1) of the Act; and (4) the housing development
remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to Section 42 of the
Code, as amended. The above notwithstanding, upon satisfaction in full of the
authority mortgage loan, foreclosure of the mortgage loan or sale of the
housing development to an entity other than an entity qualified under Section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or an entity controlled by a 501(c)(3)
organization, this chapter shall automatically terminate.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-19. Severability.
The various sections and provisions of this article shall be deemed to be
severable and should any section or provision of this article be declared by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same
shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or any section or
provision of this article other than the section or provisions so declared to
be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-20. Audit.
It shall be the responsibility of the city manager to review the financial
audit and other pertinent financial documents of the Jefferson Square
Apartments project to determine that the tax exemption as provided for in this
article is being used solely for the benefit of low income persons or families
and that the service charges are being correctly reported and paid. The sponsor
shall provide such financial records, annual statements, or financial reports
as are reasonably necessary for the city manager to conduct said review. Said
review shall occur at the end of the fifth and tenth years after the
rehabilitation has been completed. If the city manager and city attorney find
that the above condition has not been met, notice shall be given to the owner
and the authority with an opportunity to cure within 15 days of such notice. If
the condition shall not be cured within said 15 days, the city council shall
conduct a public hearing to consider repeal of this article. Said public
hearing shall be held only after the owner(s) of said Jefferson Square
Apartments project and the Michigan state housing development authority have
been notified by certified, return receipt mail at least 45 days prior to the
hearing.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-21. Repeal.
Ordinance No. 116 and Ordinance No. 136 shall be superseded by this article and
terminate on the effective date of Ordinance No. 252, except that all
obligations for payment of annual service charges due under Ordinance No. 116
and Ordinance No. 136, together with all accrued interest and penalties due
thereon, shall be incorporated by reference herein and continue in effect until
paid in full.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Secs. 75-22—75-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. GREEN PARK TOWNHOMES TAX EXEMPTION ORDINANCE
Sec. 75-31. Purpose.
(a)   It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of
low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a
service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing
Development Authority Act of 1966 [1966 P.A. 345, as amended, MCLA 125.1401 et
seq.]. The City of Mason is authorized by this Act to establish or change the
service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing
exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the
taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such
housing for persons of low income is a public necessity, and as the City of
Mason will be benefitted and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the
same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid
public purpose; further, that the provisions of this article for tax exemption
and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this
article are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing
developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such tax
exemption.
(b)   The City of Mason acknowledges that Green Park Townhomes Limited Dividend
Housing Association Limited Partnership ( the "sponsor") has offered, subject
to receipt of a reservation of low income housing tax credits ("LIHTC") under
Section 42 of the Code and/or mortgage loan financing from the Michigan state
housing development authority, to acquire, develop, own and operate a housing
development identified as Green Park Townhomes, to serve persons of low and
moderate income on certain property located in the City of Mason and more
particularly described as Exhibit "A" attached to Ordinance No. 252 and
incorporated herein ("housing development") and that the sponsor has offered to
pay the City of Mason on account of this housing development an annual service
charge for public services in lieu of all taxes.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-32. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966, being P.A. 346
of 1966.
Annual shelter rent means the total collections during an agreed annual period
from all occupants of a housing development representing rent or occupancy
charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat, or other utilities
furnished to the occupants.
Authority means the Michigan state housing development authority.
Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended.
Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of
housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing,
commercial, recreational, communal, and educational facilities as the authority
determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for
persons of low income.
Mortgage loan means a loan to be made by the authority to the sponsor for the
rehabilitation and/or permanent financing of the housing development.
Sponsor means person(s) or entities which have applied to the authority for
benefits under the Act, including LIHTCs and/or a mortgage loan to develop and/
or finance a housing development for low income persons or families.
Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service
which are paid by the housing development.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-33. Class of housing developments.
It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of
such taxes shall be housing developments of multiple dwellings for persons or
households of low income, which are financed or assisted pursuant to the Act.
It is further determined that Green Park Townhomes is of this class.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-34. Establishment of annual service charge.
(a)   The housing development identified as Green Park Townhomes and the
property on which it is constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes
from and after the date of closing on a new mortgage loan given by the
authority to the sponsor to construct and equip the housing development. The
city, acknowledging that the sponsor and the authority have established the
economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment
and continuing effect of this article and the qualification of the housing
development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of
taxes as established herein, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer,
subject to receipt of a mortgage loan from the authority, to construct, own and
operate said housing development, hereby agrees to accept payment of an annual
service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes.
(b)   The annual service charge shall be as follows: commencing January 1 of
the year following closing on the authority mortgage, 10% of the total annual
shelter rents collected for the preceding calendar year.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-35. Limitation on the payment of annual service charge.
(a)   Notwithstanding Section 5, the service charge to be paid each year in
lieu of taxes for that part of the housing development which is tax exempt and
which is occupied by other than low income persons or families shall be equal
to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the
housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt.
(b)   The sponsor shall certify to the city on or before February 1 of each
year the units occupied by persons other than "low income persons or families"
as of December 31 of the prior year. A service charge equal to full taxes shall
be paid on such units. For purposes of determining the full tax service charge
to be paid on such units, the city assessor shall annually determine the state
equalized value and taxable value of all units in the same manner as for non-
exempt property of a like kind. The term "low income" as used herein shall be
the same meaning found in Section 15(a)(7) of the Act.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-36. Contractual effect of article.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a)(5) of the Act, to the contrary,
a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as third party
beneficiary thereunder to provide tax payments in lieu thereof as previously
described, is effectuated by enactment of this article. Notwithstanding the
contractual effect of this article, this article may be repealed by further
ordinance of the Mason City Council in the event that payment of the service
charge in lieu of taxes, including all accrued interest, shall remain
delinquent for more than two years.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-37. Payment of service charge.
The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined hereunder shall be payable
and collected in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the
city, shall become payable on July 1 of each year and shall be distributed to
the several units levying the general property tax in the same proportion as
prevailed with the general property tax in the previous calendar year. Failure
to pay the service charge on or before July 1 of each year shall result in the
service charge being subject to 1% interest per month until paid. If any amount
of the annual service charge or accrued interest shall remain unpaid as of
December 31 of each year, the amount unpaid shall be a lien upon the real
property constituting the Green Park Townhomes housing development upon the
city treasurer filing a certificate of nonpayment of the service charge,
together with an affidavit of proof of service of the certificate of non-
payment upon the sponsor with the Ingham County register of deeds, and
proceedings may then be had to enforce the lien as provided by law for the
foreclosure of tax liens upon real property.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-38. Duration.
This article shall remain in effect and shall not terminate for a period of 35
years following closing on the authority mortgage provided that: (1)
construction of the housing development commences within one year of the
effective date of this article; (2) construction is completed within 18 months
of commencement; (3) there is filed within 13 months of the effective date of
this article the appropriate affidavit with the city assessor accompanied by a
certificate of authority that the project is eligible for the exemption, in the
manner provided by Section 15(a)(1) of the Act; (4) the housing development
remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to Section 42 of the
Code, as amended; and (5) the required infrastructure improvements (sewer,
water, storm and roadway) are completed and the entire length of Orchard Lane
is improved by the sponsor to city standards and dedicated to the city as a
public street on or before completion of construction and occupancy of the
development. The above notwithstanding, upon satisfaction in full of the
authority mortgage loan, foreclosure of the mortgage loan or sale of the
housing development to an entity other than an entity qualified under Section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or an entity controlled by a 501(c)(3)
organization, this article shall automatically terminate.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-39. Severability.
The various sections and provisions of this article shall be deemed to be
severable and should any section or provision of this article be declared by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same
shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or any section or
provision of this article other than the section or provisions so declared to
be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-40. Audit.
It shall be the responsibility of the city manager to review the financial
audit and other pertinent financial documents of the Green Park Townhomes
project to determine that the tax exemption as provided for in this article is
being used solely for the benefit of low income persons or families and that
the service charges are being correctly reported and paid. The sponsor shall
provide such financial records, annual statements, or financial reports as are
reasonably necessary for the city manager to conduct said review. Said review
shall occur at the end of the fifth and tenth years after the development has
been completed. If the city manager and city attorney find that the above
condition has not been met, notice shall be given to the owner and the
authority with an opportunity to cure within 15 days of such notice. If the
condition shall not be cured within said 15 days, the City Council shall
conduct a public hearing to consider repeal of this article. Said public
hearing shall be held only after the owner(s) of said Green Park Townhomes
project and the Michigan state housing development authority have been notified
by certified, return receipt mail at least 45 days prior to the hearing.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 75-41. Repeal.
Ordinance No. 146 shall be superseded by this article and terminate on the
effective date of Ordinance No. 252, except that all obligations for payment of
annual service charges due under Ordinance No. 146, together with all accrued
interest and penalties due thereon, shall be incorporated by reference herein
and continue in effect until paid in full.
(Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Secs. 75-42—75-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. TEMPLE SENIOR HOUSING APARTMENTS TAX EXEMPTION ORDINANCE
Sec. 75-51. Purpose.
   (a)   It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of
Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of
low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a
service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing
Development Authority Act of 1966 [1966 PA 345, as amended, MCL 125.1401 et
seq]. The City of Mason is authorized by this Act to establish or change the
service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing
exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the
taxes that would be paid but for this Act. It is further acknowledged that such
housing for persons of low income is a public necessity, and as the City of
Mason will be benefitted and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the
same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid
public purpose; further, that the provisions of this article for tax exemption
and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this
article are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing
developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such tax
exemption.
   (b)   The City of Mason acknowledges that TWG Temple Limited Dividend
Housing Association Limited Partnership (the "sponsor") has offered, subject to
receipt of an allocation under the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC)
Program by the Michigan State Housing Development Authority, to construct, own
and operate a housing project identified as Temple Senior Housing Apartments on
certain property located at Temple and Ash Streets in the City of Mason, more
particularly described in Exhibit "A", to serve low income elderly persons and
families, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city on account of this
housing project an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all ad
valorem property taxes. [A copy of Exhibit A can be found in the city's
offices.]
(Ord. No. 253, 9-3-2024; Ord. No. 262, 3-17-2025)
Sec. 75-52. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966, being Public Act
346 of 1966, as amended.
Annual shelter rent means the total collections during an agreed annual period
from all occupants of a housing development representing rent or occupancy
charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat, or other utilities
furnished to the occupants.
Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
Elderly means a single person who is 55 years of age or older or a household in
which at least one member is 55 years of age or older and all other members are
50 years of age or older.
Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of
housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing,
commercial, recreational, communal, and educational facilities as the authority
determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for
persons of low income.
LIHTC program means the Low Income Housing Tax Credit program administered by
the authority under Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1982, as
amended.
Low income persons and families means persons and families eligible to move
into a housing development.
Mortgage loan means a loan that is federally-aided (as defined in Section 11 of
the Act) or a loan or grant made or to be made by the authority to the sponsor
for the construction, rehabilitation, acquisition and/or permanent financing of
a housing project, and secured by a mortgage on the housing project.
Sponsor means TWG Temple Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited
Partnership, or any entity that receives or assumes a mortgage loan and an
allocation under the LIHTC reservation.
Utilities means charges for gas, electric, water, sanitary sewer service and
other utilities furnished to the occupants that are paid by the housing
development.
(Ord. No. 253, 9-3-2024; Ord. No. 262, 3-17-2025)
Sec. 75-53. Class of housing developments.
   It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of
such taxes shall be housing developments of multiple dwellings for elderly
persons or households of low income, which are financed or assisted pursuant to
the Act. It is further determined that Temple Senior Housing Apartments of this
class.
(Ord. No. 253, 9-3-2024; Ord. No. 262, 3-17-2025)
Sec. 75-54. Establishment of annual service charge.
   (a)   The housing development identified as Temple Senior Housing Apartments
and the property on which it is constructed shall be exempt from all ad valorem
property taxes from and after the date of closing on a new mortgage loan given
by the authority to the sponsor to construct and equip the housing development.
   (b)   The city, acknowledging that the sponsor and the authority have
established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance
upon the enactment and continuing effect of this article and the qualification
of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment
in lieu of taxes as established herein, and in consideration of the sponsor's
offer, subject to receipt of a mortgage loan from the authority, to construct,
own and operate said housing development, hereby agrees to accept payment of an
annual service charge for public services in lieu of all ad valorem property
taxes. The annual service charge shall be as follows:
      (1)   Commencing January 1 of the year following completion of
construction the sponsor shall pay a service charge in lieu of taxes equal to
4% of the total annual shelter rents collected for the preceding calendar; and
      (2)   Provided, however, in no event shall the total service charges
payable based upon the annual shelter rent exceed that amount which would be
payable on the housing development if it were not exempt and paying full real
ad valorem property taxes.
(Ord. No. 253, 9-3-2024; Ord. No. 262, 3-17-2025)
Sec. 75-55. Limitation on the payment of annual service charge.
   (a)   Notwithstanding Section 5, the service charge to be paid each year in
lieu of taxes for that part of the housing development which is tax exempt and
which is occupied by other than low income persons or families shall be equal
to the full amount of the taxes which would be paid on that portion of the
housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt.
   (b)   The sponsor shall certify to the city on or before February 1 of each
year the units occupied by persons other than "low income persons or families"
as of December 31 of the prior year. A service charge equal to full ad valorem
property taxes shall be paid on such units. For purposes of determining the
full tax service charge to be paid on such units, the city assessor shall
annually determine the state equalized value and taxable value of all units in
the same manner as for non-exempt property of a like kind.
(Ord. No. 253, 9-3-2024; Ord. No. 262, 3-17-2025)
Sec. 75-56. Contractual effect of article.
   (a)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a)(5) of the Act, to the
contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as
third party beneficiary thereunder to provide tax exemption and accept a
payment in lieu of taxes, as previously described, is effected by enactment of
this article.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the contractual effect of this article, this article
may be repealed by further ordinance of the Mason city council in the event
that payment of the service charge in lieu of taxes, including all accrued
interest, shall remain delinquent for more than two years.
(Ord. No. 253, 9-3-2024; Ord. No. 262, 3-17-2025)
Sec. 75-57. Payment of service charge.
   The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined hereunder shall be payable
and collected in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the
city, shall become payable on July 1 of each year and shall be distributed to
the several units levying the general property tax in the same proportion as
prevailed with the general property tax in the previous calendar year. Failure
to pay the service charge on or before July 1 of each year shall result in the
service charge being subject to 1% interest per month until paid. If any amount
of the annual service charge or accrued interest shall remain unpaid as of
December 31 of each year, the amount unpaid shall be a lien upon the real
property constituting the housing development upon the city treasurer filing a
certificate of non-payment of the service charge, together with an affidavit of
proof of service of the certificate of non-payment upon the sponsor with the
Ingham County register of deeds, and proceedings may then be had to enforce the
lien as provided by law for the foreclosure of tax liens upon real property.
(Ord. No. 253, 9-3-2024; Ord. No. 262, 3-17-2025)
Sec. 75-58. Duration.
   (a)   This article shall remain in effect and shall not terminate for a
period of 16 years from the completion of construction and the issuance of the
final occupancy permit provided that:
      (1)   Construction of the housing development commences within 24 months
of the effective date of this article;
      (2)   Construction is completed within 24 months of commencement;
      (3)   The city assessor receives notification from the authority
certifying that the project is eligible for the exemption, in the manner
provided by Sec. 15(a)(2) of the Act;
      (4)   The housing development remains subject to income and rent
restrictions pursuant to Section 42 of the Code, as amended; and
      (5)   The required infrastructure and site improvements for the housing
development are completed pursuant to city standards for the entire housing
development prior to occupancy.
   (b)   The above notwithstanding, if the housing development is no longer
subject to a mortgage loan, this article shall automatically terminate.
(Ord. No. 253, 9-3-2024; Ord. No. 262, 3-17-2025)
Sec. 75-59. Severability.
   The various sections and provisions of this article shall be deemed to be
severable and should any section or provision of this article be declared by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid the same
shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or any section or
provision of this article other than the section or provisions so declared to
be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. No. 253, 9-3-2024; Ord. No. 262, 3-17-2025)
Sec. 75-60. Audit.
   It shall be the responsibility of the city manager to review the financial
audit and other pertinent financial documents of the housing development
project to determine that the tax exemption as provided for in this article is
being used solely for the benefit of low income persons or families and that
the service charges are being correctly reported and paid. The sponsor shall
provide such financial records, annual statements, or financial reports as are
reasonably necessary for the city manager to conduct said review. Said review
shall occur at the end of the fifth and tenth years after the development has
been completed. If the city manager and city attorney find that the above
condition has not been met, notice shall be given to the sponsor and the
authority with an opportunity to cure within 60 days of such notice. If the
condition shall not be cured within said 60 days, the city council shall
conduct a public hearing to consider repeal of this article. Said public
hearing shall be held only after the owner(s) of said Temple Senior Housing
Apartments project and the Michigan State housing development authority have
been notified by certified, return receipt mail at least 45 days prior to the
hearing.
(Ord. No. 253, 9-3-2024; Ord. No. 262, 3-17-2025)
Secs. 75-61—75-70. Reserved.
Chapter 76
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Article I. General
Sec.
76-1.   Purpose.
Sec.
76-2.   Conflict.
Sec.
76-3.   Definitions.
Secs. 76-4—76-10. Reserved.
Article II. Permits
Sec.
76-11.   Telecommunication permit required.
Sec.
76-12.   Issuance of permit.
Sec.
76-13.   Repair of damage.
Sec.
76-14.   Annual maintenance fee.
Secs. 76-15—76-25. Reserved.
Article III. Existing Rights - Cable Television Operators
Sec.
76-26.   Existing rights; cable television operators.
Secs. 76-27—76-35. Reserved.
Article IV. Compliance and Enforcement
Sec.
76-36.   Compliance.
Sec.
76-37.   Reservation of police powers; enforcement.
ARTICLE I. GENERAL
Sec. 76-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate access to and ongoing use of public
rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications
facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and
exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with
the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, P.A.
No. 48, 2002, and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies
for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and
complying with the Act.
(Ord. No. 141, 4-21-2003; Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 76-2. Conflict.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with
the Act or other applicable law.
(Ord. No. 141, 4-21-2003; Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 76-3. Definitions.
(a)   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight
Act, P.A. No. 48, 2002, as amended from time-to-time.
Permit means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this chapter
to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city
for its telecommunications facilities.
(b)   All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as
defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following:
Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the Act.
MPSC means the Michigan public service commission in the department of consumer
and industry services and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission"
in the Act.
Public right-of-way means right-of-way as defined in chapter 1 of this Code.
Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal
property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits,
pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit,
carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals.
Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting
structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary
equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed
commercial mobile service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of Title III
of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332
and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and
service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device.
Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean
those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act,
P.A. No. 179, 1991 MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a
person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed
commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of the
Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and
further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service
provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the
Act and this chapter only, a provider also includes all of the following:
   (1)   A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications
service.
   (2)   Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns
telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way.
   (3)   A person providing broadband internet transport access service.
(Ord. No. 141, 4-21-2003; Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Secs. 76-4--76-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PERMITS
Sec. 76-11. Telecommunication permit required.
(a)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the
city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit
pursuant to this chapter.
(b)   Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an
application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of the
Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with
the city clerk, one copy with the city manager, one copy with the city
attorney. Upon receipt, the city clerk shall distribute a copy to the director
of public works, and the zoning and development director. Applications shall be
complete and include all information required by the Act, including without
limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and
proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act.
(c)   Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that
any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application
contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt
from the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act No. 442, 1976 (MCL 15.231 to
15.246), pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider
shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map.
(d)   Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application
shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee. The fee
shall be as determined by resolution of the City Council.
(e)   Additional information. The city manager may request an applicant to
submit additional information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary
or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance
with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the
city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of
additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall
notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2)of the Act.
(f)   Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1)of the Act,
authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under Section 251 of
the Michigan Telecommunications Act, P.A. No. 179, 1991 (MCL 484.2251), and
authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers
prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications
Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this chapter.
(g)   Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days
from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications
provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of
such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under
Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, P.A. No. 179, 1991 (MCL
484.2251), shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a
telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is
not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d)
above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180
days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided
in Section 5(4) of the Act.
(Ord. No. 141, 4-21-2003; Ord. 222, § 40, 12-3-2018; Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 76-12. Issuance of permit.
(a)   Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a
permit is hereby delegated to the city manager. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of
the Act, the city manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit
within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application
for a permit under section 4(b) of this chapter for access to a public right-
of-way within the city. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act, the city manager
shall notify the MPSC when the city manager has granted or denied a permit,
including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and
the date on which permit was granted or denied. The city manager shall not
unreasonably deny an application for a permit.
(b)   Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city
manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or
without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1),
6(2), and 15 of the Act.
(c)   Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the city manager may
impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be
limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public
right-of-way.
(d)   Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without
limitation on subsection (c) above, the city manager may require that a bond be
posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a
bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the
public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the
telecommunications provider's access and use.
(e)   Construction/engineering permit. A telecommunications provider shall not
commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in
the city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as
required under Chapter 70 of this Code, for construction within the public
rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering
permit.
(f)   Conduit or utility poles. Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining
a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this chapter does
not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.
(g)   Route maps. Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications
provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction
of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the
location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city.
The route maps should be in paper and electronic format unless and until the
MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act.
(Ord. No. 141, 4-21-2003; Ord. 222, § 41, 12-3-2018; Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 76-13. Repair of damage.
Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking
an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities
within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way
in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done
to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the
public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way its
preexisting condition.
(Ord. No. 141, 4-21-2003; Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 76-14. Annual maintenance fee.
(a)   Establishment and payment of fee. In addition to the non-refundable
application fee paid to the city set forth in Sec.
76-11(d) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications
facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance
fee to the authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act.
(b)   Modification of existing fees. In compliance with the requirements of
Section 13(1)of the Act, the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any
fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the
effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-
of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required
under the Act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the
requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the city also hereby approves
modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in
public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay
only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The city shall provide
each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this
chapter, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act. To the
extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the
amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the
Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and
intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be
promptly refunded as having been charged in error.
(c)   Savings clause. Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the
Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under
subsection (b) of this section shall be void from the date the modification was
made.
(d)   Use of funds. Pursuant to Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received
by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-
way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received
by the city from the Authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund
and/or the Local Street Fund maintained by the city under P.A. No. 51, 1951.
(e)   Annual report. Pursuant to Section 10(5)of the Act, the city manager
shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of
funds annually distributed by the authority.
(Ord. No. 141, 4-21-2003; Ord. 222, § 42, 12-3-2018; Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Secs. 76-15—76-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. EXISTING RIGHTS - CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS
Sec. 76-26. Existing rights; cable television operators.
(a)   Existing rights. Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly
provided herein with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any
existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a
permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a
telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way,
issued or executed prior to the effective date of this chapter, including all
rights granted under Ordinance No. 99-R.
(b)   Cable television operators. Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the
city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy
for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1,
2002, the effective date of the Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that
portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable
modem services provided through broadband Internet transport access services.
(Ord. No. 141, 4-21-2003; Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Secs. 76-27—76-35. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 76-36. Compliance.
The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this chapter is
to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof
should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall
comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including the
following:
   (1)   Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, P.A.
No. 442, 1976 (MCL 15.231 to 15.246), as provided in Sec.
76-11(c) of this chapter;
   (2)   Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit
requirements hereof, in accordance with Sec.
76-11(f) of this chapter;
   (3)   Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an
application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the application fee,
in accordance with Sec.
76-11(g) of this chapter;
   (4)   Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from
the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for
access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance
with Sec.
76-12(a) of this chapter;
   (5)   Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in
accordance with Sec.
76-12(a) of this chapter;
   (6)   Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance
with Sec.
76-12(a) of this chapter;
   (7)   Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in Sec.
76-12(b) of this chapter;
   (8)   Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the
telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in
accordance with Sec.
76-12(c) of this chapter;
   (9)   Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds
the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its
original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and
use, in accordance with Sec.
76-12(d) of this chapter;
   (10)   Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for
construction or engineering permits, in accordance with Sec.
76-12(e) of this chapter;
   (11)   Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's
right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with Sec.
76-14(b) of this chapter;
   (12)   Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with Sec.
76-14(e) of this chapter; and
   (13)   Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to
pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with Sec.
76-26(b) of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 141, 4-21-03; Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Sec. 76-37. Reservation of police powers; enforcement.
(a)   Reservation of police powers. Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this
chapter shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a
telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way
or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the public.
(b)   Municipal civil infraction. A person who violates any provision of this
chapter or the terms or conditions of a permit issued by the city is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to the
penalty provided by Sec.
1-8(e) of the city Code. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit
the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of
this chapter or a permit.
(c)   Enforcement. The city manager is hereby designated as the authorized city
official to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil
infraction violation notices for violations under this chapter as provided by
the city Code.
(Ord. No. 141, 4-21-2003; Ord. 222, § 43, 12-3-2018; Ord. No. 252, 9-3-2024)
Chapters 77
RESERVED
Chapter 78
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES*
*Cross References: Law enforcement, ch. 34; offenses and miscellaneous
provisions, ch. 42; prohibited motorized vehicles in parks, §
46-37; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; parades, §
70-76 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 90.
State Law References: Traffic generally, MCL 257.1 et seq.; powers of local
authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606.
Article I. In General
Sec.
78-1.     Reserved.
Sec.
78-2.     Interpretation.
Sec.
78-3.     Enforcement.
Sec.
78-4.     Michigan Vehicle Code adopted.
Sec.
78-5.     Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages adopted.
Sec.
78-6.     Amendments to Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and
Villages.
Sec.
78-7.     Skateboards.
Secs. 78-8--78-30. Reserved.
Article II. Administration and Enforcement
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 78-31--78-50. Reserved.
Division 2. Parking Violations Bureau
Sec.
78-51.     Established.
Sec.
78-52.     Location, employees, rules and regulations.
Sec.
78-53.     Disposition of violations.
Sec.
78-54.     Limitations on settlement of violations.
Sec.
78-55.     Parking violation issuance.
Sec.
78-56.     Fine and costs.
__________
   *Cross references-Law enforcement, ch. 34; offenses and miscellaneous
provisions, ch. 42; prohibited motorized vehicles in parks, § 46-37; streets,
sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70; parades, § 70-76 et seq.; vehicles
for hire, ch. 90.
   State law references-Traffic generally, MCL 257.1 et seq.; powers of local
authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 78-1. Reserved.
Sec. 78-2. Interpretation.
In the event of a conflict between this chapter and the Uniform Traffic Code
for Cities, Townships and Villages as adopted in this chapter, the provisions
of this chapter shall control. In the event of a conflict between the
provisions of this chapter and the Michigan Vehicle Code (1949 PA 300, MCL
257.1 et seq.) as adopted in this chapter, the Michigan Vehicle Code shall
control. In the event of conflict between the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities,
Townships and Villages as adopted in this chapter and the Michigan Vehicle Code
(MCL 257.1 et seq.), the Michigan Vehicle Code shall control.
Sec. 78-3. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the Uniform
Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as adopted in this chapter and
the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.).
Sec. 78-4. Michigan Vehicle Code adopted.
The Michigan Vehicle Code (1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1 et seq.), including all
amendments effective as of the date of publication of notice of adoption of the
ordinance codified in this article, and including all amendments thereafter
made to the Michigan Vehicle Code, is hereby re-adopted by reference as a
traffic code of the City of Mason. Amendments made to the Michigan Vehicle Code
shall become effective as adopted by reference herein effective as the same day
they become effective in the Michigan Vehicle Code. The penalties and
procedures prescribed pursuant to the Michigan Vehicle Code and any amendments
thereto hereafter adopted are applicable to violations thereof occurring in the
city.
(Ord. No. 189, 5-7-2012)
State Law References: Authority to adopt Michigan Vehicle Code by reference,
MCL 117.3(k).
Sec. 78-5. Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages adopted.
(a)   The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages, and any
amendment or revision thereof, as promulgated by the director of the Michigan
Department of State Police, is adopted by reference pursuant to the Uniform
Traffic Code, 1956 PA 62 (MCL 257.951).
(b)   Reference in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages
to "governmental unit" shall mean the City of Mason.
(Ord. No. 75-A-96, §§ 1, 2, 2-5-1996; Ord. No. 168, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 242, 4-
3-2023)
State Law References: Authority to adopt Uniform Traffic Code by reference, MCL
257.951.
Sec. 78-6. Amendments to Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and
Villages.
The following additional sections and subsections of the Uniform Traffic Code
for Cities, Townships and Villages are added as set forth in this section.
      Section 28.1159. Through Streets. The following streets and every portion
thereof are hereby designated as "through streets." It is the duty of the
traffic engineer to place and maintain a stop sign on each and every street
which intersects such through streets, or which intersects a portion of such
through streets:
         (A)   Ash Street, from the east city limit to Cedar Street.
         (B)   Cedar Street, from the north city limit to its southernmost
terminus.
         (C)   Columbia Street, from the east city limit to the west city
limit.
         (D)   Jefferson Street, from the north city limit to the south city
limit.
         (E)   Okemos Street, from the north city limit to Columbia Street.
      Section 28.1160. Truck Routes; Restrictions; Exceptions; Definition; and
Penalty.
         (A)   No person shall drive, move, or cause or permit to be driven or
moved any truck upon any street or highway of this city except such streets or
highways as may be designated as truck routes.
         (B)   Truck routes are hereby designated to be Kipp Road from Eden
Road to U.S. 127, U.S. 127, M-36 Highway, West Columbia Street from M-36
Highway to the west city limit, Howell Road from Okemos Road to the west city
limit, and such other routes as may hereafter be designated pursuant to the
Uniform Traffic Code.
         (C)   The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to persons who
shall drive or move trucks to and from locations within the city for local
delivery or transport of goods or services.
         (D)   A truck, for purposes of this section, shall be any vehicle
which is defined as a "truck" under Section 75 of the Michigan Vehicle Code
(MCL 257.75) and having three or more axles.
         (E)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a civil
infraction. This prohibition shall not be enforced until notice thereof is
given by posting of appropriate official signs.
      Section 28.1825. Parking on Lawn Extension Between Sidewalk and Curb. No
person shall drive upon, park, or stand any vehicle between the curb or curb
line and the lot line nearest the street, such area being commonly known as the
lawn extensions, whether or not any sidewalk or curb is actually in place on
such street. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction.
      Section 28.1826. Parking Fully Within Space. When a space is marked for
parking, every vehicle shall be parked wholly within the marked space, except
that a vehicle which is too large to be parked within a single designated space
shall be permitted to occupy two adjoining marked spaces. A person who violates
this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
      Section 28.1827 Overtime Parking. Where signs are erected limiting the
maximum period of time for parking in any parking zone, no person shall stop or
park a vehicle in such zone for a period of time longer than the posted time. A
person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
      Section 28.1828. Overnight Parking; Trucks; Definitions; Violation as
Civil Infraction.
         (A)   All parking may be prohibited on certain streets between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. by traffic control orders issued pursuant to
the Uniform Traffic Code.
         (B)   The parking of trucks is prohibited on all of the streets in the
city between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. all of the year.
         (C)   The parking of trucks is prohibited on residential streets in
the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. all of the year.
         (D)   A truck for purposes of this section shall be any vehicle
defined as a truck under Section 257.75 of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL
257.75 ) and having a combined weight of vehicle, cargo, and occupants
exceeding five tons.
         (E)   A residential street is defined for purposes of this section as
any highway or street where within any 600 feet along such street or highway
there are buildings or uses for residential purposes which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage collectively on both sides of the street.
         (F)   A violation of this section shall be a civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 75-A-96, § 6, 2-5-1996; Ord. No. 143, 5-3-2004; Ord. No. 168, 9-2-
2008; Ord. No. 242, 4-3-2023)
Sec. 78-7. Skateboards.
(a)   Use limited. No person shall use a skateboard in the following places:
   (1)   On any roadway within the city, except while crossing a highway or
street on a crosswalk, and then only in the manner specified by Section 2182.04
of the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages, as adopted and
amended by the city.
   (2)   On any of the lands leased or owned by the public, including public
easements and rights-of-way, or on the private property of another, within that
area of the city bounded by the Michigan Central Railroad right-of-way, Oak
Street, Barnes Street, and the alley located between Maple Street and Sycamore
Street, including an extension of the lateral line of the alley west to the
Michigan Central Railroad right-of-way on Monday through Saturday from the
hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. and at such other times as declared by the
chief of police.
   (3)   On any of the paved or non-paved lands dedicated to the use of the
Maple Grove Cemetery except for those lands dedicated to the Hayhoe Riverwalk
Trail.
(b)   Manner of use. No person shall use a skateboard:
   (1)   Upon a sidewalk, walkway or other surface or facility used or intended
for pedestrians without yielding at all times the right-of-way to pedestrians.
   (2)   Upon a public or private parking lot or facility open to the public
without yielding the right-of-way at all times to pedestrians and vehicles and
so as to not interfere with the parking of vehicles.
   (3)   In a reckless or careless manner, or in any manner likely to result in
injury or damage to the person or property of another, including monuments and
markers within Maple Grove Cemetery.
   (4)   At a speed greater than a walking speed when crossing within a
crosswalk or crossing a roadway where no crosswalk is provided.
   (5)   By placing portable ramps or similar devices or structures upon public
property.
(c)   Posting of signs. The department of public works shall erect appropriate
signs which designate where skateboards are prohibited by this section.
(d)   Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
responsible for a civil infraction and subject to a civil fine of not more than
$100.00. A police officer witnessing a violation of this section may stop the
person, detain the person temporarily for purposes of making a record and
prepare and subscribe a complaint for a civil infraction in the manner provided
by Section 28.1110a of the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and
Villages, as adopted and amended by the city.
(Ord. No. 120, §§ 1--5, 8-1-1988; Ord. No. 168, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 236, 6-21-
2021; Ord. No. 238, 7-18-2022)
Secs. 78-8--78-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT*
*Cross References: Administration, ch. 2.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Secs. 78-31--78-50. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU*
*State Law References: Parking violations bureau, MCL 600.8395; parking
violations notice MCL 257.742(7), MCL 257.742(9)
Sec. 78-51. Established.
There is established a parking violations bureau for the purpose of accepting
civil infraction admissions in parking violation cases within the city and to
collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this article. The
parking violations bureau shall be under the supervision and control of the
chief of police.
(Ord. No. 76, § 1, 12-16-1968; Ord. No. 76-A-85, § 1(1), 4-15-1985)
Sec. 78-52. Location, employees, rules and regulations.
The chief of police shall, subject to the approval of the city council,
establish a convenient location for the parking violations bureau, appoint
qualified city employees to administer the bureau, and adopt rules and
regulations for its operation.
(Ord. No. 76, § 2, 12-16-1968)
Sec. 78-53. Disposition of violations.
No parking violation not scheduled in section
78-56 shall be disposed of by the parking violations bureau. The fact that a
particular violation is scheduled shall not entitle the alleged violator to
disposition of the violation at the bureau, and in any case the person in
charge of such bureau may refuse to dispose of such violation in which case any
person having knowledge of the facts may file a citation with the district
court in compliance with Section 742(7) of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL
257.742(7)).
(Ord. No. 76, § 3, 12-16-1968; Ord. No. 76-A-85, § 1(3), 4-15-1985)
Sec. 78-54. Limitations on settlement of violations.
No violation may be settled at the parking violations bureau except at the
specific request of the alleged violator. No civil fine for any violation shall
be accepted from any person who denies having committed the offense, and in no
case shall the person who is in charge of the bureau determine or attempt to
determine the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to such alleged
violation. No person shall be required to dispose of a parking violation at the
parking violations bureau and all persons shall be entitled to have any such
violation processed before a court having jurisdiction if they so desire. The
unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the parking
violations bureau shall not prejudice him or in any way diminish the rights,
privileges and protection accorded by law.
(Ord. No. 76, § 4, 12-16-1968; Ord. No. 76-A-85, § 1(4), 4-15-1985)
Sec. 78-55. Parking violation issuance.
The issuance of a parking violation notice by a police officer, including a
limited-duty officer, of the city shall be deemed an allegation of a parking
violation. Such notice of violation shall indicate the length of time in which
the person to whom the notice was issued must respond before the parking
violations bureau. It shall also indicate the address of the bureau, the hours
during which the bureau is open, the amount of the civil fine and costs
scheduled for the offense for which the ticket was issued and advise that if an
admission of responsibility is not made and the prescribed civil fines and
costs not paid at the parking violations bureau, within the time limited, a
citation may be filed with the district court in compliance with Section 742(7)
of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.742(7)).
(Ord. No. 76, § 5, 12-16-1968; Ord. No. 76-A-85, § 1(5), 4-15-1985)
Sec. 78-56. Fine and costs.
For any violation within the city, civil fines and costs as set forth within
the city council adopted Directory of Charges shall be paid.
(Ord. No. 76, § 6, 12-16-1968; Ord. No. 76-A-85, § 1(6), 4-15-1985; Ord. No.
76-A-9, § 1, 12-2-1991; Ord. No. 76-A-00, § 1, 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 182, 5-2-
2011; Ord. No. 246, 11-20-2023)
Chapter 79
RESERVED
Chapter 80
URBAN AGRICULTURE
Sec.
80-1.   General provisions.
Secs. 80-2—80-20. Reserved.
Sec.
80-21.   Honeybees.
Sec.
80-22.   Poultry.
Sec. 80-1.   General provisions.
   (a)   Permitted zones. Urban agriculture operations under this chapter shall
be permitted only in the AG, RS-1, RS-2, and RS-3 zoning districts.
   (b)   License required. Any person wanting to practice urban agriculture
under this chapter within the city shall first complete the appropriate license
application and submit the application with the required fee to the city for
approval. Regulations pertaining to a license shall be as follows:
      (1)   If the applicant is not the owner of the real property on which
urban agriculture is to be conducted, the applicant must provide written
consent to the practice of urban agriculture by the owner of the real property.
Without such written consent, a license shall not be granted.
      (2)   An initial license shall be valid for no longer than three years.
      (3)   If, in the judgment of the zoning official or designee, a licensee
has abided by all ordinance provisions and has not created a nuisance to the
owners or occupants of adjacent properties or the surrounding neighborhood, a
renewal license may be granted for three years.
      (4)   If the zoning official or designee has verified violations of this
section, but the licensee is currently in compliance, a renewal license may be
granted for one year.
      (5)   All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year consistent
with the duration limits of subsections (b)(2), (3) and (4) above.
      (6)   The zoning official or designee may revoke or choose to not renew a
license if, in the judgment of the zoning official or designee, any violation
of this section by a licensee has been allowed to continue for more than two
weeks after notice of such violation.
      (7)   No license issued pursuant to this section shall remain valid past
the date on which this section either expires or is repealed, whichever is
earlier.
      (8)   A licensee aggrieved by a decision of the zoning official may file
an appeal with the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided at Section
94-363 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 265, 7-7-2025)
Secs. 80-2—80-20. Reserved.
Sec. 80-21. Honeybees.
   No person shall keep or house honeybees within the city unless in compliance
with the requirements of this section.
   (a)   The maximum number of hives permitted per lot shall be as follows:
      (1)   Two hives on a lot up to 11,000 square feet in area.
      (2)   Four hives on a lot of more than 11,000 square feet in area and up
to 22,000 square feet in area.
      (3)   Five hives on a lot of more than 22,000 square feet in area and up
to 43,560 square feet (one acre) in area.
      (4)   Eight hives on a lot larger than 43,560 square feet {'{'}one acre)
in area.
      (5)   One additional hive is allowed for each additional acre of land.
   (b)   Hive size and maintenance.
      (1)   Each hive shall have a maximum size of 20 cubic feet.
      (2)   Each hive shall be maintained in good condition, including painting
if existing paint is peeling or flaking.
      (3)   Unused hives shall be secured from occupancy by swarms. It shall
not be a defense of violation of this section that bees are not being
intentionally kept when an unused hive attracts a swarm.
   (c)   A flyway barrier at least six feet in height shall shield any part of
a lot line that is within 25 feet of a hive. The flyway barrier shall consist
of a wall, fence, dense vegetation or a combination thereof. When dense
vegetation is used, the initial planting may be at least four feet in height so
long as the vegetation being used normally reaches a height of six feet or
higher. The flyway barrier shall continue parallel to the lot line for at least
ten feet in each direction from any hive or enclose all hives.
   (d)   A constant supply of water shall be provided for all hives.
   (e)   All hives shall be located as follows.
      (1)   In the rear yard.
      (2)   At least 25 feet from any dwelling or otherwise habitable structure
on an adjoining property.
      (3)   At least five feet from any property line.
      (4)   At least ten feet from any public sidewalk.
(Ord. No. 265, 7-7-2025)
Sec. 80-22. Poultry.
   No person shall keep or house poultry within the city unless in compliance
with the requirements of this section.
   (a)   In the AG, RS-1, RS-2, and RS-3 districts only the keeping of poultry
is permitted. No urban agriculture is permitted in any other district.
   (b)   The keeping of poultry, specifically hens, shall be permitted as
follows:
      (1)   A maximum of two hens are permitted for each 11,000 square feet of
lot/parcel of land area.
      (2)   No more than six hens may be kept on any lot/parcel of land in the
city.
      (3)   Roosters are not permitted.
      (4)   Hens must be provided with a henhouse or poultry coop and must be
kept in the henhouse or poultry coop or an adjoining poultry run or pen at all
times. Any poultry run or pen shall be fully fenced on all sides and the top.
      (5)   Hens are not allowed to roam freely on any lot/parcel of land.
      (6)   The henhouse or poultry coop and poultry run or pen must be in the
rear yard and located at least 40 feet from any dwelling on adjacent property
and at least ten feet from any property line.
      (7)   The total square footage of any henhouse or poultry coop and
adjoining poultry run or pen may not exceed 80 square feet with a maximum
height of eight feet.
      (8)   Henhouses or poultry coops and poultry runs or pens must be kept
clean so as to not create a nuisance and to prevent noxious odor.
      (9)   All feed and other items associated with the keeping of hens likely
to attract insects, rodents, and other vermin must be secured and protected in
sealed containers.
(Ord. No. 265, 7-7-2025)
Chapter 81
RESERVED
Chapter 82
UTILITIES*
*Charter reference—Municipally owned utilities, ch. 12.
Cross references—Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch.
6; businesses, ch. 10; environment, ch. 22; natural resources, ch. 38;
planning, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public
places, ch. 70; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 74.
Article I. In General
Division 1. Definitions, Abbreviations
Sec.
82-1.   Definitions.
Sec.
82-2.   Abbreviations.
Division 2. Water and Sewerage Systems Combined
Sec.
82-3.    Legislative determination.
Sec.
82-4.    Systems combined.
Sec.
82-5.    Supervisor.
Sec.
82-6.    Operating year.
Sec.
82-7.   Permitted connections.
Secs. 82-8–82-9. Reserved.
Division 3. Duty to Connect to Municipal Utilities
Sec.
82-10.   Notice of availability.
Sec.
82-11.   Water utility connections.
Sec.
82-12.   Sanitary sewer utility connections.
Sec.
82-13.   Duty to maintain sewer leads.
Sec.
82-14.   Failure to connect.
Sec.
82-15.   Variances.
Secs. 82-16–82-30. Reserved.
Article II. Water System
Division 1. General
Sec.
82-31.   Polluting, contaminating wells prohibited.
Sec.
82-32.   Conservation rules.
Sec.
82-33.   Maintenance of curb boxes.
Sec.
82-34.   Meters.
Sec.
82-35.   Turning off water for repairs; fee for resumption of service;
tampering with meter; additional meter.
Secs. 82-36–82-60. Reserved.
Division 2. Cross Connections
Sec.
82-61.   Purpose, scope, construction, establishing authority.
Sec.
82-62.   Application to new, existing buildings.
Sec.
82-63.   Conflict of laws.
Sec.
82-64.   Conflicts of interest.
Sec.
82-65.   Enforcement.
Sec.
82-66.   Right of entry, presumption.
Sec.
82-67.   Certificate of compliance.
Sec.
82-68.   Notice of violation.
Sec.
82-69.   General authority to discontinue service.
Sec.
82-70.   Imminent hazards.
Sec.
82-71.   Administrative hearing, Review Panel.
Sec.
82-72.   Action by Administrative Hearing Review Panel.
Sec.
82-73.   Premises subject to division.
Sec.
82-74.   Determination of premises subject to division.
Sec.
82-75.   Periodic inspections.
Sec.
82-76.   New, expanded or altered piping systems.
Sec.
82-77.   Prohibitions of cross connections.
Sec.
82-78.   Color coding of piping.
Sec.
82-79.   Alternate identification of piping.
Sec.
82-80.   Identification of secondary water.
Sec.
82-81.   Protection of water supply.
Sec.
82-82.   Minimum residential water pressure.
Sec.
82-83.   Disinfection of piping system.
Sec.
82-84.   Backflow prevention devices–Required.
Sec.
82-85.   Lawn sprinkler systems.
Sec.
82-86.   Fire protection systems.
Sec.
82-87.   Automatic fire sprinkler systems.
Sec.
82-88.   Testing and sampling.
Sec.
82-89.   Inspection fees.
Sec.
82-90.   Annual report.
Secs. 82-91–82-100. Reserved.
Article III. Sewer Use Requirements and Restrictions
Division 1. General
Sec.
82-101.   Purpose and policy.
Sec.
82-102.   Private sanitary sewage disposal; when permitted.
Sec.
82-103.   Wastewater discharges.
Sec.
82-104.   Amendment, effect.
Sec.
82-105.   Maintenance of sewer service lead.
Secs. 82-106–82-109. Reserved.
Division 2. Building Sewer Construction
Sec.
82-110.   License required.
Sec.
82-111.   Filing of application.
Sec.
82-112.   Information required in application.
Sec.
82-113.   Filing of record required.
Sec.
82-114.   Method of connections at branches and stubs.
Sec.
82-115.   Inspection required.
Sec.
82-116.   Connection of roof drains and footing drains prohibited.
Sec.
82-117.   Connection of surface water sources prohibited.
Sec.
82-118.   Protection from damage.
Sec.
82-119.   City to decide question of passing over or under drain, sewer,
obstructions.
Sec.
82-120.   Cost of openings borne by builder.
Sec.
82-121.   Guarding of openings, obstructions required.
Sec.
82-122.   Separation of drains, building sewers from water pipes required.
Sec.
82-123.   Connection of building drains, building sewers, and floor drains.
Sec.
82-124.   Building sewer pipe standards.
Sec.
82-125.   Installation of pipe.
Sec.
82-126.   Backfilling standards.
Sec.
82-127.   Standards for house drains and sewers.
Secs. 82-128–82-150. Reserved.
Division 3. Discharge Restrictions
Sec.
82-151.   Violations declared misdemeanor.
Sec.
82-152.   Treatment of polluted water required before discharge.
Sec.
82-153.   General discharge to system.
Sec.
82-154.   Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Sec.
82-155.   Additional discharge limitations; approval required.
Sec.
82-156.   Specific pollutant limitations.
Sec.
82-157.   State and local requirements.
Sec.
82-158.   Pretreatment required.
Sec.
82-159.   Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
Sec.
82-160.   Modification of Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
Sec.
82-161.   Construction and maintenance of pretreatment facilities.
Sec.
82-162.   Alternate calculation of limits.
Sec.
82-163.   Compliance deadline, existing source, new sources.
Sec.
82-164.   Dilution prohibited.
Sec.
82-165.   Accidental discharges, operating upsets and slug loads.
Secs. 82-166–82-186. Reserved.
Division 4. Industrial Discharge Permit Requirements
Sec.
82-187.   Wastewater discharge permits.
Sec.
82-188.   Reporting requirements for permittee.
Sec.
82-189.   Monitoring facilities.
Sec.
82-190.   Inspection and sampling.
Sec.
82-191.   Pretreatment.
Sec.
82-192.   Bypass of pretreatment facilities.
Sec.
82-193.   Confidential information.
Secs. 82-194--82-214. Reserved.
Division 5. Enforcement
Sec.
82-215.   Civil penalties.
Sec.
82-216.   Harmful contributions.
Sec.
82-217.   Falsifying information.
Sec.
82-218.   Revocation of permit.
Sec.
82-219.   Notification of violation.
Sec.
82-220.   Show-cause hearing.
Sec.
82-221.   Legal action.
Sec.
82-222.   Affirmative defense; operations upset.
Secs. 82-223–82-240. Reserved.
Article IV. Rates and Charges
Division 1. General
Sec.
82-241.   Fiscal year for system.
Sec.
82-242.   Payment for service required.
Sec.
82-243.   Rates, fees and charges established.
Sec.
82-244.   Billing for charges, cash deposit.
Sec.
82-245.   Additional charges for extraordinary sewage or waste.
Sec.
82-246.   Collection of charges, enforcement of lien.
Sec.
82-247.   Base water and sanitary sewer connection charges.
Sec.
82-248.   Additional water and sanitary sewer connection charges.
Secs. 82-249–82-250. Reserved.
Division 2. Water System Charges
Sec.
82-251.   Rates, fees and charges established.
Secs. 82-252–82-260. Reserved.
Division 3. Sewer System Charges
Sec.
82-261.   Rates established; to whom applicable; basis for computation.
Sec.
82-262.   User charges.
Sec.
82-263.   Determination of wastewater discharge quantities.
Sec.
82-264.   Rates to be billed.
Sec.
82-265.   Base sewer connection fee.
Sec.
82-266.   Periodic revision to user charges and to capital improvement charges.
Secs. 82-267–82-270. Reserved.
Article V. Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
Sec.
82-271.   Purpose and policy.
Sec.
82-272.   General requirements and prohibitions.
Sec.
82-273.   Prohibition of illicit discharges.
Sec.
82-274.   Exempt discharges.
Sec.
82-275.   Prohibition of illicit connections.
Sec.
82-276.   Suspension of discharges to municipal separate storm sewer system.
Sec.
82-277.   Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Sec.
82-278.   Access to facilities.
Sec.
82-279.   Requirements to prevent, control, and reduce storm water pollutants
by the use of best management practices.
Sec.
82-280.   Watercourse protection.
Sec.
82-281.   Notification of spills.
Sec.
82-282.   Notice of violation.
Sec.
82-283.   Appeal of notice of violation.
Sec.
82-284.   Enforcement measures after appeal.
Sec.
82-285.   Cost of abatement of the violation.
Sec.
82-286.   Compensatory action.
Sec.
82-287.   Remedies not exclusive.
Article VI. Enforcement
Sec.
82-291.   Municipal civil infractions.
Sec.
82-292.   Appearance tickets.
Sec.
82-293.   Misdemeanor citations.
Sec.
82-294.   Violations deemed a public nuisance.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
DIVISION 1.
DEFINITIONS, ABBREVIATIONS
Sec. 82-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter all have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
Acquire and acquiring mean acquisition by purchase, construction or any other
method.
Act or the Act means the federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
Approval Authority means the director of the state department of environmental
quality, or, if the state does not have an approved state pretreatment program,
the administrator of EPA region 5.
Authority shall mean the utilities director or designee.
Authorized enforcement agency means the utilities director or designee.
Authorized representative of industrial user means:
   (1)   The principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-
president, if the industrial user is a corporation;
   (2)   The general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship; or
   (3)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
subsection (1) or (2) of this definition if such representative is responsible
for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge
originates.
Available municipal water supply means a municipal water main carrying potable
water located in a right-of-way, easement, highway, street or public way which
crosses, adjoins or abuts the property and located no more than 300 feet from
the nearest point of any structure used or designed for human occupancy.
Available public sanitary sewer means a public sanitary sewer system located in
a right-of-way, easement, highway, street or public way which crosses, adjoins,
or abuts the property and located no more than 300 feet from the nearest point
of the structure from which sanitary sewage originates.
Backflow shall mean water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants
flowing into a public water supply due to a reversal of flow.
Best Management Practices (BMPs) means those schedules of activities,
prohibitions or practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly
or indirectly to storm water, receiving waters, or separate storm water
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in terms of weight and concentration
(mg/l).
Building drain or house drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping
of a drainage system which receives the discharge of wastewater from within a
structure and conveys it to the building sewer.
Building sewer means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user
to the WWTP.
Categorical standards means National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or
pretreatment standard.
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving sanitary and storm sewage.
Compatible pollutant means a substance amenable to treatment in the city WWTP
such as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, and fecal coliform
bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit of the city
WWTP designed to treat such pollutants and which does in fact remove such
pollutants to a substantial degree. Examples of additional pollutants may
include chemical oxygen demand, total organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus
compounds, nitrogen and nitrogen compounds, fats, oils, and greases of animal
or vegetable nature.
Construction activity means activities subject to NPDES Construction Permits.
Generally these include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of
one acre or more. Such activities include clearing and grubbing, grading,
excavating, and demolition.
Control Authority means the Approval Authority or the Authority if the city has
an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
Cross connection shall mean a connection or arrangement of piping or
appurtenances through which a backflow could occur.
Cross connection control inspector shall mean the legally designated person
whose duty it is to perform periodic inspections of premises within the city
for detection of cross connections.
Curb box shall mean a fixture located between the structure served and the
water main that provides protection and access to the water service shut off
valve.
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the state.
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the
administrator or other duly authorized official of the agency.
Garbage means solid waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food,
and from the handling, storage, processing and sale of produce. Properly
shredded garbage is garbage that has been cut to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration
of time.
Health department means the official department of health of the county.
Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
Illegal discharge means any discharge to the city storm water system that is
not composed entirely of storm water except discharges pursuant to a NPDES
permit or as otherwise exempted by Section
82-274 of this article.
Illicit connection means a physical connection to the municipal separate storm
sewer system that conveys illicit discharges into the system and/or is not
authorized or permitted by the city; or any drain or conveyance connected from
a commercial or industrial land use to the separate storm sewer system which
has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by
an authorized enforcement agency.
Imminent hazards shall mean, in the judgment of the Authority, there is a
violation or a condition which may cause a violation of this code at a public
water supply connection requiring immediate action to prevent endangering the
health of the people.
Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant.
Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic
pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b) or Section 307(c) of
the Act into the WWTP (including holding tank waste discharged into the
system).
Indirect user means a source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a
discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to Section 402 of the
Act.
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as
defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14).
Industrial discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic
pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b) or Section 307(c) of
the Act into the WWTP (including holding tank waste discharged into the
system).
Industrial waste means liquid waste, solids or semisolids from industrial
processes, trades or businesses as distinct from sanitary sewage.
Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the WWTP treatment process
or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's
NPDES permit or reduces the efficiency of the WWTP. The term also includes
interference in the use of sanitary sewage sludge or its disposal by the WWTP
under the criteria, guidelines or regulations contained in the city's approved
sludge management plan.
MDEQ means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means those facilities located
within the city and owned by the city or the county drain commissioner or the
county board of road commissioners by which stormwater may be collected and
conveyed to the waters of this state, including any streets or roads with
drainage systems, inlets, curbs, gutters, storm pipes and retention, detention
or infiltration basins, which are not part of the publicly-owned treatment
works as defined by 40 CFR 122.2.
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or pretreatment standard means any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with Section 307(b) and Section 307(c) of the Act which applies to a
specific category of industrial users.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge
Permit means a permit issued by MDEQ that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
National Prohibited Discharge Standard or prohibited discharge standard means
any regulation developed under the authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and
40 CFR 403.5.
Natural outlet means any watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of water,
either surface water or groundwater.
New source means:
   (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is
or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after
the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the
Act, which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
      a.   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located;
      b.   The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at
an existing source; or
      c.   The production or wastewater generating processes or the building,
structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, the extent to which the new facility is
engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be
considered.
   (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create
a new installation meeting the criteria of this section but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing processes or production equipment.
   (3)   Construction of a new source has commenced if the owner or operator
has:
      a.   Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
         1.   Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment;
         2.   Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is
necessary for the new source facilities or equipment; or
      b.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering,
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
subsection.
Non-storm water discharge means any discharge to the separate storm sewer
system that is not composed entirely of storm water.
Normal domestic strength wastewater means sanitary sewage or other wastewater
which shall be a compatible pollutant and with BOD of 300 mg/l or less,
suspended solids of 350 mg/l or less, and total phosphorus of 20 mg/l or less
(as P).
NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to the National Pollution Discharge
Eliminations System prescribed in Section 402 of the Act.
Nuisance shall mean the maintenance of a condition or activity upon private
property or publicly owned property which endangers the public health or safety
and includes all conditions and activities which violate state and local health
statutes and ordinances.
Operation and maintenance means all work, materials, equipment, utilities and
other efforts required to operate and maintain the wastewater transportation
and treatment systems consistent with ensuring adequate treatment of wastewater
to produce an effluent in compliance with the NPDES permit and other applicable
state and federal regulations, and including the cost of replacement.
Operations upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional
and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
Pipings shall mean water conveying water pipes, appurtenances, and related or
connected devices, equipment or facilities.
Plans and specifications shall mean drawings, data and true description or
representation of an entire waterworks system or parts thereof as it exists or
is to be constructed, and a statement on how a waterworks system is to be
operated.
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants
may include: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids;
non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish,
garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, and accumulations, so
that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides,
herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal
coliform and other pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes;
wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and
noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Pollution means the man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
Potable water shall mean water free from impurities present in amounts
sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects. Its
bacteriological and chemical qualities shall conform to the requirements of the
Michigan Safe Drinking Water Act, being Act No. 399 of the P.A. of Michigan of
1976 (MCL 325.1001 et seq.), as amended.
Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the WWTP. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes, in plant process changes, or other means except as prohibited by 40
CFR 403.6(d).
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirements
related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on
an industrial user.
Private sewage disposal system means any septic tank, cesspool or other
facilities intended or used for the disposal of sanitary sewage.
Public improvements means the public water supply and sanitary sewage disposal
system improvements within and outside the city which are functional components
of the respective system.
Public sanitary sewer means a sanitary sewer in which all owners of the
abutting property have access and which is controlled by the Authority.
Ready-to-serve (RTS) charge means a fee assessed as a separately stated charge
on all billings rendered to customers to cover the costs of the water and
sanitary sewer systems at rates set by resolution of the city council based on
the size of the water meter. Proceeds from this fee will be collected and
accounted for in a separately stated account within the combined water and
sewer fund.
Replacement means the replacement in whole or part of any equipment or
facilities in the wastewater transportation or treatment systems to ensure
continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with the NPDES permit and
other applicable state and federal regulations.
Residential equivalent unit or REU shall mean the factor representing a ratio
of the estimated sewage generated by a class of user to that generated by the
normal single family user, usually measured in gallons per day, as established
by resolution of the city council.
Residential users means all users that are domiciles or housing units, either
single-family or multifamily.
Revenues and net revenues mean as defined in Section 3 of the Revenue Bond Act
of 1933 (MCL 141.103).
Safe air gap means the minimum distance of a water inlet or opening above the
maximum highwater level or overflow rim in a fixture, device or container to
which public water is furnished which shall be at least two times the inside
diameter of the water inlet pipe and which shall not be less than one inch and
need not be more than 12 inches.
Sanitary sewage means the liquid or water-carried waste discharge from the
sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels),
office buildings, factories or institutions.
Sanitary sewer means a sewer used or intended for the collection and
transportation of sanitary sewage and wastewater or either of them and to which
stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
Seal shall mean a device installed by the Authority so as to prevent the use of
any piping, equipment facilities or appurtenances which would be a violation of
this division.
Secondary water supply shall mean a water supply system maintained in addition
to a public water supply system, including but not limited to water systems
from ground or surface sources not meeting the requirements of the Michigan
Safe Drinking Water Act, being Act No. 399 of the P.A. of Michigan of 1976 (MCL
325.1001 et seq.), as amended, or water from a public water supply which in any
way has been treated, processed or exposed to any possible contaminant or
stored in other than an approved storage facility.
Sewage means any combination of sanitary sewage, stormwater, industrial waste,
and uncontaminated industrial waste, or any of them.
Sewer means any pipe, tile, tube or conduit for carrying sewage.
Significant industrial user means:
   (1)   Except as provided in subsection (2) of this definition:
      a.   All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter (I), Subchapter (N); and
      b.   Any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000
gallons per day or more of processed wastewater to the WWTP (excluding sanitary
noncontact cooling and boiler blow down wastewater); contributes a processed
waste stream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or
organic capacity of the WWTP treatment plant; or is designated as such by the
Authority on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the WWTP's operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement.
   (2)   Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria of this
definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the WWTP's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Authority may at any time, on his/her own initiative or in response to a
petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8
(f)(6) determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial
user.
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the
President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
Storm sewer or storm drain means an enclosed sewer or open ditch which carries
stormwater and/or uncontaminated industrial wastes.
Storm sewer system or storm drainage system means those publicly-owned
facilities by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including but not
limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs,
inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins,
natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other
drainage structures.
Stormwater means atmospheric precipitation, surface water runoff, and flows
from footing drains that travel to the nearest stream, channel, or impoundment.
Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) means a document which describes
the Best Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person or
business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the
actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharge to storm water, storm water
conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
Submerged inlet shall mean a water pipe or extension thereto from a public
water supply system terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which
may contain water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminant which is
unprotected against backflow.
Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of
or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable
by laboratory filtering.
The system or system means the complete public water supply and sanitary sewage
disposal system of the city, all wells, water mains, laterals, pumping
stations, storage tanks, main and lateral sewers, sanitary sewage disposal
plant and all related works, instrumentalities and properties used or useful in
connection with the combined water supply and sanitary sewage disposal system,
together with all additions, extensions and improvements.
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency under
the provisions of CWA 307(a) or other acts.
Uncontaminated industrial wastes means water which has not come into contact
with any substance used in or incidental to industrial processing operations.
Useful life means the estimated period during which the WWTP will be operated.
User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the city's WWTP and/or uses or consumes potable water supplied
by the city.
User charge means a charge levied on users of the city's WWTP for the cost of
operation and maintenance of such works, and includes the cost of replacement.
Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes
from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions,
together with any pollutants which may be present, whether treated or
untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the WWTP.
Wastewater discharge permit means a permit as set forth in section
82-187.
Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) means the treatment works as defined by
Section 212 of the Act which is owned in this instance by the city. This
definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the WWTP. For the
purposes of this article, WWTP shall also include any sewers that convey
wastewater to the WWTP from persons outside the city who are, by contract or
agreement with the city, users of the city's WWTP.
WWTP facility means that portion of the WWTP designed to provide treatment to
wastewater.
Water utility shall mean a governmental unit, municipal or private corporation,
association, partnership or individual engaged in furnishing potable water to
the public.
Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion of the state, or
are designated as such on the USGS topographic map.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005 ;Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007; Ord. No. 243, 5-1-2023; Ord.
No. 245, 11-20-2023)
   Cross reference–Definitions generally, §
1-2
Sec. 82-2. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD shall mean Biochemical Oxygen Demand.
CFR shall mean Code of Federal Regulations.
COD shall mean chemical oxygen demand.
CWA shall mean Clean Water Act.
EPA shall mean Environmental Protection Agency.
l shall mean liter.
mg shall mean milligrams.
mg/l shall mean milligrams per liter.
ND shall mean no detectable trace (less than method detection limit).
NPDES shall mean National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
REU shall mean residential equivalent unit.
SIC shall mean Standard Industrial Classification.
SIU shall mean significant industrial user.
SWDA shall mean Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq.
TSS shall mean total suspended solids.
USC shall mean United States Code.
WWTP shall mean wastewater treatment plant.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
DIVISION 2.
WATER AND SEWERAGE SYSTEMS COMBINED
Sec. 82-3. Legislative determination.
It is determined and declared to be necessary for the public health, benefit
and welfare of the city to combine the water supply system and the sanitary
sewage disposal system of the city into one combined utility system (the
"system"). It is also the public policy of this state and this city that all
occupied premises be connected to an available municipal water supply system
and an available public sanitary sewer system and that the separation of storm
water drainage from the sanitary sewer system is hereby declared to be a public
policy and purpose of this chapter.1
   1MCL 117.5j, MCL 333.12753, MCL 324.312a, and § 320.4 of the County Sanitary
Code.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-4. Systems combined.
The water supply and sanitary sewage disposal systems of the city shall be
operated and maintained as one system on a combined-rate basis under the
provisions of the Revenue Bond Act of 1933 (MCL 141.101, et seq.), to be known
and designated as the water and sanitary sewage disposal system, or the system,
which shall include all wells, water mains and laterals, pumping stations,
sewers, sanitary sewage disposal plant, sanitary sewage lift stations and all
attendant facilities and equipment which are used or useful in the operation
and maintenance of either the water supply system or the sanitary sewage
disposal system.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-5. Supervisor.
The operation, repair and management of the system shall be under the
supervision and control of the city manager. The council shall pass all
ordinances and make such rules and regulations as may be needed so as to
provide for the safe, economical and efficient management of the system.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. 222, § 44, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 82-6. Operating year.
The system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year commencing on
July 1 and ending on June 30.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-7. Permitted connections.
(a)   All connections to the system shall only be by permit.
(b)   All permits issued for connections to the system shall be issued only
upon application of the owner or his duly authorized agent, setting forth the
size and type of pipe to be used, the location and size of the public water or
public sanitary sewer, the precise location of the tap-in connections as
related to the building, and such other information as set forth on the
application form provided by the city.
(c)   No connections shall be made to the system that do not include both water
and sewer, unless by consent of the city manager and then upon payment of the
connection charges that are established pursuant to Article IV, Section 82-243.
(d)   All permits for connections shall be conditional and subject to final
inspection before backfilling by the building inspector or his duly authorized
agent. Upon final inspection, the building inspector shall issue the owner or
his agent a certificate of inspection. Any connection made without this
certificate shall void the permit, and the tap-in shall be disconnected, unless
properly made and unless the cost of re-excavation and inspection are forthwith
paid to the city.
(e)   Water main connections shall be made only by the city, subject to its
sole discretion as to location, work and material. The charge shall be the
actual cost of the material, including meter cost, labor, supervision and
administration costs of ten percent. The Authority shall estimate the cost of
such installation, and this amount shall be deposited with the city at the time
the permit is issued. Any overage shall be refunded, and any cost above the
estimate shall be billed and paid by the property owner forthwith. The final
connection from the installation made by the city from or near the curb to the
building shall be performed by the owner at his own expense and subject to city
specifications; however, no installation shall be completed until final
inspection and approval by the city.
(f)   No person other than an authorized representative of the city shall make
any connection to any water main of the city, including fire hydrants. No
person shall take or use city water from any water main of the city, including
fire hydrants, without a permit or authorization from the Authority. A
violation of this subsection shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. 222, § 46, 12-3-2018)
Secs. 82-8–82-9. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
DUTY TO CONNECT TO MUNICIPAL UTILITIES
Sec. 82-10. Notice of availability.
Upon a public sanitary sewer or a municipal water main first becoming available
to a property, the city shall publish notice of availability of the public
sanitary sewer system or water distribution system in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city and shall serve notice of availability upon the
owner of each parcel of property so affected by first-class mail addressed to
the property owner at the most current address shown on the city's property tax
rolls. This notice shall give the owner the approximate location of the
sanitary sewer system or municipal water main which is available for connection
and shall advise the owner of the connection requirements and enforcement
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-11. Water utility connections.
All structures used or designed for human occupancy shall be connected to an
available municipal water supply. The owner of any structure used or designed
for human occupancy which is not connected to an available municipal water
supply on the effective date of this chapter ordinance shall, at the owner's
sole expense, connect such structure to any available municipal water supply
within 18 months after the city's publication and service of notice of
availability.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-12. Sanitary sewer utility connections.
All structures in which sanitary sewage originates shall be connected to an
available public sanitary sewer. The owner of any structure in which sanitary
sewage originates shall, at the owner's sole expense, connect such structure to
any available public sanitary sewer within 18 months after the city's
publication and service of notice of availability.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-13. Duty to maintain sewer leads.
All owners who connect to the city's available public sanitary sewer shall
thereafter maintain the building sewer including the "Y" or stub at the owner's
sole expense.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-14. Failure to connect.
If any structure which is used or designed for human occupancy and/or in which
sanitary sewage originates is not connected to an available municipal water
supply and/or an available public sanitary sewer within the time specified in
sections
82-11 and
82-12, the city shall require the connection to be made immediately after
receipt of a Notice to Connect, which may be by first- class or certified mail
to the owner of the property or by posting on the property. If any such
structure remains unconnected to an available municipal water supply or
available public sanitary sewer after the owner thereof has received Notice to
Connect, the owner of the property shall be responsible for a municipal civil
infraction punishable as provided in section
1-8(d) of the Mason City Code. Each day that the premises remains unconnected
thereafter shall constitute a separate violation. In addition to the remedies
provided by the Mason City Code, the city may, after 90 days from the date of
mailing or posting of the written Notice to Connect, bring an action for a
mandatory injunction or order in the Ingham County Circuit Court to compel the
owner to connect to the available municipal water supply and/or available
sanitary sewer system immediately.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-15. Variances.
Any property owner who receives notice to connect to municipal utility services
may file an application for a variance with the Mason city council. The
variance may be granted when the variance application and other factual
evidence demonstrates that the variance is necessary to avoid practical
difficulties resulting from the physical characteristics of the property or to
avoid unnecessary hardships not created by the applicant and the city council
finds that the granting of a variance will not cause a substantial adverse
affect or risk of harm to the environment or the public health, safety, and
welfare. Any such variance shall be subject to each of the following
conditions:
   (1)   Each application for a variance shall be accompanied by an inspection
and certificate by the Ingham County Health Department and/or a licensed
sanitarian certifying that the existing onsite sanitary sewer disposal
facilities are in compliance with sanitary codes and/or a water chemistry
analysis verifying that the private water supply is potable.
   (2)   No more than one variance shall be granted by the council for a term
not to exceed ten years from the date of Notice of Availability.
   (3)   If any private well or onsite sanitary sewage disposal system fails or
requires reworking during the term of any variance, the subject property shall
be connected within 180 days to the available sanitary sewer or municipal water
supply.
   (4)   The variance shall be recorded with the Ingham County Register of
Deeds and shall be disclosed by the owner of the property in writing to any
prospective purchaser pursuant to the seller disclosure requirements mandated
by the Michigan Seller Disclosure Act, MCL 565.951 et seq.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Secs. 82-16–82-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. WATER SYSTEM
DIVISION 1.
GENERAL
Sec. 82-31. Polluting, contaminating wells prohibited. 
(a)   The owner of any private well which is abandoned shall cause the
abandoned well to be properly plugged by a registered well drilling contractor
pursuant to the regulations published by the Michigan Department of Community
Health and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
(b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain or to
continue to maintain, or permit to be constructed or maintained, or to continue
to be maintained, within the city, any source of possible contamination or
pollution to any of the municipal water wells within the city.
(c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to do or continue any act, or to
allow any act to be done or continued that may contaminate or pollute or
contribute to the contamination or pollution of the public water supply wells
or water system of the city.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-32. Conservation rules.
(a)   When weather or other extraordinary conditions place unusual demand upon
the public water distribution system or when the public water supply or
capacity is restricted due to mechanical failure or other physical limitations
and low pressure or reduced volumes threaten the public health, safety or
welfare, the city manager is empowered to make and publish rules necessary to
conserve and protect the public health, safety and welfare and the integrity of
the public water supply system. Such rules may restrict or prohibit irrigation
of lawns, other outdoor irrigation and other nonessential uses of the public
water supply.
(b)   Rules promulgated by the city manager under this section shall become
effective upon filing with the city clerk and publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city and shall remain in effect until modified or
rescinded by further order of the city manager or by resolution of the city
council.
(c)   The city manager may grant exceptions to this section in cases where
outdoor irrigation is necessary to preserve nursery stock or newly established
landscaping which is required by city codes or the Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Act, Pt. 91 of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act (MCL 324.9101 et seq.).
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. 222, § 47, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 82-33. Maintenance of curb boxes.
(a)   It is determined and declared to be necessary for the public health and
welfare of the city that all curb boxes for water shutoff shall remain
accessible from above ground.
(b)   If a curb box is covered and cannot be readily located for that reason,
all charges for additional time needed in locating the curb box, as compared
with the time that would be spent in locating one above the ground, and all
other additional expenses shall constitute a lien on the property served; and
if not paid within six months after the expenses are due, the amount due shall
be certified to the tax assessing officer of the city, who shall enter such
delinquent charges upon the next general city tax roll as a charge against such
premises; and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided by law
for delinquent and unpaid taxes.
(c)   When a single water service lead serves more than one dwelling unit,
there shall be a common curb box shut-off on the common lead and separate shut-
offs shall be provided for each dwelling unit. The proposed location and
arrangement of the common shut-off and all separate shut-offs shall be
identified on a site plan submitted to the city and shall be installed as
approved by the city. For new construction, two units shall require a minimum
of a one-inch common service lead, three units shall require a minimum of a
1.25-inch common service lead, and four or more units shall require a licensed
engineer or architect recommendation.
(d)   The property owner shall be solely responsible for the entire cost of
maintenance, repair, and replacement of the water service lead from the
premises served to the curb box, including all separate shut-offs up to the
common curb box. The city shall be solely responsible for the entire cost of
maintenance, repair and replacement of the water service lead from and
including the curb box and shut-off valve, or common curb box and shut-off
valve to the water main.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-34. Meters.
(a)   There shall be installed for each user one meter per household in good
working order. Each user shall allow entry to the premises served by duly
authorized city personnel at reasonable times for testing, inspection, repair
and service to its water meters.
(b)   All meters shall be owned by the city, except as otherwise specifically
provided for, and upon written request of any user, accompanied by a deposit
fee, such meter will be tested. If on such test the meter registers over two
percent more water than actually passes through it, the meter will be replaced
and the deposit refunded; otherwise the deposit will be retained to cover the
cost of the test.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-35. Turning off water for repairs; fee for resumption of service;
tampering with meter; additional meter.
(a)   Where water is shut off in any section of the city by reason of accident
or necessity of repair, the water department shall endeavor to give timely
notice to the consumers affected, and shall, so far as practicable, use its
best efforts to prevent and minimize inconvenience and damage arising from such
shutoff; but the failure to give such notice shall not render the city
responsible or liable in damages for any inconvenience, injury or loss which
may result from such shutoff.
(b)   If, for any reason, except on the initial installation and connection,
water service is resumed or turned on for a user, the user shall first pay the
required turn-on charge.
(c)   No person shall tamper with, disconnect, bypass, replace, alter or
interfere with any city meter, or engage in any act to obtain free service or
reduced water service rates without the express consent of the city manager. A
violation of this section is a misdemeanor.
(d)   Where premises are connected to at least one meter which measures the
flow of water, the waste of which is directly or indirectly discharged to the
city's publicly owned treatment works, the owner may install a second meter
connection so as to measure only water drawn from outside faucets which does
not flow as waste to the city's publicly owned treatment works. This meter
shall be purchased at cost from the city, or a source approved by the city,
installed under city permit, inspected, and maintained in good working order,
all at the owner's sole expense.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. 222, § 48, 12-3-2018)
Secs. 82-36--82-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
CROSS CONNECTIONS
Sec. 82-61. Purpose, scope, construction, establishing authority.
(a)   The purpose of this division is to promote and protect the public health,
safety and welfare by the prevention and elimination of cross connections which
have been recognized as a public health hazard to drinking water quality.
(b)   The provisions of this division shall control all matters concerning the
inspection, detection, prevention and elimination of cross connections in
certain new and existing industrial, commercial, and residential facilities.
(c)   This division shall be legally construed in such manner as to best
effectuate its purpose. The provisions of this division shall be construed, if
possible, in such manner as to make such provisions consistent with each other
and likewise with all future ordinances of the city, and all amendments
thereto; provided, however, that where any inconsistency or conflict cannot be
avoided, then the most restrictive of such inconsistent or conflicting
provisions shall control and prevail.
(d)   This division is adopted pursuant to the provisions of section 5 of Act
No. 399 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 325.1001 et seq.). as
amended, and Administrative Rules, Part 14, R325.11401-325.11407, as amended.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-62. Application to new, existing buildings.
The requirements of this division shall pertain to both existing and newly
constructed buildings.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-63. Conflict of laws.
Nothing contained in this division shall be deemed to nullify any provision of
the Michigan plumbing code or any other statute or legally adopted ordinance or
code of the city. In any case where a provision of this division is found to be
in conflict with a provision of any state statute or any other legally adopted
ordinance or code of the city, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
people shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-64. Conflicts of interest.
(a)   The cross connection control inspector shall refrain from any transaction
which may directly or indirectly result in the following:
   (1)   The hiring for employment of the cross connection control inspector by
an owner, occupant or lessee of premises subject to this division, for the
purpose of making repairs or alterations, as required by the provisions of this
division.
   (2)   The referral by the cross connection control inspector of any person
for employment by an owner, occupant or lessee of premises subject to this
division for the purpose of making repairs or alterations, as required by the
provisions of this division.
   (3)   The gaining of a financial interest by the cross connection control
inspector in any transaction involving an owner, occupant or lessee of premises
subject to this division; such financial interest including, but not limited
to, any known financial interest direct or indirect, gained by the cross
connection control inspector's spouse, parent, grandparent, child, grandchild,
brother or sister or spouse of any of them.
(b)   Violation of any of the provisions of this section shall render the
business relationship between the cross connection control inspector and the
city voidable at the option of the city manager.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. 222, § 49, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 82-65. Enforcement.
The Authority is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of
this division and to make inspections of all properties served by the public
water supply where cross connections with the public water supply system are
deemed possible.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-66. Right of entry, presumption.
The Authority is hereby authorized to enter, during reasonable hours, premises
served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the
purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross
connection. Owners, lessees or occupants in charge of premises within the city
shall give free access to such premises, during reasonable hours, for the
purpose of inspection. Should entry be refused, the Authority may request that
the city attorney obtain a court order authorizing such entry to the premises.
Refusal of entry shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-67. Certificate of compliance.
(a)   A certificate of compliance with this division shall be issued by the
Authority upon completion and approval of all inspections of new premises, upon
completion and approval of a periodic inspection of existing premises, and upon
approval of new expanded or altered piping in an existing premises.
(b)   Tests of protective devices may be required by the Authority before
issuing a certificate of compliance.
(c)   Failure to operate successfully under tests within the limitations and
requirements of this division shall constitute sufficient grounds for ordering
changes in the piping arrangements, equipment, facilities or appurtenances
before a certificate of compliance is issued.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-68. Notice of violation.
(a)   If the Authority has reason to believe that there is a violation of the
provisions of this division, a notice of violation may be issued to the
violator or the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises in which the
violation is located. A person who is issued a notice of violation shall have
the number of days specified in the notice of violations to correct and
eliminate the violation; however, the violator shall in no instance be given
greater than 60 days to correct or eliminate the violation, unless specifically
approved otherwise by the Authority.
(b)   Notice of violations issued by the Authority shall:
   (1)   Be in writing.
   (2)   Include a statement of the violations and the remedial action
required.
   (3)   Specify the number of days within which correction or elimination of
the violation must occur.
   (4)   Indicate that a plumbing permit be secured for the plumbing portion of
the necessary corrections.
   (5)   Be served upon the owner, lessee, or occupant as the case may require.
(c)   Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner,
lessee, or occupant, if a copy thereof is personally served; if a copy thereof
is sent by registered or certified mail; if a copy thereof is posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the premises affected by the notice; or if
service of such notice is made by any method authorized or required under the
laws of this state.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-69. General authority to discontinue service.
The Authority is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service to
premises where such premises have failed to correct and eliminate any
connection in violation of this division and to seal any piping arrangement,
devices, equipment, facilities or appurtenances. Further precautionary measures
deemed necessary to eliminate the danger of contamination of the public water
supply is authorized and may be undertaken by the Authority. Water service to
such premises shall not be restored until the cross connections have been
eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this division. In addition,
violators shall be subject to further penalty, as provided in this division.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-70. Imminent hazards.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, the Authority shall have
the power to declare an imminent hazard and thereupon discontinue water service
to the premises by sealing any piping arrangements, devices, equipment,
facilities or appurtenances. Water service to such premises shall not be
restored until the cross connections have been eliminated in compliance with
the provisions of this division. In addition, violators shall be subject to
further penalty, as provided in this division.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-71. Administrative hearing, review panel.
(a)   A person who is issued a notice of violation under this division, may
within ten days from the date of receipt of such notice, petition for an
administrative hearing at which the person may indicate why it is believed that
there is no violation of this division. The request for the administrative
hearing shall not act as a stay of actions taken by the Authority.
(b)   The privilege to request an administrative hearing shall also exist where
discontinuance of the water supply has previously been made due to a declared
imminent hazard.
(c)   There is hereby created an administrative review panel composed of the
city manager, a member of the Utility Rate Study Commission designated by the
commission, and the zoning and development director.
(d)   Upon receipt of a written petition for an administrative hearing, the
administrative review panel shall set a time and place for such hearing and
shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why the notice
of violation should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall commence not
later than ten days after the day on which the petition was filed.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. 222, § 50, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 82-72. Action by administrative hearing review panel.
After such hearing, the administrative review panel shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the notice, depending upon its findings. The order of the panel shall
be served on the petitioner in accordance with the provisions set forth in
section 82-68 for service of a notice of violation.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-73. Premises subject to division.
(a)   Any premises not exempted in subsection (b) of this section, which is
provided water service by a public or private water supply system and which has
or is proposed to have any of the following systems, is subject to this
division:
   (1)   A secondary water supply.
   (2)   A water treatment system.
   (3)   A boiler, water or steam.
   (4)   A commercial or industrial process or equipment which uses water
including, but not limited to, plating tanks, water-cooled equipment, product
washing equipment and air conditioning units.
   (5)   A sewage liquid waste or solid waste treatment or process system.
   (6)   A lawn irrigation system.
   (7)   A location which supplies potable water for mobile units for cleaning
or transport.
   (8)   A temporary water service.
   (9)   A wet fire protection system.
   (10)   Any other possible source of backflow.
   (11)   Any pressure-increasing equipment over system pressure.
(b)   The following are not subject to this division:
   (1)   Except for lawn irrigation systems, any premises which contains only
structures not exceeding two stories in height and which utilizes only such
plumbing fixtures as drinking fountains, lavatories, water closets and urinals,
or appliances such as residential dishwashers or residential clothes washing
machines.
   (2)   A boiler at a residential structure serving less than six dwelling
units which utilizes no chemical treatment.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-74. Determination of premises subject to division.
(a)   The Authority is hereby authorized to conduct an initial survey to
identify all premises subject to this division.
(b)   The Authority shall classify each premises according to degree of hazard
to the potable water system and shall initiate inspections based on the health
hazard potential.
(c)   Upon completion of the initial inspection, the Authority shall issue
either a certificate of compliance, in accordance with section
82-67, or a notice of violation, in accordance with section
82-68.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-75. Periodic inspections.
(a)   The Authority shall periodically inspect all premises and facilities
subject to this division. The frequency of inspections and reinspections shall
be based on the potential health hazards and shall be established or modified
by the Authority. The interval for periodic reinspections shall be established
within the range of three months to five years.
(b)   Upon completion of a periodic inspection, the Authority shall issue
either a renewed certificate of compliance, in accordance with section
82-67, or a notice of violation, in accordance with section
82-68.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-76. New, expanded or altered piping systems.
(a)   The owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises at which new piping
systems will be installed or existing piping systems will be expanded or
altered shall submit the following to the Authority:
   (1)   A completely filled out application for review of plans and
specifications, as provided by the Authority.
   (2)   Two complete sets of plans and specifications of the piping, devices,
and of the equipment and buildings used in connection therewith.
   (3)   Any further information or documentation to satisfy the Authority that
the piping and equipment shall be installed and operated within the limitations
and prohibitions specified in this division. No work shall be initiated until
necessary permits have been obtained from the department of zoning and
development.
(b)   No new facility or expanded facility completed pursuant to a plumbing
permit shall be occupied or the water system utilized until a certificate of
compliance has been issued by the Authority in accordance with section
82-67.
(c)   The owner, lessee or occupant or person responsible for the new, expanded
or altered piping system, devices, equipment or facility shall notify the
Authority when the work is completed and ready for final inspection, which
inspection shall be made promptly after such notification.
(d)   Upon completion of the inspection of new, expanded, or altered piping,
the Authority shall issue a certificate of compliance, in accordance with
section
82-67, or a notice of violation in accordance with section
82-68.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-77. Prohibitions of cross connections.
(a)   A cross connection between a public water system and other systems or
equipment is prohibited.
(b)   A cross connection shall not be made between a public water supply system
and a secondary water supply.
(c)   A cross connection shall not be made by submerged inlet.
(d)   A cross connection shall not be made between a public water supply and
piping which may contain sanitary waste or a chemical contaminant.
(e)   A cross connection shall not be made between a public water supply system
and piping immersed in a tank or vessel which may contain a contaminant.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-78. Color coding of piping.
(a)   All exposed piping carrying potable water shall be uniformly painted a
distinguishing bright blue color and so maintained that each pipe may be
readily traced in its entirety by such color. All lines that carry secondary
water shall be painted brown. In instances where these colors conflict with
established systems of painting in a particular establishment, the Authority
may allow the use of other colors of equal brightness and distinction, provided
that the alternative color code is submitted to and accepted by the Authority
prior to painting of the pipe. Any such color code shall be posted on the
premises at locations approved by the Authority.
(b)   Color coding requirements will be deemed to have been met if three inch
bands of blue or brown paint are used at intervals of not more than 25 feet and
at points where exposed piping passes through walls, floors or roofs. The bands
shall be applied to the piping on both sides of the walls and both above and
below the floor or roof.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-79. Alternate identification of piping.
Where maintenance of color coding is impossible, the Authority may permit use
of a permanently attached durable sign or tag of acceptable design on each
piece of pipe in each line not to exceed 25 feet between signs or tags, and at
each valve. The following are acceptable designs:
   (1)   Secondary water may be indicated by use of a durable tag in the shape
of a four-inch equilateral triangle bearing the legend "water unsafe" in
letters not less than 7/16 inch in height.
   (2)   Potable water may be indicated by use of a durable circular tag of
three-inch diameter bearing the legend "safe water" in letters not less than
one-half inch in height.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-80. Identification of secondary water.
All openings from which secondary water may be obtained shall have at all times
a sign prominently posted within two feet of the opening, bearing the following
warning: WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING. Such sign shall be at least eight inches by
ten inches in size, prominently lettered in contrasting colors, with no letters
less than one inch in height. Signs are to be furnished and maintained by the
owner of the secondary supply and must be of materials and design acceptable to
the Authority.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-81. Protection of water supply.
(a)   Any water-using equipment, apparatus, or device, shall have its water
supply protected against contamination by methods acceptable to the Authority.
(b)   Water piping used to convey potable water shall not be submerged in
nonpotable water or other liquid.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-82. Minimum residential water pressure.
Under conditions of flow attained through simultaneous use of fixtures, there
shall be a residential pressure of not less than eight pounds per square inch
measured on the pressure side of the wide open faucet or valve supplying the
highest fixture in the building, except that pressurized flush valves shall
require a minimum pressure of 15 pounds per square inch on the supply side of
the valve when in operation.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-83. Disinfection of piping system.
The Authority shall require, when necessary, that the potable water system or
any part thereof installed or repaired, be disinfected in accordance with the
following methods before it is placed in operation:
   (1)   The system or part thereof, shall be thoroughly flushed and then be
filled with a solution containing 100 parts per million of available chlorine
and allowed to stand two hours before flushing and returning to service.
   (2)   In the case of potable water filters or similar devices, the dosage
shall be determined by the Authority.
   (3)   When directed by the Authority, samples shall be collected and
analyzed to determine the effectiveness of the disinfection.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-84. Backflow prevention devices-Required.
(a)   A water utility is hereby prohibited from installing and/or maintaining a
water service connection to a person's premises where a cross connection or
secondary water supply is maintained, contrary to the provisions of this
division, unless the public potable water supply is protected against backflow
by installing an approved backflow prevention device at the service connection.
(b)   When the Authority finds that there is a cross connection or a secondary
water supply on the premises; that the owner, lessee or occupant is operating
the piping system in a manner that could adversely effect the piping system;
when it is determined that there are frequent changes to the piping and related
equipment; or when it is determined that there is undue risk because of
complexity of the piping system, the Authority shall require the owner, at the
owner's expense, to:
   (1)   Install an approved backflow prevention device at each service
connection to his premises.
   (2)   Test such device annually or more often when deemed necessary.
   (3)   Properly repair and maintain such device or devices and keep adequate
records of each test and subsequent maintenance and repair, including materials
or replacement parts.
(c)   No connection shall be made to the service line between the meter and the
backflow prevention device. If a bypass around the backflow prevention device
is installed, a singular backflow device shall be installed on the bypass. If
the service is unmetered, the backflow prevention device shall be installed
near the property line upstream from the first outlet or branch connection.
(d)   Each device intended for prevention of backflow shall be approved by the
Authority. The design, maintenance and testing procedures, installation
requirements, other features of the device and evidence of effectiveness may be
required by the Authority prior to acceptance. The Authority may accept devices
approved by the state department of public health or meeting the requirements
of the American Society of Sanitary Engineering or of other professional or
testing organizations.
(e)   The backflow prevention device shall be located in a well drained room or
space of sufficient size to permit a person to have convenient access for
inspection, testing and repair purposes. Installation of the device below grade
or in a meter pit is not acceptable, unless specifically authorized in writing
by the Authority.
(f)   All devices installed in a potable water system for protection against
backflow shall be maintained in good working condition by the owner, occupant
or lessee. The Authority may inspect such installed devices and, if found to be
defective or inoperative, shall require the repair or replacement thereof. No
device shall be removed from use or relocated, or other device substituted,
without the approval of the Authority.
(g)   Only the devices indicated below are acceptable for protection against
backflow:
   (1)   An approved air gap at the customer service for protection of the
public water system.
   (2)   An air gap on the premises piping system only when specifically
authorized by the Authority.
   (3)   A reduced pressure zone backflow preventor for all backflow protection
conditions.
   (4)   A reduced pressure zone backflow prevention device for an automatic
fire sprinkler system using an antifreeze solution approved by the Authority;
and for the following specified use:
      a.   A low pressure boiler not subject to chemical treatment.
      b.   A closed recirculating system used for heating and cooling not
subject to chemical treatment.
      c.   A water softener of the automatically regenerative type.
   (5)   A barometric loop for a water connection not subject to back pressure.
   (6)   A vacuum breaker for water connections not subject to back pressure,
such as standard plumbing fixtures, lavatory sinks, lawn irrigation systems,
and those submerged inlets specifically authorized by the Authority.
(h)   Any atmospheric type vacuum breaker shall be installed on the discharge
side of the last control valve and, on open vessels, shall be at least six
inches above the flood level rim of the device; or at a distance equal to the
critical level, plus such safety factor as may be specified for any given
vacuum breaker by the Authority. For closed vessels the top of the device shall
be treated as the flood level rim, but, in addition, a check valve shall be
installed on the discharge side of the vacuum breaker.
(i)   Pressure type vacuum breakers may be installed so that they are
continuously subject to static line pressure. Pressure vacuum breakers shall be
installed a minimum of 12 inches above the equipment or piping served,
whichever is higher.
(j)   All required check valves, including those which are spring loaded, shall
be installed so that the force of gravity will assist in closing and holding
the disc or clapper on the seat. No check valve shall be installed in the
vertical position on down feed supply piping. Vertical lift check valves shall
be installed only in the vertical position on up feed supply piping. Horizontal
lift check valves shall only be installed in the horizontal position. If
horizontal swing check valves are installed in vertical piping, the direction
of normal flow shall be up, and there shall be external evidence of a hinge pin
to establish the type of check valve.
(k)   Safe air gap shall be maintained between the water supply inlet and the
maximum overflow level of any fixture, tank, or container. Safe air gaps shall
be determined as follows:
   (1)   Circular openings. Circular water supply inlet openings shall have an
air gap equivalent to twice the diameter of the orifice; but not less than one
inch and need not be more than 12 inches.
   (2)   Other openings. For water supply openings other than circular, the air
gap shall be 2-1/4 times the square root of the area of the opening.
   (3)   Equations. Or in equation form: G = 2d for circular openings: G = 2.25
square root of A for other openings, where G = the air gap, D = the diameter
and A = the area.
   (4)   Exceptions. On openings greater than four-inch diameter or of
equivalent area, if the opening is other than circular, the Authority shall be
consulted for minimum air gaps.
(l)   Air gaps and vacuum breakers shall be installed above the spill line of
the fixture or device; or positive spill openings to the outside of the flush
tank, device or apparatus shall be provided if the apparatus, tank or device is
equipped with overflows which might become blocked, fouled or otherwise
stopped.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-85. Lawn sprinkler systems.
(a)   Lawn sprinkler systems shall be equipped with a vacuum breaker on the
discharge side of each area control valve.
(b)   If a lawn sprinkling system is installed so different areas sprinkled are
each controlled by a valve on the discharge side of the main control valve on
the main distribution branch to the entire lawn sprinkling system, the system
shall be protected by one of the following methods:
   (1)   An acceptable vacuum breaker may be installed on the discharge side of
each zone control valve.
   (2)   Where the supply of water to the various zones is controlled by an
acceptable automatic multiport zone control valve, at least one port of which
is always open, an acceptable vacuum breaker may be installed downstream from
the main control valve and upstream from the multiport valve.
   (3)   A reduced pressure principle backflow preventor may be installed on
the main distribution branch to the sprinkler system in close proximity to the
main control valve.
   (4)   An acceptable pressure type vacuum breaker may be installed between
the main control valve and the zone control valves.
   (5)   If it is proposed to protect the water supply to a zone sprinkling
system by a method other than one of those set forth in subsections (b)(1)
through (b)(4) above, complete mechanical and topographical plans of the
proposed installation shall be submitted to the Authority before the work is
begun, for examination to determine the acceptability of the installation from
the standpoint of protection of the water supply and from the standpoint of
potential nuisance.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-86. Fire protection systems.
(a)   If siamese, standpipe or other types of fittings are provided for
connection of fire hoses to the fire protection system, and such fire
protection system is normally supplied through the municipal water service lead
and the main water distribution pipe of the premises, a check valve and a
control valve of the outside screw and yoke pattern shall be installed in each
branch to the fire protection system at its connection with the main water
distribution pipe.
(b)   If, however, any fire protection system with fittings as described in
subsection (a) of this section, is located within 1,000 feet if any river,
canal or other body of water, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
device shall be installed in each branch of the fire protection system at its
connection with the main water distribution pipe.
(c)   A fire protection system with fittings as described in subsections (a)
and (b) of this section which is within 1,000 feet of a river, canal or other
body of water and which has a separate water service connection for fire
protection purposes only, shall have that service connection protected by a
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
(d)   Every water service line supplying only fire protection devices shall be
equipped with a double check valve assembly, except that a detector check
valve, if used, may be considered one of the checks of the required assembly.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-87. Automatic fire sprinkler systems.
(a)   Where necessary to provide an automatic fire sprinkler system using
antifreeze solutions to serve an unheated area, only antifreeze approved by the
Authority may be used. Such systems shall have not more than 20 heads and shall
have at all times prominently posted, within two feet of the fill location, a
warning sign at least eight inches by ten inches in size, having letters of one
inch in height, bearing the following statement; "USE ONLY MATERIALS AUTHORIZED
BY THE CITY OF MASON."
(b)   Signs are to be furnished and maintained by the owner and must be of
materials and design acceptable to the Authority.
(c)   In the supply line to each antifreeze system, there shall be a U-loop
provided in the supply piping. The downleg (supply side) of the U-loop shall
drop at least 1.25 times the amount of rise of the up leg of the U. The minimum
length of the downleg shall be four feet.
(d)   Where a system using an antifreeze solution approved by the Authority is
connected to the potable water system, a reduced pressure zone backflow
prevention device shall be provided in the branch serving the antifreeze system
and above the highest point in the line containing antifreeze solution.
(e)   Where a system using an antifreeze solution approved by the Authority is
connected to a separate fire protection system, a single check valve and
outside screw and yoke valve in the supply branch of the antifreeze system
shall suffice.
(f)   When requested in writing by an owner, occupant or lessee, the Authority
may permit use of antifreeze solutions not approved by the Authority, provided
a reduced pressure principle backflow preventor is installed at the connection
to the potable water system.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-88. Testing and sampling.
(a)   The Authority is hereby authorized to conduct, cause to be conducted, or
to require an owner, occupant or lessee to have conducted any test or tests of
any new or existing piping arrangement, devices, equipment, facility or
appurtenances, the retention of which the Authority has reason to believe may
result in contamination of potable water, or when the Authority has reason to
believe that there is evidence that cross connections do not meet the
limitations prescribed in this division, or at a prescribed frequency to ensure
proper functioning of protective devices. Tests shall be conducted by persons
certified by an organization approved by the Authority. A full written record
of test conditions, test methods and of test results obtained shall be
maintained by the persons conducting such tests.
(b)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner, occupant or lessee of the
operation tested to provide, at his expense, reasonable and necessary openings
in the piping system, appurtenances, equipment or facilities and safe and easy
access thereto, to permit technically valid measurements and samples to be
taken. All new piping equipment or facilities which provide potential for cross
connection may be required by the Authority to provide adequate openings in the
piping system, appurtenances, equipment or facilities, and safe and easy access
thereto to permit technically valid measurements and samples to be taken.
(c)   The Authority is hereby authorized to sample, or cause to be sampled,
water or other fluid flowing in, or having potential for flowing in, any piping
system subject to this division.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-89. Inspection fees.
(a)   A fee shall be paid by the owner, occupant or lessee subsequent to any
inspection or periodic reinspection of premises by the Authority. The fee shall
be established pursuant to Article IV, section 82-243 for each complete or
partial unit of time the Authority is upon the premises. Each unit of time
shall consist of 15 minutes. A minimum fee equivalent to two units of time
shall be charged for each inspection or periodic reinspection.
(b)   The inspection fee shall be paid within 30 days from the date that the
billing for such fee is made by the city to the owner, occupant or lessee. If
the amount is not paid to the city within such time period, the amount due
shall be assessed against such property as a special assessment, in accordance
with the provisions of section 11-9 of the city charter.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-90. Annual report.
The city shall make an annual report of the status of its cross connections
control program to the state department of environmental quality. The annual
report shall be made on a form provided by the department of environmental
quality.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Secs. 82-91--82-100. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS
DIVISION 1.
GENERAL
Sec. 82-101. Purpose and policy.
(a)   This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the WWTP for the city and is intended to enable the city to
comply with all applicable state and federal laws.
(b)   The objectives of this article are to:
   (1)   Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city sanitary sewer
system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the
resulting sludge;
   (2)   Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city sanitary sewer
system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving
waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
   (3)   Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge
from the system; and
   (4)   Provide for the equitable distribution of the costs of the city
sanitary sewer system.
(c)   This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the city sanitary sewer system through the issuance of permits
to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of general requirements
for other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires
user reporting, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established in this article.
(d)   This article shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who
are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city WWTP. Except as
otherwise provided, the Authority shall, acting under the supervision of the
city manager, administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. 222, § 51, 12-3-2018; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-102. Private sanitary sewage disposal; when permitted.
Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any
privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other private facility intended or
used for the disposal of sanitary sewage. Where a public sanitary sewer is not
available as defined under the provisions of section
82-1, the building sewer shall be connected with a private disposal system
constructed and maintained in compliance with rules and regulations of the
county health department and orders of the city council, and subject to the
following additional regulations:
   (1)   At such time as a public sanitary sewer becomes available to a
property served by a private sanitary sewage disposal system, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sanitary sewer in compliance with the
provisions of this article; and any septic tank, privy, privy vault, cesspool
or similar private sanitary sewage disposal facility shall be abandoned and
discontinued for sanitary sewage disposal use.
   (2)   All private sanitary sewage disposal systems permitted under this
article shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times at the sole
expense of the owner.
   (3)   All abandoned private sanitary sewage disposal systems shall be
completely filled with earth, sand, gravel, concrete or other approved
material. Upon the abandonment or discontinuation of use of a septic tank or
privy, the sewage and sludge contents shall be completely removed and disposed
of by a duly licensed septic tank cleaner. The tank, or the pit in the instance
of a privy, shall be treated with a chemical disinfectant acceptable to the
county health department; and the tank or pit shall be completely backfilled
with sand and made safe from the hazard of collapse or entrapment.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-103. Wastewater discharges.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in
any area under the jurisdiction of the city, and/or to the city POTW any
wastewater except as authorized by the Authority in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-104. Amendment, effect.
The city reserves the right to amend this article to provide more stringent
limitations or requirements on discharges to the WWTP at any time it deems
necessary to comply with the objectives set forth at section
82-101. All users then connected to the system at the time of amendment shall
comply with any limitations or requirements more stringent than those in effect
at the time of the user's connection.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-105. Maintenance of sewer service lead.
The property owner shall be solely responsible for the entire cost of
maintenance, repair, and replacement of the sanitary service lead from the
premises served to the public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Secs. 82-106–82-109. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION
Sec. 82-110. License required.
No person shall lay, alter, repair or do any kind of work connected with any
building sewer, connection or sewer work in the public right-of-way, unless
licensed by the city as a sewer builder.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-111. Filing of application.
(a)   Any person desiring to do business as a sewer builder in connection with
the sanitary sewer system shall file in the city hall an application giving the
name of the person and place of business asking to be licensed by the city as a
sewer builder, and stating that the applicant is qualified by experience to
engage in the work and willing to be governed in all respects by the rules and
regulations which are or may be adopted by the city. Each applicant for a
license shall pay an annual fee in the amount established by resolution of city
council and execute and deposit to the city, with his application, a bond with
sufficient surety or sureties to be approved by the city, in the sum of
$10,000, conditioned that he will indemnify and save harmless the city from all
accidents and damages caused by any negligence in protecting his work or by any
unfaithful, imperfect, inadequate, careless or unskilled work done by him or
his employees, and that he will also promptly and in a proper time replace and
restore sidewalk, pavement or other street surfaces over any opening he may
have made to as good a state as existed previous to their opening, and to keep
and maintain the surface in good order to the satisfaction of the city for the
period of one year next thereafter, and that he will pay all fines imposed upon
him for a violation of any of the rules and regulations prescribed by this
article and anyone injured or damaged may bring action on such bond for the
recovery of damages. On receiving his license, he shall have recorded in the
city clerk's office his actual place of business and the name under which the
business is transacted and shall immediately notify the clerk of any change in
either thereafter. No license shall be granted for more than one year, and all
licenses shall be granted to expire on January 1.
(b)   Before a license is granted to any person to do business as a sewer
builder, he shall file with the application a certificate of carriage of
workers compensation insurance with statutory limits, and public liability and
property damage insurance in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 combined single
limits with a company authorized to do business in the state, with the City of
Mason as an additional named insured. These minimum limits may be increased by
the Authority as required based upon the scope of the work.
(c)   The city council may, on its own initiative for good cause, suspend or
revoke any license issued under the provisions of this article; and the
findings of the city council in such matters shall be conclusive and final, and
the reasons for such revocation or suspension shall be entered on the records
of the council. The Authority may for good cause suspend any license granted
under this article for a period of 24 hours and cause such license to be
delivered to him, and he shall forthwith report in writing such action to the
city manager and upon approval of the city manager in writing, such license
shall stand revoked and suspended until the next regular meeting of the city
council. At such meeting of the city council, the holder of such license shall
appear and be heard; and, if the council after hearing the facts shall deem it
advisable, it may affirm the revocation or change the revocation to a
suspension for an appropriate period.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. 222, § 52, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 82-112. Information required in application.
Application for permit to connect to the public sanitary sewer system must be
made in writing by the owner of the property to be sewered or drained, or his
authorized agent. Such application shall give the exact location of the
property, number of the lot, number of feet of frontage, number of buildings to
be connected, the name of the owner, and the name of the licensed sewer builder
employed to do the work, and shall be made on forms furnished for this purpose
by the city; however, the permit shall be granted with the express condition
that the owner for whose benefit the connection is made shall on behalf of
himself, his heirs or assigns, hold the city harmless from any loss or damage
that may in any way result or be caused by the making of any such connection.
Further, such permit shall not be granted until the applicant shall have paid
the required permit fee.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-113. Filing of record required.
Within five days after the work of connecting to the sewer system, the sewer
builder shall file with the city a record showing the number of feet of pipe
laid, its location with respect to the property and buildings connected,
together with such information as may be required by the Authority to make a
complete record of the work.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-114. Method of connections at branches and stubs.
(a)   Y-branches and stubs shall be placed at frequent intervals along the main
or lateral sewer. A record of such Y-branches and stubs is kept in the office
of city engineer and will be furnished to the sewer builder for his
information, but the city does not guarantee the accuracy or actual existence
of the location. All connections with the public sewer system must be made at
such Y- branches or stubs except as approved by the city. The breaking of any
pipe of any main or lateral sewer to connect a house connection shall be deemed
a misdemeanor and subject the sewer builder to a fine as provided in this
article; and, in addition to such fine, he shall pay all expenses of taking up
such sewer and rebuilding it to the satisfaction of the Authority or his
authorized representative. On his failure to do so, the sewer builder shall
forfeit his license, and the charges shall be collected from his sureties.
(b)   If the Y-branch or stub cannot be found with a reasonable effort, the
city may permit the connection to be made by tapping the main or lateral sewer
with a hole of sufficient size to receive the pipe used in the house connection
and connecting the building sewer to the city sewer with a sewer saddle or Y
connection which has been approved by the city.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-115. Inspection required.
The city must be given notice when any new connection to the public sanitary
sewer system is ready for inspection, and all work must be left uncovered and
convenient for examination until inspected and approved. Such inspection shall
be made within 24 hours after such notification. If the city inspector
determines that any work constructed does not conform with this article, the
sewer builder shall remove and replace any such rejected work and shall make
all work meet the requirements of this article to the full satisfaction of the
city inspector.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-116. Connection of roof drains and footing drains prohibited.
(a)   No downspouts from roofs, roof drains, water from air conditioning units,
refrigeration units and cooling units, sump pumps or building footing drains
shall be directly or indirectly connected to the public sanitary sewer system.
(b)   All sump pumps and building footing drains shall be directly connected to
an available public storm sewer or such other storm water disposal facility
approved by the Authority. "Available public storm sewer" shall have the same
meaning as "available public sanitary sewer" as defined at section
82-1.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-117. Connection of surface water sources prohibited.
No open outlet, street drain, catchbasin or other surface water source from a
paved area, yard, court, or courtyard shall be connected with the building
drain or otherwise directly or indirectly connected to the public sanitary
sewer system. Any person making any such connection shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in Chapter 1, Section
1-8(e) of this Code.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-118. Protection from damage.
Persons making any kind of improvement to the public streets and alleys upon
which sewers and house connections have been laid shall so plan and execute
their work that damage will not occur to any public sanitary sewer or house
connection connected with such public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-119. City to decide question of passing over or under drain, sewer,
obstructions.
If a water, gas or other conduit or obstruction shall come in the way of a
drain or sewer, the question of passing over or under the drain or sewer shall
be determined by the city. If a house connection shall come in the way of an
existing water main, gas main or other obstruction, the question of passing
over or under the obstruction shall be determined by the city. In no case shall
a sewer builder be allowed to decide the question. All expenses connected with
passing both over and under such pipes, conduits or obstructions shall be borne
by the owner of the property for whose benefit the connection is being made.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-120. Cost of openings borne by builder.
Openings on any street or alley for sanitary sewer connections shall be made by
a licensed sewer builder and asphalt repairs by city forces or contractors
employed by the city. All costs shall be borne by the licensed sewer builder.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-121. Guarding of openings, obstructions required.
All openings and obstructions in any street, land or alley must be guarded at
all times with sufficient state-approved barriers and such other precautions as
shall be necessary to guard the public against accident; and at all times the
work shall be so done as to cause the least inconvenience to property owners
and the general public.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-122. Separation of drains, building sewers from water pipes required.
No building sewer, building drain, house drain, surface drain or main sewer
shall be laid in the same trench with potable water pipes and in no case closer
together than ten feet to a potable water source without special permission
from the city.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-123. Connection of building drains, building sewers, and floor drains.
Before any building sewer shall be connected to the WWTP, the owner of the
building sewer shall prove to the full satisfaction of the city that it is
entirely clean and that it conforms, in every respect, with the rules and
regulations prescribed by this article. Floor drains shall be connected with
the building sewer and shall be trapped in such a manner that the water seal
cannot be broken.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-124. Building sewer pipe standards.
The building sewer pipe from a point three feet outside of the structure to the
public sanitary sewer shall be constructed of materials approved by the
Authority in conformance with specifications published and filed with the city
clerk entitled "City of Mason Development Standards." Joints shall be
permanently watertight. The building sewer pipe from the property line to the
public sanitary sewer shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter or larger as
required by the Authority to accommodate the use of the structure served. The
building sewer shall be inspected as per section
82-115.
   (1)   For a single-family or two-family structure, the building sewer pipe
from a point three feet outside of the structure to the property line shall be
a minimum of four inches in diameter.
   (2)   For any structure other than a single-family or two-family structure,
the building sewer pipe from a point three feet outside the structure to the
property line shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter or larger as
required by the Authority to accommodate the use of the structure served.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-125. Installation of pipe.
The cover of the Y-branch or stub on the public sanitary sewer shall be
carefully removed to avoid damage to the socket or bell. The first length of
pipe attached to the Y-branch or stub shall be laid so as to give a good fall
into the public sanitary sewer. The entire length of pipe on any house
connection shall be laid in a straight line and on a uniform grade from a point
three feet outside the wall of the building to be served, to the Y-branch or
stub. Such grade shall be a fall of not less than one foot in 100 feet from the
house to the public sanitary sewer, unless by special permission of the city,
in which case provision must be made for regular and efficient flushing. Curved
pipe shall be used for every deflection from a straight line of more than three
inches in two feet. Unless otherwise specified in writing by the city, the
manner of laying the pipe and making the joints shall be as follows:
   (1)   The sanitary service installed for a new building or when replacing an
old or damaged sanitary service shall be made to a wye or tee. If there is no
existing wye or tee, a new wye or tee may be installed or it shall be connected
to a saddle, properly connected, in the presence of a city inspector.
   (2)   Except for multi-story residential structures, when one sanitary sewer
lead serves more than one dwelling unit within a single structure, separate
clean-outs may be provided for each dwelling unit and also for each end of the
common lead and a clean-out shall be provided at the point where leads join to
become a single lead.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-126. Backfilling standards.
All backfilling over that part of any house drain within the boundaries of any
street, alley or public grounds must be either thoroughly puddled or tamped in
layers not exceeding six inches in thickness as determined by the city. The
replacing of any gravel and/or sand shall be done within 48 hours after laying
the house drain or sewer and must be done so as to make the surface at least as
good as it was before it was disturbed, and to the full satisfaction of the
city; and the sewer builder will be held responsible for any subsequent
settling in the ground and/or pavement. All water pipes must be protected to
the satisfaction of the sewer inspector, and all gas pipes shall be protected
to the satisfaction of the company owning the pipes; and any subsequent damage
to either water or gas pipes, by reason of the construction of the house drain,
or subsequent settling of the earth, shall be paid for by the sewer builder.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-127. Standards for house drains and sewers.
House drains and sewers laid within the city limits in and for houses where no
public sanitary sewer is available shall be done according to the regulations
of this article in every particular.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Secs. 82-128–82-150. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS
Sec. 82-151. Violations declared misdemeanor.
Violations of this division are a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-152. Treatment of polluted water required before discharge.
It shall be unlawful for any person to directly discharge into the waters of
the state within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any
sanitary sewage, industrial waste, or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provision of this
division and the statutes and regulations of the state.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-153. General discharge to system.
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly,
any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or
performance of the WWTP or cause a pass-through to the receiving stream. These
general prohibitions apply to all such users of the WWTP whether or not the
user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other
national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not
contribute any of the following substances to the city's WWTP:
   (1)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the WWTP facility resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the WWTP which exceeds
40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit), or lower than -1 degree Celsius
(30 degrees Fahrenheit), unless the WWTP facility is designed to accommodate
such temperature.
   (2)   Any wastewater or waste which may contain more than 100 mg/l of fat,
oil or grease.
   (3)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause a fire or explosion hazard in the WWTP, including, but not
limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees
Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR
261.21, or be injurious in any other way to the WWTP or the operation of the
WWTP. At no time shall two successive readings on any explosion hazard meter,
at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be
more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower
explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include but are not
limited to:
         a.   Gasoline;
         b.   Kerosene:
         c.   Naphtha;
         d.   Benzene;
         e.   Toluene;
         f.   Xylene;
         g.   Ethers;
         h.   Alcohols;
         i.   Ketones;
         j.   Aldehydes;
         k.   Peroxides;
         l.   Chlorates;
         m.   Perchlorates;
         n.   Bromates;
         o.   Carbides;
         p.   Hydrides;
         q.   Sulfides; and
         r.   Any other substance which the city, the state or EPA has notified
the user as a fire hazard or a hazard to the system.
   (4)   Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in
a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment
facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater
than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure,
bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings,
grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics,
gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or
lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes, petroleum oil,
non- biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts
that will cause interference or pass-through.
   (5)   Any wastewater having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 15.0, or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and/or personnel of the WWTP, unless the WWTP is
specifically designed to accommodate such wastewater.
   (6)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singularly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans
or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the WWTP, or
exceed the limitations set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. The
toxic pollutants shall include but are not limited to any pollutant identified
pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act.
   (7)   Any wastewater containing pollutants which, either singularly or by
interaction with other wastes, result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the WWTP in a quantity that may cause acute worker health or
safety problems.
   (8)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment
process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
   (9)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive waste or isotopes of such
half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by state or federal
regulations.
   (10)   Any wastewater where batch discharge containing industrial processing
wastes in excess of standards established by state or federal regulation or
containing such substances as may impair the sanitary sewage treatment process
or cause a deviation from the NPDES permit requirements, pretreatment
standards, and all state and federal regulations.
   (11)   Any wastewater containing suspended solids of such character or
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials
at the WWTP.
   (12)   Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
   (13)   Any substance which will cause the WWTP to violate its NPDES and/or
state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards.
   (14)   Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, and the
like) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows
or has reason to know will cause interference to the WWTP. In no case shall a
slug load lasting longer than 15 minutes have a flow rate, concentration or
qualities of pollutants that exceed more than five times the average 24-hour
concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation.
   (15)   Any substance which may cause the WWTP effluent or other product of
the WWTP such as residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation
and reuse, or interferes with the reclamation process.
   (16)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Authority.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-154. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
Authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid waste
containing grease, oil and sand in excessive amounts; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters of dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city
and shall be located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be of substantial construction,
of impervious materials, capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes of
temperature, and shall be equipped with easily removable covers which, when
bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. When installed, all grease,
oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at the owner's
expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-155. Additional discharge limitations; approval required.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the public sanitary
sewers any waters, waste, substances or materials having the following
characteristics without the prior review and approval of the Authority:
   (1)   A five-day BOD greater than 300 mg/l.
   (2)   Containing more than 350 mg/l of suspended solids.
   (3)   Having a chlorine demand of more than 50 mg/l.
   (4)   Having a daily average flow greater than two percent of the average
daily sewage flow of the city.
   (5)   Having any quantity or substance having a characteristic described in
section 82-153.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-156. Specific pollutant limitations.
No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of:
  Daily Maximum Allowable Concentration (mg/l) Allowable Concentration* (mg/l)
  Average
                       Daily Maximum Allowable      Allowable Concentration*
                       Concentration (mg/l) Average (mg/l)
(1)  Arsenic           0.088                        0.044
(2)  Cadmium           0.026                        0.013
(3)  Chromium          1.89                         0.945
(4)  Copper            0.789                        0.363
(5)  Cyanide, total    0.042                        0.021
(6)  Iron              10.0                         —
(7)  Lead              0.34                         0.170
(8)  Mercury           ND**                         ND**
(9)  Nickel            1.1                          0.504
(10) PCB               0.0005                       —
(11) Phosphorus, total 20.0                         —
(12) Silver            0.006                        0.003
(13) Zinc              2.4                          1.57
*      Average allowable concentration shall mean the average of the four most
recent consecutive sampling events.
**ND:   No detectable trace (less than method detection limit).
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-157. State and local requirements.
State requirements and limitations on discharge shall apply in any case where
they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in
this division. Local requirements and limitations shall apply in any case where
they are more stringent than state or federal requirements.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-158. Pretreatment required.
If any such wastewaters or waters as described in sections
82-151 through
82-156 are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the WWTP, which
contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in this
division, or which in the judgment of the Authority may have a deleterious
effect upon the WWTP or receiving waters, or which otherwise creates hazards to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may, where necessary in the
opinion of the Authority:
   (1)   Reject the waste.
   (2)   Require the owner to control the quantities and rates of discharge of
such waters or waste to meet all applicable state and federal regulations,
including the NPDES permit.
   (3)   Require the owner to provide, at the oswner' sole expense, such
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:
      a.   Reduce the BOD to 300 parts per million, the suspended solids to 350
mg/l,and the chlorine demands to 50 mg/l; and/or
      b.   Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the
maximum limits provided in sections
82-153 through
82-157.
   (4)   Require the owner to pay the added costs of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing sewer charges.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-159. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
If upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards for
a particular industrial subcategory the federal standard is more stringent,
then limitations imposed under the federal standard for sources in that
subcategory shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this
division. The Authority shall notify all affected users of the applicable
reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-160. Modification of Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
Where the city WWTP facility achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited
by pretreatment standards, the city may, at the request of a user, apply to the
Approval Authority for modification of specific limits in the pretreatment
standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean the reduction in the amount of a
pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater
treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is
achieved by the system in 95% of the samples taken measured according to the
procedures set forth in section 40 CFR 403.7(c)(2). The city may then modify
pollutant discharge limits and the pretreatment standards if the requirements
contained in 40 CFR 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the Approval
Authority is obtained. Any user requesting application for modification shall
reimburse the city for all costs of testing and data compilation required by 40
CFR 403.7.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-161. Construction and maintenance of pretreatment facilities.
(a)   Where pretreatment facilities are required by the city, plans,
specifications and other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary
treatment, including a semiannual report of progress regarding compliance with
pretreatment standards, shall be submitted for approval by the city manager;
and no construction of such facility shall be commenced until such approvals
are obtained in writing.
(b)   Where pretreatment facilities are provided for any wastewater or waste,
they shall be maintained in satisfactory and effective operation at all times
by the owner at the owner's sole expense.
(c)   The owner shall regularly submit a wastewater treatment report to the
city as often as required by the permit. Such report shall include all
measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater and waste
as referred to in this section and any other pertinent information as may be
required by the city.
(d)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater
and wastes to which reference is made in this division shall be determined in
accordance with standard methods for examination of water and wastewater and
federal guidelines establishing the procedures for the analysis of pollutants,
and shall be determined at the monitoring facility provided for in section 82-
189 or upon suitable samples taken at such monitoring facility. If no special
monitoring facility is available, sampling shall be at the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected.
(e)   Every industrial or commercial entity operating a pretreatment or control
facility which discharges wastewater or liquid wastes into the public sewer
(sanitary, combined, or storm) shall have the waste treatment or control
facilities under the specific supervision and control of a person who has been
certified by the state department of environmental quality as being properly
qualified to operate the facilities under the requirements of law.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. 222, § 53, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 82-162. Alternate calculation of limits.
(a)   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only
in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the Authority may convert
the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant
discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating
effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users.
(b)   When calculating equivalent mass-per-day limitations under this section,
the Authority shall calculate such limitations by multiplying the limits in the
standard by the industrial user's average rate of production. This average rate
of production shall be based not upon the designed production capacity but
rather upon a reasonable measure of the industrial user's actual long- term
daily production, such as the average daily production during a representative
year. For new sources, actual production shall be estimated using projected
production.
(c)   When calculating equivalent concentration limitations, the Authority
shall calculate such limitations by dividing the mass limitations by the
average daily flow rate of the industrial user's regulated process wastewater.
This average daily flow rate shall be based upon a reasonable measure of the
industrial user's actual long-term average flow rate such as the average daily
flow rate during the representative year.
(d)   Equivalent limitations calculated in accordance with this section shall
be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of Section 307(d) of the Act
and this Code. Industrial users will be required to comply with the equivalent
limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the
equivalent limitations were derived.
(e)   If categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for calculating
maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for calculating maximum
monthly average, or four-day average limitations, where applied, the same
production of flow figure shall be used in calculating both types of equivalent
limitations.
(f)   Any industrial user operating under a control mechanism incorporating
equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production based
standard shall notify the Authority within two business days after the user has
a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change
within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the Authority of such
anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in
its control mechanism that were based on the original estimate of the long-term
average production rate.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-163. Compliance deadline, existing source, new sources.
Compliance by existing sources with categorical pretreatment standards shall be
within three years of the date the standard is effective unless a shorter
compliance time is specified in the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N. Existing sources which become industrial users subsequent to
promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall be
considered existing industrial users except where such sources meet the
definition of a new source. New sources shall install and have in operating
condition, and shall start up all pollution control equipment required to meet
applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the
shortest feasible time (not to exceed 90 days), new sources must meet all
applicable pretreatment standards.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-164. Dilution prohibited.
Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment
standard or requirement, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of
process water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial
or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement. The Authority may impose mass limitations
on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass
limitations is appropriate.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-165. Accidental discharges, operating upsets and slug loads.
(a)   Protection. Each categorical and noncategorical user shall provide
necessary protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
substances regulated by this division. Facilities to prevent accidental
discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the
owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city
for review when required, and shall be approved by the city before construction
of the facility. All existing users who are required to provide such a plan
shall complete such a plan by May 1, 1985. No user who commences contribution
to the WWTP after the effective date of this division shall be permitted to
introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have
been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to
modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this
division.
(b)   Oral notice. In the case of an accidental discharge or operations upset
which places the user in a temporary state of noncompliance with this division
or which could cause problems to the WWTP, including any slug loadings as
defined by section
82-153(14), it is the responsibility of the user to immediately (within 24
hours) telephone and notify the Authority of the incident. The notification
shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume,
and corrective actions.
(c)   Written notice.
   (1)   Within five days following oral notification of an accidental
discharge or operations upset, the user shall submit to the Authority a
detailed written report containing the following:
      a.   Description of the upset, cause and impact on the discharger's
compliance status.
      b.   Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times. If
noncompliance is to continue, a statement addressing when compliance can
reasonably be expected to occur.
      c.   All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of such an upset or other conditions of noncompliance.
   (2)   Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to person
or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil
penalties or other liability which may be opposed by this section or other
applicable law.
(d)   Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the
event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who
may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedures.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Secs. 82-166–82-186. Reserved.
DIVISION 4.
INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 82-187. Wastewater discharge permits.
(a)   Required. All significant industrial users existing as of February 12,
1992 and any industrial/commercial users, as required by the city, proposing to
connect to or to contribute to the WWTP shall obtain a wastewater discharge
permit before connecting to or contributing to the WWTP.
(b)   Application.
   (1)   Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete
and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city, and
accompanied by a fee of $50.00. Existing significant industrial users shall
apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days after the effective date
of this division, and proposed new sources shall apply at least 90 days prior
to connecting to or contributing to the WWTP. In support of the application,
the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the
following information:
      a.   Name, address and location (if different from the address).
      b.   SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.
      c.   Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not
limited to those mentioned in this division as determined by reliable bona fide
chemical and biological analysis; sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of
the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended.
      d.   Time and duration of discharges.
      e.   Average daily and instantaneous peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
      f.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers, and
appurtenances by the size, location and elevation.
      g.   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all materials which are or could be discharged to the WWTP.
      h.   The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by any city, state or federal pretreatment standards or
requirements, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment
standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards
or requirements.
      i.   If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide
such additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional O&M
activities. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The
following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
         1.   The schedule shall contain reasonably prompt increments of
progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g.,
hiring an engineer or other appropriate personnel, completing preliminary
plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction, and all other acts necessary
to achieve compliance with this chapter).
         2.   No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
Authority, including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and
the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule
established.
         3.   Under no circumstances shall the city permit a time increment for
any single step directed toward compliance which exceeds nine months.
      j.   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate
of production.
      k.   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day).
      l.   Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and
proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system.
      m.   Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary
to evaluate the permit application.
   (2)   All permit applications shall be signed by a principal executive
officer of the user.
   (3)   The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished,
the city may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and
conditions provided in this section.
(c)   Permit modifications. Within nine months of the promulgation of a
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater contribution permit
of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with
such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user
subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by
subsection (a) of this section, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge
permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard. In addition, the user with an existing
wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the Authority within 180 days after
the promulgation of an applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard the
information required by subsection (b)(1)h.and i.
(d)   Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations,
user charges and fees and compliance schedules established by the city. Permits
may contain the following:
   (1)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to the WWTP.
   (2)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
   (3)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
   (4)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities.
   (5)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests and
reporting schedule.
   (6)   Compliance schedules and periodic compliance reports.
   (7)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports
(see section
82-188).
   (8)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording city access to
such records.
   (9)   Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction of
wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of
the wastewater constituents being introduced into the WWTP.
   (10)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges, accidental
discharges and operations upsets.
   (11)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure
compliance with this article.
(e)   Net/gross calculation of limits.
   (1)   Adjustment authorized. The Authority may adjust the categorical
pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in the industrial
user's intake water in accordance with this subsection.
   (2)   Application. Any industrial user wishing to obtain credit for intake
pollutants must make application to the Authority. Upon request of the
industrial user, the applicable standard will be calculated on a net basis
(i.e., adjusted to reflect credit for pollutants in the intake water) if the
requirements of subsections (d)(3)and (4) of this section are met.
   (3)   Criteria. The industrial user must demonstrate that the control system
it proposes or uses to meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards
would, if properly installed and operated, meet the standards in the absence of
pollutants in the intake waters.
   (4)   Credit. Credit for generic pollutants such as biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), and oil and grease should not be
granted unless the industrial user demonstrates that the constituents of the
generic measure in the user's effluent are substantially similar to the
constituents of the generic measure in the intake water or unless appropriate
additional limits are placed on process water pollutants either at the outfall
or elsewhere.
(f)   Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not
to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or
may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit
reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing
permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification
by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as
identified in subsection (d)(2) are modified or other just cause exists. The
user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days
prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the
permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
(g)   Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific
user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new source, different
premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city. Any
succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of all
existing permits.
(h)   Permit fees and charges. Each user required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit shall reimburse the city upon demand the reasonable and
necessary cost of monitoring, inspection, surveillance and review of accidental
discharges. Such expenses shall be charged to the user at 1.4 times the lowest
hourly rate of the person qualified to perform the service and shall include
necessary equipment expense and actual cost of outside testing and consulting
services.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-188. Reporting requirements for permittee.
(a)   Report required. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance
with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source,
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the WWTP, any
categorical user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall
submit to the Authority a report showing the measured average daily and maximum
daily flow, in gallons per day from regulated process streams and such other
streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40
CFR 403.6(e) and identifying the pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process. In addition the report shall include the results of sampling
and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass where required)
of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both
daily maximum and average concentration (or mass) shall be reported. The sample
shall be representative of daily operations and shall be taken in the frequency
and manner provided by 40 CFR 403(12)(b)(5). The report shall state whether the
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to
bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements.
(b)   Periodic compliance reports.
   (1)   Any user subject to a pretreatment standard after the compliance date
of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new user, after
commencement of the discharge into the WWTP, shall submit to the Authority
during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently by the
city, a report indicating the nature and concentration of prohibited or
regulated substances in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment
standard. In addition, this report shall include a record of all measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. Flows shall
be reported on the basis of actual measurement; however, where cost or
feasibility considerations justify, the city may accept reports of average and
maximum flows estimated by variable techniques. At the discretion of the
Authority in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates,
holidays, budget cycles, and the like, the Authority, for good cause shown, may
agree to alter the months during which the reports are to be submitted.
      a.   If the Authority has imposed mass limitations on users, the report
required by subsection (b)(1) of this section shall indicate the mass of
pollutants regulated by pretreatment standard in the effluent of the user. For
industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits, the report
required by subsection (b)(1) shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's
long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable
pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), the
report shall include the user's actual average production rate for the
reporting period.
      b.   Reports of users shall contain the results of sampling and analysis
of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or
production and mass where requested by the Authority, of pollutants contained
in the discharge which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standard. The
report shall be based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and
analysis performed during the period covered by the report, which data is
representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. The
frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed by the Authority to assess and
assure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements. All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the Authority pursuant to Section 304(h) of the Act and
contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments thereto, or with any other test
procedures approved by the Authority. Sampling shall be performed in accordance
with the techniques approved by the Authority.
      c.   Where 40 CFR, Part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical
technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication
"Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening" or amendments thereto, or with
any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the Authority.
   (3)   If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the
user shall notify the Authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the Authority within 30 days after becoming
aware of the violation.
(c)   Reporting requirements, noncategorical discharges. Industrial users with
discharges which are not subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall
submit at least once every six months (on dates specified by the Authority)
such reports as the Authority deems necessary to verify compliance with all of
the general discharge limitations and prohibitions of this article as required
by 40 CFR 403.12(h).
(d)   Base line monitoring report.
   (1)   At least 90 days prior to the commencement of discharge, new sources,
and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an
applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the Authority a
report which contains estimates of the measured average daily and maximum daily
flow of process streams and waste streams and flow and amount of regulated
pollutants in the form and containing the information required by the state
pretreatment standards Part 23, R 323.2310(a) - (e), and shall include in this
report information on the method of pretreatment intended to be used to meet
the applicable pretreatment standards.
   (2)   Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall
report to the Authority any changes to the information requested in subsection
(d)(1) within 60 days of such change.
(e)   Report of substantial change in pollutants. Any industrial user shall
promptly notify the WWTP in advance of any substantial change in the volume or
character of pollutants in its discharge, including all of the following, if
applicable:
   (1)   Groundwaters that are purged for remedial action programs.
   (2)   Groundwaters containing pollutants that infiltrate into the sewers.
   (3)   The listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the
nondomestic user has submitted initial notification as required by 40 CFR Part
261 (1990) and the state pretreatment regulations Part 23, R 232.2310(15).
(f)   Hazardous waste report.
   (1)   Any industrial user shall notify the WWTP, the EPA regional waste
management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing
of any discharge into the WWTP of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of,
would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the
name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste
number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the
industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar
month to the WWTP, the notification shall also contain the following
information if known and readily available to the industrial user:
      a.   An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes;
      b.   An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in
the wastestream discharged during that calendar month; and
      c.   An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
      Industrial users who commence discharging shall provide the notification
no later than 180 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic
hazardous waste. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only
once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
discharges must be submitted under 40 CFR 403.12(j). The notification
requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under
the self-monitoring requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b), (d), and (e).
   (2)   a.   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of this subsection
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of
hazardous wastes unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-
acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) requires a one-
time notification.
      b.   Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more
than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional
notification.
   (3)   In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the
WWTP, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days
of the effective date of such regulations.
   (4)   In the case of any notification made under this subsection, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of hazardous waste generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.
(g)   Signatory requirements. All reports required by this section shall
contain the certification statement as set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii) and
shall be signed as follows:
   (1)   By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user submitting
the reports required by subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section is a
corporation. For the purpose of this subsection, a “responsible corporate
officer" means:
      a.   A president, secretary, treasurer or vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
      b.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation
facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or
expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
   (2)   By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user submitting
the reports required by subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section is a
partnership or sole proprietorship respectively.
   (3)   By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
subsection (g)(1) or (g)(2) of this section if:
      a.   The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in
subsection (g)(1) or (g)(2) of this section;
      b.   The authorization specifies either an individual or a position
having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the
industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager,
operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent
responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and
      c.   The written authorization is submitted to the city.
   (4)   If an authorization under subsection (g)(3) of this section is no
longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility
for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the
requirements of subsections (g)(1), (2) or (3) of this section must be
submitted to the city prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an
authorized representative.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-189. Monitoring facilities.
(a)   The city shall require to be provided and operated at the user's own
expense monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises; but the
city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on
the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk
area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked
vehicles.
(b)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to
allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility,
sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
(c)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notifications by the city.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-190. Inspection and sampling.
The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the
purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being complied
with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or
discharged shall allow the city or their representative ready access at all
reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. The
city, Approval Authority and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's
property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection,
compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security
measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance
before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements
with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable
identification, personnel from the city, Approval Authority and EPA will be
permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their
specific responsibilities.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-191. Pretreatment.
(a)   Users shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to
comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all Federal
Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as specified by
the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and
maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment
facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review
and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The
review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this division. Any
subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall
be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of
the changes.
(b)   The city shall annually publish in the county newspaper a list of the
users which were in significant noncompliance with any pretreatment
requirements or standards at least once during the 12 previous months in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii). For purposes of this section, the term
"significant noncompliance" shall have the meaning ascribed to it by 40 CFR
403.8(f)(2)(vii).
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-192. Bypass of pretreatment facilities.
(a)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an
industrial user's treatment facility.
Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to
the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial
and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic
loss caused by delays in production.
(b)   Bypass not violating applicable pretreatment standards or requirements.
An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to the provision of subsections (c) and (d) of this section.
(c)   Notice.
   (1)   If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the Authority, if possible at least ten days
before the date of the bypass.
   (2)   An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass
that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the Authority within 24 hours
from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the industrial
user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including
exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Authority may
waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been
received within 24 hours.
(d)   Prohibition of bypass.
   (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the city may take enforcement action against
an industrial user for a bypass unless:
      a.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or
severe property damage.
      b.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use
of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance.
      c.   The industrial user submitted notices as required under subsection
(c) of this section.
   (2)   The Authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if the Authority determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in subsection (d)(1) of this section.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-193. Confidential information.
(a)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall
be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction
unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Authority that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection
as trade secrets of the user.
(b)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written
request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, state disposal system
permit and/or the pretreatment programs; however, such portions of a report
shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review
or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information.
(c)   Information accepted by the Authority as confidential shall not be
transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the city
until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Secs. 82-194–82-214. Reserved.
DIVISION 5.
ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 82-215. Civil penalties.
Any user who violates this article or any order, rule, regulation or permit
issued under this article, which violation is not declared a misdemeanor, shall
be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be liable for a civil
fine of not more than $2,500.00 for each offense, plus the costs of the action
as provided by MCL 600.8727. Each day on which a violation shall occur or
continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the
penalties provided in this section, the city may recover its actual costs,
including inspection fees, incurred for any cleaning, repair or replacement
work caused by a violation and reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court
reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law
against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued under this article.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-216. Harmful contributions.
(a)   The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater
contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the
city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or the environment, causes interference to the WWTP, or causes the city
to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
(b)   Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service
and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately stop or eliminate
the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily
with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary,
including immediate severance of the sanitary sewer connection, to prevent or
minimize damage to the WWTP or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall
reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or the wastewater treatment
service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed
written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be
submitted to the city within 15 days of the date of occurrence.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-217. Falsifying information.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application or certification in any application, record,
report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to
this article or a wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers
with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required
under this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be subject to the
provisions of 18 USC 1001 relating to fraud and false statements and the
provisions of section 309(c)(4) of the Act, as amended, governing false
statements, representation or certification. For the purpose of this section,
the term "person" means, in addition to the definition contained in section 502
(5) of the Act, any responsible corporate officer.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-218. Revocation of permit.
Any user who violates the following conditions or applicable state and federal
regulations, is subject to having the wastewater discharge permit revoked in
accordance with the procedures of this division:
   (1)   Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his discharge;
   (2)   Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;
   (3)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection or monitoring; or
   (4)   Violation of conditions of the permit.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-219. Notification of violation.
(a)   Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this
article, the terms of any wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition,
limitation of requirements contained in this article, the city may serve upon
such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30
days of the date of the notice, a plan for its satisfactory correction shall be
submitted to the city by the user.
(b)   The Authority and his designee are authorized to issue and serve
citations to any person who is reasonably believed to have violated any
provision of this chapter designated a municipal civil infraction pursuant to
Chapter 87 of 1961 PA 236, MCL 600.8707.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-220. Show-cause hearing.
(a)   The city may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized
discharge to enter the WWTP to show cause before the city council why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on
the user, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city
council regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken and
the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before
the city council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The
notice of hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be
made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
(b)   The city council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or
may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the city to:
   (1)   Issue in the name of the city council notices of hearings requesting
the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence
relevant to any matter involved in such hearings.
   (2)   Take the evidence.
   (3)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts
and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city council for
action.
(c)   At any hearing held pursuant to this section, testimony taken must be
under oath and recorded stenographically; the transcript, so recorded, will be
made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon
payment of the usual charges.
(d)   After the city council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order
to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified
time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed or
existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are
properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and
appropriate may be issued. Any person aggrieved by a final order of the city
council may appeal to the county circuit court within 20 days of entry of the
order.
(e)   If the user does not substantially prevail on the substance of the matter
in dispute before the city council, the user shall be assessed an appeal fee of
$100.00 plus city attorney's fees, expert witness fees, and stenographic fees
for transcribing the city council proceedings.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-221. Legal action.
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the
WWTP contrary to the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment
requirements, or any order of the city, such discharge is declared to be a
public nuisance and a nuisance per se. The city attorney may commence an action
for appropriate legal, injunctive and/or other equitable relief in any court of
competent jurisdiction, or an action for civil or criminal penalties in the
county district court.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-222. Affirmative defense; operations upset.
An operations upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to any action
brought by the city for noncompliance with the categorical and noncategorical
pretreatment standards of this article, if the following demonstration and
requirements are met:
   (1)   The industrial user shall demonstrate, through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence that:
      a.   An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the specific
causes of the upset.
      b.   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures.
      c.   The industrial user has submitted to the Authority the oral and
written notifications required by section
82-165.
   (2)   In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (3)   In case of upset, the industrial user shall control production or all
discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical
pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment
facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment
is provided. This requirement shall apply in the situation where, among others,
the primary source of power of the facility is reduced or lost or fails.
   (4)   An industrial user shall not have an affirmative defense in any action
brought against it alleging a violation of the general discharge prohibitions
established in section
82-153.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Secs. 82-223–82-240. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. RATES AND CHARGES
DIVISION 1.
GENERAL
Sec. 82-241. Fiscal year for system.
The system shall be operated on the basis of a fiscal year commencing on July 1
and ending on June 30.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-242. Payment for service required.
No free service shall be furnished by the system to any person or to any public
agency or instrumentality, but service so furnished by the system shall be paid
for in accordance with the schedule of rates, or any revision of such schedule,
in compliance with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-243. Rates, fees and charges established.
The rates and fees to be charged for connections, water service, equipment,
sanitary sewer service, inspection fee, and other charges pertaining to the
system and the billing intervals shall be as established by resolution of the
city council.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-244. Billing for charges, cash deposit.
(a)   A billing covering use of the system before and after the effective date
of any rate change shall have the bill prorated, based upon the average use per
day and the number of days within such billing period as the rate then is in
effect.
(b)   A delayed payment charge of ten percent shall be added to any bill which
is not paid within 20 days from the first day of the month following the end of
the billing period.
(c)   Users who are located outside the corporate limits of the city and who
have received permission to connect to the system shall pay user charges and
capital improvement charges as for users within the corporate limits of the
city, plus such additional charges as the city may determine by cost analysis
to relate to additional operation and maintenance costs (including replacement
costs) for the provision of water or sanitary sewer service outside the city
limits. Users outside the corporate limits of the city shall pay a base sewer
connection fee, which shall be in accordance with section 82-243, any
additional capital charges as provided by section
82-247, and any other connection charges as may be agreed upon between the city
and adjacent townships for which service is provided outside the corporate
limits of the city. All users located outside the city shall, as a condition to
receiving permission to connect to the system, agree to be bound by all the
terms and conditions of this chapter.
(d)   A cash deposit in an amount equal to three times the average quarterly
billing shall be required as a security for payment of water and/or sewer
service charges as follows:
   (1)   Where such a deposit is necessary under Section 21 of the Revenue Bond
Act of 1933 (MCL 141.121) or Section 5 of 1939 PA 178 (MCL 123.165) because an
owner or landlord has disclaimed responsibility for such charges in the manner
provided by law;
   (2)   Where service is being provided to users who are located outside the
corporate limits of the city and the local jurisdiction has not by ordinance
established the city's utility charges as a lien on the premises served to be
collected with the local property taxes; or
   (3)   In such other case as the city council shall deem such security to be
necessary.
   (4)   Where a cash bond is required, no further service shall be provided to
the premises until such cash bond is posted with the city finance director.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-245. Additional charges for extraordinary sewage or waste.
If the character of wastewater or waste from any manufacturing or industrial
plant or any other building or premises shall be such as to impose an
unreasonable additional burden upon the WWTP, an additional charge may be made
over and above the regular rates, or the Authority may require that such
wastewater be treated by the responsible person before being emptied into the
public sanitary sewer, or the right to empty such wastewater may be denied, if
necessary, for the protection of the WWTP or the public health or safety.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-246. Collection of charges, enforcement of lien.
(a)   All charges for water and sewer service shall constitute a lien on the
property served which may be enforced under the provisions of 1933 P.A. 94, MCL
141.121; and, if not paid within six months after the charges are due, the
official in charge of the collection shall, prior to May 1 of each year,
certify to the tax assessing officer of the city the facts of such delinquency,
whereupon the officer shall enter such delinquent charges upon the next general
city tax roll, as a charge against the premises, and the lien shall be enforced
in the same manner as provided by law for delinquent and unpaid taxes. Unpaid
water rates or charges may also be collected by suit in assumpsit brought in
the name of the city against the owner or occupant of the premises or property,
or both.
(b)   In addition to all the rights and methods of collection, the city shall
have the right to shut off and discontinue the supply of water to any premises
or to disconnect any premises from the public sewer for the nonpayment, when
due, of water or sewer service charges, or for the refusal to allow reasonable
access to the premises for service or repair to city water meters. All
disconnection charges and fees, as established by city council resolution,
shall be paid prior to turning on the water to or reconnecting such premises to
the WWTP and all previous utility bills shall be paid in full. Before utility
service may be disconnected for nonpayment, the Authority shall first provide
written notice by first-class mail to the owner of the premises served as shown
on the city's most recent tax bill, to occupants of the premises, and to any
tenants of the premises as shown on the city's personal property tax roll and
provide the owner and/or tenants an opportunity for an informal hearing for the
Authority to review any factual disputes.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-247. Base water and sanitary sewer connection charges.
A base connection fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be
charged for any connection to the city water utility or the city sanitary sewer
system as defined in this section.
(a)   Water base connection fee. The maximum base connection fee shall be
determined as follows:
   (1)   Determine the total current value of the capital components of the
water production, treatment, distribution, and storage system minus the value
of any water mains of eight inches in diameter or less.
   (2)   Divide the adjusted total current value of the water system from
subsection (a)(1) by the current WWTP treatment plant flow as expressed in
REUs.
(b)   Sanitary sewer base connection fee. The maximum base connection fee shall
be determined as follows:
   (1)   Determine the total current value of the capital components of the
sanitary sewer collection, treatment, distribution, storage, and disposal
system minus the value of any public sanitary sewer mains of eight inches in
diameter or less.
   (2)   Divide the adjusted total current value of the sanitary sewer system
from subsection (b)(1) by the current WWTP treatment plant flow as expressed in
REUs.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-248. Additional water and sanitary sewer connection charges.
(a)   In cases where the property to be connected to the system has not
participated directly in the cost of the system improvements which specifically
benefit the property or been assessed the cost by special assessment, an
additional water and/or sanitary sewer connection charge shall be paid prior to
the making of any service connection, based upon a share of the total cost of
construction of such improvements as determined by the percentage by which the
frontage and/or acreage of the connecting property bears to the frontage and/or
acreage as determined by the city council, of all property which may
potentially connect to such improvements.
(b)   The city treasurer shall determine the total cost of construction,
including interest on bonded indebtedness, and shall establish a suspense
account. The total street frontage and/or acreage as determined by the city
council of all properties which may potentially connect to the system
improvement shall then be calculated, and the treasurer shall compute the
percentage of total frontage and/or acreage for each individual lot or parcel
of property which may be connected to the system improvement. Property owned by
the city shall be included in computing the total frontage and/or acreage but
shall not be subject to the additional charge. In the case of charges based on
frontage, the total cost for corner lots shall be determined by reference only
to the largest side. Each owner of property which may thereafter connect to the
system improvement, as determined from the assessor's records, shall then be
mailed a notice advising them that their property shall be subject to an
additional water and/or sanitary sewer connection charge if connected to the
system improvement in the future and stating the amount, or method of
calculating, such charge. The suspense account and the obligation to pay the
additional water and/or sanitary sewer connection charge shall expire 40 years
after completion of construction. The amount collected as an additional water
or sewer connection charge shall be placed in the capital improvement fund for
replacement, extensions, and improvements to the system.
(c)   In cases where the cost of a system improvement has been paid by a
private party directly or through special assessment, the city may enter into
an agreement with such party providing that future users who connect to the
system improvement shall be charged a capital connection fee in an amount
determined in accordance with subsection (b) above, and provide that a portion
of the additional capital charge, as determined by the city council, may be
collected and disbursed to the party paying for the construction of the
improvement, or their designee. The balance of the amount collected as an
additional water or sewer connection charge under this subsection which is not
distributed to the party paying for the main shall be placed in the capital
improvement fund for the system.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-249–82-250. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
WATER SYSTEM CHARGES
Sec. 82-251. Rates, fees and charges established.
(a)   The following charges for equipment, service, and connections shall be as
established by resolution of the city council unless stated otherwise:
   (1)   Testing water meter.
   (2)   Water turn-on charge.
   (3)   Water deposit.
   (4)   Water meter (meter, yoke, dial, new account fee).
   (5)   Base water connection fee.
   (6)   Additional water connection fee (fire sprinkler, fire suppression, and
the like).
   (7)   Service charge.
   (8)   Water turn-on after 3:30 p.m. Monday through Friday, or any time on
Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays will be charged at contractual rates and hours.
   (9)   Water turn-on wrench, refundable deposit.
   (10)   Irrigation sprinkler meter (meter, yoke, dial, new account fee).
(b)   A ready-to-serve charge.
(c)   Where connections are made to a residential building, there shall be one
base water connection fee for each dwelling unit.
(d)   Where connections are made to a building or structure devoted to
commercial or nonresidential uses, there shall be one base water connection fee
for a three-quarter-inch water pipe connection and an additional base water
connection fee for each one-quarter-inch increase in water pipe size over
three-quarter-inch.
(e)   Where an existing structure is altered or enlarged by increasing the
number of dwelling units, or is altered to a nonresidential use, and the size
of the water pipe is increased, an additional base water connection fee shall
be made in the manner as provided in this section.
(f)   The service charge shall be due and payable when service is requested by
a customer for that portion of the system which is owned by or the
responsibility of the customer. The service charge shall be due only for the
second and subsequent call for any single occurrence and due only when calls
for service are made after regular working hours.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 243, 5-1-2023)
Secs. 82-252–82-260. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
SEWER SYSTEM CHARGES
Sec. 82-261. Rates established; to whom applicable; basis for computation.
Rates and charges for the use of the WWTP shall be made against each lot,
parcel of land or premises which may have any sewer connections with the WWTP
or which may otherwise discharge sewage wastewater or industrial waste, either
directly or indirectly, into such system or any part of the system. Charges for
use of the WWTP shall be designated as sewer service charges and shall include:
   (1)   User charges, which shall distribute operation, maintenance and
replacement costs for the city wastewater collection and treatment system to
each user on a proportional basis.
   (2)   A Ready-to-Serve charge.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 243, 5-1-2023; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-262. User charges.
The user charges for service furnished by the system shall be levied upon each
lot or parcel of land, building or premises, having any sewer connection with
such system, on the basis of the quantity of water used, the waste of which is
directly or indirectly discharged to the WWTP as measured by meters used, or in
their absence with the approval of the city, by such equitable method as shall
be determined by the city manager for the payment of charges for water used;
except in cases where the character of the wastewater from a manufacturer or
industrial plant, building or premises is such that unreasonable additional
burden is placed upon the system, greater than that imposed by the normal
domestic strength wastewater, additional charges shall be assessed over the
regular rates. Rates for users obtaining all or part of their water supply from
sources other than the city's water system shall be determined by gauging or
metering the actual wastewater accepted by the city. Charges for users shall be
computed on the basis of 1,000 gallon units per customer.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. 222, § 54, 12-3-2018; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-263. Determination of wastewater discharge quantities.
For homes, businesses and industries using metered water from the system,
metered water usage (corrected where applicable for water consumption or loss
to storm drains) shall be the basis for determination of wastewater discharge
quantities. Industries with private water supplies or industries for which
metered use of public water is not directly related to wastewater discharge
shall furnish and install meters, and charges shall be based upon metered
discharge from that industry. Industrial meters for wastewater so installed
shall be approved by the city and shall be available to city employees for
routine readings.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-264. Rates to be billed.
(a)   Sewer service charges for use of the WWTP shall include:
   (1)   A charge for quantity of sanitary sewage discharged to the city
treatment plant; plus
   (2)   A charge for BOD, suspended solids and phosphorous in excess of that
for normal domestic wastes; plus
   (3)   A Ready-to-Serve charge.
(b)   Billings for the sanitary sewer service shall be charged at such rates
and intervals as shall be established by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 243, 5-1-2023; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-265. Base sewer connection fee.
(a)   Where connection is made to a building or structure, a base sewer
connection charge in an amount established by resolution per residential
equivalent shall be made. The minimum equivalent factor for any premises shall
be 1.0.
(b)   Where an existing structure is enlarged or the uses altered so as to
increase the residential equivalent unit factors assigned to such premises, the
owner shall pay an additional base sewer connection fee for the incremental
increase in REUs. There shall be no refund of any base sewer connection fee
previously paid to the city on account of any change in use or structure which
reduces the REUs assigned to such structure.
(c)   The table of unit factors shall be as established by resolution of the
city council.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005)
Sec. 82-266. Periodic revision to user charges and to capital improvement
charges.
(a)   Revenues generated by user charges are to support the cost of the
operation and maintenance of the WWTP. Operation and maintenance costs shall
include replacement costs for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories
or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the WWTP to
maintain the capacity and performance for which the works have been designed
and constructed.
(b)   Ready-to-Serve charges determined by city council.
(c)   An annual audit shall be prepared as required elsewhere in city
ordinances and the charter. Based upon such audit, the city shall review user
charges and capital improvement charges annually and shall revise them
periodically to reflect the actual cost of the WWTP operation and maintenance
costs including replacement costs) to maintain a proportionate system of user
charges and to provide such sums as the city council may deem necessary for
capital improvements to the system.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 243, 5-1-2023; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Secs. 82-267–82-270. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM
Sec. 82-271. Purpose and policy.
(a)    The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the City of Mason through the regulation of
non-storm water discharges to the separate storm sewer system to the maximum
extent practicable as required by federal and state law.
(b)    This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply
with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit process.
(c)   The objectives of this article are:
   (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system by storm water discharges by any user.
   (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and illicit discharges to the
municipal separate storm sewer system.
   (3)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article.
(d)   This article shall apply to all water entering the separate storm sewer
system generated on any developed and/or undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by Section
82-274.
(e)   The City of Mason shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions
of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city may be
delegated in writing by the city manager to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city. Except as otherwise
provided herein, the director of public works shall, acting under the
supervision of the city manager administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this article.
(f)   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article
are minimum standards; therefore this article does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007; Ord. 222, § 55, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 82-272. General requirements and prohibitions.
(a)   Any person engaged in activities which will or may result in pollutants
entering a storm sewer system shall undertake reasonable measures to reduce
such pollutants.
(b)   No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep or permit to be
thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained, any refuse, rubbish, garbage or
other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon
any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain inlet, catch basin, conduit or other
drainage structures, parking area, or upon any public or private plot of land
so that the same might be or become a pollutant, except where such material is
being temporarily stored in properly contained waste receptacles or is part of
a well defined compost system.
(c)   No person shall cause or permit any dumpster, solid waste bin, or similar
container to leak such that any pollutant is discharged into any street, alley,
sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage
structures, business place, or upon any private plot of land in the city.
(d)   The occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee, or proprietor of any real
property in the city where there is located a paved sidewalk or parking area
shall maintain said paved surface free of dirt or litter to the extent
reasonable and practicable and provide an adequate means for the disposal of
refuse, rubbish, garbage, or other articles so as to prevent such matter from
entering a storm drain system. Sweeping from said sidewalk shall not be swept
or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or street, but shall be
disposed of in receptacles maintained in said real property.
(e)   No person shall throw or deposit any pollutant in any fountain, pond,
lake, stream, or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere in the city,
except as otherwise permitted under local, state or federal law.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
Sec. 82-273. Prohibition of Illicit Discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause or continue to be discharged into the
municipal separate storm sewer system or watercourses any illicit discharge,
materials, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than
storm water.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
Sec. 82-274. Exempt Discharges.
(a)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article, provided that they do not result in a violation of
State of Michigan water quality standards:
   (1)   Water line flushing
   (2)   Landscape irrigation runoff
   (3)   Diverted stream flows
   (4)   Rising groundwaters
   (5)   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined by 40CFR 35.2005
(20))
   (6)   Pumped groundwaters (except for groundwater cleanups not specifically
authorized by NPDES permits)
   (7)   Discharges from potable water sources
   (8)   Air conditioning condensates
   (9)   Irrigation waters
   (10)   Springs
   (11)   Water from crawl space pumps
   (12)   Foundation drains, footing drains and sump pumps
   (13)   Roof drains
   (14)   Lawn watering runoff
   (15)   Waters from non-commercial car washing
   (16)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands
   (17)   Residential swimming pool waters and other permitted, dechlorinated
swimming pool waters
   (18)   Residual street wash waters
   (19)   Fire fighting and fire training activities
   (20)   Any other water source not containing pollutants
   (21)   Discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to
protect public health and safety.
   (22)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires written
authorization from MDEQ for the dye used, plus a verbal notification to MDEQ
prior to the time of the test.
(b)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the federal Environmental
Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm water system.
(c)   Whenever building footing/foundation drains are utilized, a direct
connection between the footing/foundation drain through a sump pump-check valve
system to a storm drain shall be utilized. A gravity system for conveyance of
discharges from footing/foundation drains is prohibited.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007; Ord. 213, 1-8-2018)
Sec. 82-275. Prohibition of Illicit Connections.
(a)   The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the City of Mason through the regulation of
non-stormwater discharges to the separate storm sewer system to the maximum
extent practicable as required by federal and state law.
(b)   This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply
with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit process.
(c)   The objectives of this article are:
   (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system by storm water discharges by any user.
   (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and illicit discharges to the
municipal separate storm sewer system.
   (3)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article.
(d)   This article shall apply to all water entering the separate storm sewer
system generated on any developed and/or undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by section
82-274.
(e)   The City of Mason shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions
of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city may be
delegated in writing by the city manager to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city. Except as otherwise
provided herein, the utilities director shall, acting under the supervision of
the city manager, administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
article.
(f)   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article
are minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007; Ord. No. 245, 11-20-2023)
Sec. 82-276. Suspension of discharges to municipal separate storm sewer system.
(a)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations.  The city
may, without prior notice, suspend municipal separate storm sewer system
discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons,
or to the municipal separate storm sewer system or waters of the United States.
If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize the
damage to the municipal separate storm sewer system or waters of the United
States, or to minimize danger to persons.
(b)    Suspension due to detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging
to the municipal separate storm sewer system in violation of this article may
have their municipal separate storm sewer system access terminated if such
termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The city will notify a
violator of the proposed termination of its access to the municipal separate
storm sewer system. The violator may petition the authority for
reconsideration.
(c)   Appeal. Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the authority to
suspend or terminate access to the municipal separate storm sewer system may
appeal such decision to the Mason building code board of appeals pursuant to
the rules and procedures established by the Board, provided that a written
application for appeal is filed within 20 days of the decision or order of the
authority. A timely appeal to the board of appeals shall stay any order of
suspension other than a suspension under subsection (a) of this section until a
final decision of the board.
(d)    A person who reinstates a municipal separate storm sewer system access
to premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of
the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in section
1-8(e) of this code.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
Sec. 82-277. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water
discharge permit requirement shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the city prior to the allowing of the discharges to the municipal separate
storm sewer system. This section applies to all facilities that have storm
water discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction
activity.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
Sec. 82-278. Access to facilities.
Any person who owns or has control of any premises which directly or indirectly
discharges storm water to the municipal separate storm sewer system shall
permit all duly authorized employees of the control authority bearing proper
credentials and identifications to enter upon all such premises for the purpose
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing to determine
compliance with the provisions of this article and to comply with the following
inspection and monitoring requirements as applicable:
   (1)   The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect premises subject to
regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force
which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the city.
   (2)   The owner or any person in control of any premises subject to
regulation under this article shall allow the city ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying
of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to
discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as defined
by state and federal law.
   (3)   The city shall have the right to set up on any premises such devices
as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the facility's storm water discharge.
   (4)   The city has the right to require any discharger to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure storm water flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
   (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
premises to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner.
   (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this article.
A person who is an operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge
storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the
person denies the city reasonable access to the permitted facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article.
   (7)   If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from
which storm water is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable
cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there
is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the
community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court
of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
Sec. 82-279. Requirements to prevent, control, and reduce storm water
pollutants by the use of best management practices.
(a)   The city will adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices
(BMPs) for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute
to pollution or contamination of storm water, the separate storm sewer system,
or waters of the United States.
(b) The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge
of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal separate storm sewer
system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural
BMPs.
(c) Any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the
source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's
expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further
discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
(d)   Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity,
to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of
this section.
(e)   These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with the requirements of the NPDES permit.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
Sec. 82-280. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structure will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
Sec. 82-281. Notification of spills.
Any person who discharges or has information of any known or suspected release
of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or
pollutants discharging into storm water, the separate storm sewer system or
water of the United States, shall take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of a release
of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a
release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the city in person
or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in
person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to
the city within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge or
prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment,
the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site
written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
Sec. 82-282. Notice of violation.
(a)   Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the city may order compliance by
written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require
without limitation:
   (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
   (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
   (3)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
   (4)   The abatement of remediation of storm water pollution or contamination
hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and
   (5)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
   (6)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
(b)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation
or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should
the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the
work will be done by a designated governmental agency, or a contractor and the
expense shall be charged to the violator.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
Sec. 82-283. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the
authority. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date
of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Mason building
code board of appeals shall take place within 30 days from the date of receipt
of the notice of appeal. The decision of the board shall be final.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
Sec. 82-284. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth
in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of
the decision of the Mason building code board of appeals upholding the decision
of the authority, then representatives of the authority shall enter upon the
subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be
unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises
to refuse to allow the authority to enter upon the premises for the purposes
set forth above.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
Sec. 82-285. Cost of abatement of the violation.
Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will
be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protest with the City Council objecting to
the amount of the assessment within 30 days. If the amount due is not paid
within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the City Council or by
the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become
a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the
property for the amount of the assessment.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
Sec. 82-286. Compensatory action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by the
Ordinance, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at
compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
Sec. 82-287. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the
discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
ARTICLE VI. ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 82-291. Municipal civil infractions.
Any user who violates this chapter or any order, rule, regulation or permit
issued under this chapter, which violation is not declared a misdemeanor, shall
be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be liable for a civil
fine of not more than $2,500.00 for each offense, plus the costs of the action
as provided by MCL 600.8727. Each day on which a violation shall occur or
continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the
penalties provided in this section, the city may recover its actual costs,
including inspection and testing fees, incurred for any work caused by a
violation and reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs, court reporters’ fees
and other expenses of litigation against the person found to have violated this
article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this
article.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
Sec. 82-292. Appearance tickets.
The Authority is authorized to issue and serve a municipal civil infraction
violation notice or citation for any violation of this chapter which is a
municipal civil infraction.
(Ord. No. 144, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
Sec. 82-293. Misdemeanor citations.
The authority is authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect
to violations of this chapter which are designated a misdemeanor pursuant to
section 9c(2) of 1968 PA 147, MCL 764.9.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
Sec. 82-294. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided in this
chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the
provisions of this article are a threat to the public health, safety and
welfare and are declared and deemed to be a public nuisance and a nuisance per
se, and may be abated or restored at the violator's expense, and a civil action
to abate, adjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be
taken in any court of competent jurisdiction or any order, rule, regulation or
permit issued under this chapter, which violation is not declared a
misdemeanor, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be
liable for a civil fine of not more than $2,500.00 for each offense, plus the
costs of the action as provided by MCL 600.8727. Each day on which a violation
shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In
addition to the penalties provided in this section, the city may recover its
actual costs, including inspection and testing fees, incurred for any work
caused by a violation and reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court
reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation against the person found to
have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued
under this article.
(Ord. No. 158, 2-5-2007)
Chapters 83--85
RESERVED
Chapter 86
VEGETATION*
*Cross References: Building and building regulations, ch. 6; environment, ch.
22; natural resources, ch. 38; planning, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other
public places, ch. 70; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 74.
Article I. In General
Secs. 86-1--86-30. Reserved.
Article II. Prohibited Vegetation
Sec.
86-31.     Purpose.
Sec.
86-32.     Duty to notify.
Sec.
86-33.     Duty of landowner, agent or occupant; exceptions.
Sec.
86-34.     Removal; notice; cost.
Sec.
86-35.     Charge(s) included in tax bill.
Sec.
86-36.     Tax lien.
Sec.
86-37.   Penalty for violation or violation deemed a civil infraction.
Secs. 86-38--86-70. Reserved.
Article III. Trees
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
86-71.     Nuisance trees.
Sec.
86-72.     Removal of nuisance trees.
Sec.
86-73.     Right of entry of city employees.
Sec.
86-74.     Notice of removal.
Sec.
86-75.     Keeping of trees with diseases or infestations prohibited.
Secs. 86-76--86-100. Reserved.
Division 2. Reserved
Secs. 86-101--86-130. Reserved.
Division 3. Trees on Public Property
Sec.
86-131.     Street tree species to be planted.
Sec.
86-132.     Spacing.
Sec.
86-133.     Distance from curb and sidewalk.
Sec.
86-134.     Distance from street corners and fireplugs.
Sec.
86-135.     Utilities.
Sec.
86-136.     Public tree care.
Sec.
86-137.     Tree topping.
Sec.
86-138.     Pruning, corner clearance.
Sec.
86-139.     Removal of stumps.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 86-1--86-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PROHIBITED VEGETATION*
*Cross References: Environment, ch. 22.
State Law References: Noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq.
Sec. 86-31. Purpose.
In order to preserve and maintain the public health and welfare and to prevent
fire hazards, no owner or occupant of any lot, place or area within the city,
or the agent of such owner, shall permit on such lot, place or area, or upon
any abutting sidewalk or street, any noxious weeds, grasses or deleterious or
unhealthy growths, or other noxious or flammable matter, that may be growing,
lying or located on such lot, place or area.
(Ord. No. 206, 12-19-2016)
Sec. 86-32. Duty to notify.
The city will publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the
county during the month of March that noxious weeds not cut will be cut by the
city and the owner of the property shall be charged with the cost thereof
pursuant to provisions of this article. Publication shall also contain such
other information as required pursuant to MCL 247.61 et seq., as amended, and
the city may cut such noxious weeds as many times as will be necessary and
charge the cost of same to the property owner.
(Ord. No. 206, 12-19-2016)
Sec. 86-33. Duty of landowner, agent or occupant; exceptions.
It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or occupant of any property located
within 165 feet of a structure or the depth of ownership, whichever is the
lesser, excepting public utility installations, to prevent weeds, grasses,
brush or other vegetation from growing to a height of greater than eight
inches, nor shall such owner, agent, or occupant permit an accumulation of dead
weeds, grasses, brush or other vegetation of a height greater than eight inches
on any such properties. Nothing in this section shall apply to trees, flower
gardens, vegetation planted for ornamental purposes, vegetation in vegetable
gardens or vegetation in fields devoted to an agricultural crop.
(Ord. No. 206, 12-19-2016)
Sec. 86-34. Removal; notice; cost.
The city manager, or the authorized designee(s) of the city manager, shall
notify personally, or by posting on the premises, the owner, agent or occupant
of any of the lands described in Sec.
86-33 (above) on which prohibited grasses, weeds, vegetation or brush is found.
Such notice shall contain a description of the prohibited condition and a
summary of the provisions of this article. If the owner, agent or occupant of
such land has failed within three business days after such notice is delivered
or posted to cut, destroy or remove the prohibited condition, the city manager
or designee(s) may enter upon such land and destroy by cutting with or without
mechanical equipment and/or otherwise remove the prohibited weeds, grasses,
brush or other vegetation. Express power to so enter such lands and perform
such duties is hereby conferred upon the city manager and his/her designee(s).
All expenses incurred in such destruction and/or removal shall be billed to and
paid by the owner, agent or occupant of such lands.
(Ord. No. 206, 12-19-2016; Ord. 222, § 56, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 86-35. Charge(s) included in tax bill.
If such owner, agent or occupant will not pay such statement when due, the
amount of expenses incurred by the city in destroying and/or removing such
condition shall be paid by the city and the amount; the actual cost, plus
accrued interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the date of completion of the
work, thereof will be assessed against the lands on which such expenditures
were made on the next general assessment roll of the city and shall be
collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected.
(Ord. No. 206, 12-19-2016)
Sec. 86-36. Tax lien.
The city shall have a lien upon such lands for such expense, such lien to be
enforced in the manner prescribed by the general laws of the state providing
for the enforcement of tax liens.
(Ord. No. 206, 12-19-2016)
Sec. 86-37. Penalty for violation or violation deemed a civil infraction.
Any person or business violating the terms of this article shall be, in
addition to the penalties herein before provided, deemed responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and subject to a civil fine of $500.00 plus
applicable court costs and abatement costs.
(Ord. No. 206, 12-19-2016)
Secs. 86-38--86-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. TREES
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 86-71. Nuisance trees.
   (a)   Any female box elder tree which is or could be the breeding place for
boxelder bugs (Leptocoris trivittatus) is declared to be a public nuisance, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain such tree on his property after
notification as provided in this division.
   (b)   Any dead or diseased tree that constitutes a hazard to life and
property or harbors insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to
other trees within the city is declared to be a public nuisance, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to maintain such tree on his property after
notification as provided in this division.
(Ord. No. 66, § 1, 11-18-1963; Ord. No. 264, 6-16-2025)
Sec. 86-72. Removal of nuisance trees.
   Any nuisance trees located on public lands within the limits of the city
shall be removed at city expense and under the direction of the director of
public works.
(Ord. No. 66, § 2, 11-18-1963; Ord. No. 264, 6-16-2025)
Sec. 86-73. Right of entry of city employees.
   The director of public works or any employee of the city designated by him
may enter upon private property to make field inspections, including the
removal of specimens of nuisance trees for analysis.
(Ord. No. 66, § 3, 11-18-1963; Ord. No. 264, 6-16-2025)
Sec. 86-74. Notice of removal.
   (a)   After inspection of a nuisance tree, the director of public works may
require, by written notice, addressed either to the owner of the premises on
which the tree is located or the occupant of such premises, the removal of such
tree.
   (b)   If such notice is given, the person notified will be given a
reasonable and definite time in which to comply with the order, which time
shall be not less than ten days from the date of the notice. If such tree is
not removed within the time given in the notice, the director of public works
or authorized city employees shall report the failure to the city council. The
city council may, without further notice, cause the work to be done. All costs
involved in the cutting and removal of such trees shall be assessed against the
property on the next general assessment roll of the city.
(Ord. No. 66, § 4, 11-18-1963; Ord. No. 264, 6-16-2025)
Sec. 86-75. Keeping of trees with diseases or infestations prohibited.
   No person shall keep or maintain any part of any elm tree infected with the
Dutch Elm disease or any part of any ash tree infected with the Emerald Ash
Borer within the city.
(Ord. No. 68, § 1, 6-10-1964; Ord. No. 170, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 264, 6-16-2025)
Secs. 86-76--86-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
RESERVED
DIVISION 3.
TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Sec. 86-131. Street tree species to be planted.
   The tree commission, by resolution, will designate the official tree species
and size class, which will be made publicly available. No species other than
those included in this list may be planted as street trees without written
permission of the tree commission.
(Ord. No. 123, § 7, 12-17-1990; Ord. No. 170, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 264, 6-16-
2025)
Sec. 86-132. Spacing.
   The spacing of street trees will be determined by the species size as
indicated on the approved tree commission street tree list; and no trees may be
planted closer together than the following: small to medium (20 feet), medium
(20 feet), and medium to large trees, (20 feet); large trees, (30 feet); except
in special plantings designed or approved, or as directed by the director of
public works.
(Ord. No. 123, § 8, 12-17-1990; Ord. No. 170, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 264, 6-16-
2025)
Sec. 86-133. Distance from curb and sidewalk.
   The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will
be in accordance with the approved tree commission street tree list. No trees
may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small to
medium (three feet), medium (three feet), and medium to large (three feet); and
large trees, (four feet), or as directed by the director of public works.
(Ord. No. 123, § 9, 12-17-1990; Ord. No. 170, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 264, 6-16-
2025)
Sec. 86-134. Distance from street corners and fireplugs.
   No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner,
measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines, or as
directed by the director of public works. No street tree shall be planted
closer than ten feet of any fireplug, or as directed by the director of public
works.
(Ord. No. 123, § 10, 12-17-1990; Ord. No. 264, 6-16-2025)
Sec. 86-135. Utilities.
   No street trees other than those species listed as small to medium trees in
the approved tree commission street tree list may be planted under or within
ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral
feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other
utility, or as directed by the director of public works.
(Ord. No. 123, § 11, 12-17-1990; Ord. No. 264, 6-16-2025)
Sec. 86-136. Public tree care.
   (a)   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety
or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
   (b)   The city tree commission and/or director of public works may remove or
cause or order to be removed any tree or part of a tree which is in an unsafe
condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric
power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is
affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not
prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners, providing
that the selection and location of such trees is in accordance with this
division.
(Ord. No. 123, § 12, 12-17-1990; Ord. No. 264, 6-16-2025)
Sec. 86-137. Tree topping.
   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city
department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property.
Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from
this section at the determination of the city tree commission.
(Ord. No. 123, § 13, 12-17-1990; Ord. No. 264, 6-16-2025)
Sec. 86-138. Pruning, corner clearance.
   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the
city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the
light from any streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and
so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the
street or sidewalk. Owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees,
or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the
public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street
from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device
or sign.
(Ord. No. 123, § 14, 12-17-1990; Ord. No. 264, 6-16-2025)
Sec. 86-139. Removal of stumps.
   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of
the ground.
(Ord. No. 123, § 16, 12-17-1990; Ord. No. 264, 6-16-2025)
Chapters 87--89
RESERVED
Chapter 90
VEHICLES FOR HIRE*
*Cross References: Businesses, ch. 10; streets, sidewalks and other public
places, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78.
Article I. In General
Secs. 90-1--90-30. Reserved.
Article II. Taxicabs
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
90-31.     Definitions.
Sec.
90-32.     Violations declared misdemeanor.
Sec.
90-33.     Police department; duty to enforce article.
Secs. 90-34--90-55. Reserved.
Division 2. Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity
Sec.
90-56.     Required.
Sec.
90-57.     Application for certificate.
Sec.
90-58.     Public hearing.
Sec.
90-59.     Issuance.
Sec.
90-60.     Indemnity bond or liability insurance required.
Sec.
90-61.     License fees.
Sec.
90-62.     Transfer of certificates.
Sec.
90-63.     Suspension and revocation of certificates.
Secs. 90-64--90-85. Reserved.
Division 3. Driver's License
Sec.
90-86.     Required.
Sec.
90-87.     Application.
Sec.
90-88.     Examination of applicant; current state motor vehicle operator's
permit required.
Sec.
90-89.     Police investigation of applicant; traffic and police record.
Sec.
90-90.     Consideration of application.
Sec.
90-91.     Issuance of license; duration; annual fee.
Sec.
90-92.     Display of license.
Sec.
90-93.     Suspension and revocation.
Sec.
90-94.     Failure to comply with city, state and federal laws.
Secs. 90-95--90-115. Reserved.
Division 4. Vehicle Requirements
Sec.
90-116.     Equipment and maintenance.
Sec.
90-117.     Designation of taxicabs.
Sec.
90-118.     Taximeter required.
Secs. 90-119--90-140. Reserved.
Division 5. Operational Restrictions and Requirements
Sec.
90-141.     Rates of fare; rate card required.
Sec.
90-142.     Receipts.
Sec.
90-143.     Refusal of passenger to pay legal fare.
Sec.
90-144.     Solicitation, acceptance and discharge of passengers.
Sec.
90-145.     Open stands; establishment; use.
Sec.
90-146.     Call box stands; establishment; use.
Sec.
90-147.     Prohibitions of other vehicles.
Sec.
90-148.     Taxicab service.
Sec.
90-149.     Manifests.
Sec.
90-150.     Holder's records and reports.
Sec.
90-151.     Advertising.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 90-1--90-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. TAXICABS
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 90-31. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
Certificate means a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by
the police chief, authorizing the holder to conduct a taxicab business in the
city.
Cruising means the driving of a taxicab on the streets, alleys or public places
of the city in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire.
Driver's license means the permission granted by the police chief to a person
to drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city.
Holder means a person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity
has been issued.
Manifest means a daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips made by
the driver, showing time and place of origin, destination, number of
passengers, and the amount of fare of each trip.
Rate card means a card issued by the city for display in each taxicab which
contains the rates of fare then in force.
Waiting time means the time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time of
acceptance of a passenger to the time of discharge, but does not include any
time that the taxicab is not in motion if due to any cause other than the
request, act or fault of a passenger.
(Ord. No. 100, § 1, 10-3-1977)
Cross References: Definitions generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 90-32. Violations declared misdemeanor.
Violations of this article are a misdemeanor.
Sec. 90-33. Police department; duty to enforce article.
The police department of the city is given the authority and is instructed to
watch and observe the conduct of holders and drivers operating under this
article. Upon discovering a violation of the provisions of this article, the
police department shall report the violation to the city council, which will
order or take appropriate action.
(Ord. No. 100, § 33, 10-3-1977)
Secs. 90-34--90-55. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY
Sec. 90-56. Required.
No person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him to be
operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city without having
first obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the
police chief.
(Ord. No. 100, § 2, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-57. Application for certificate.
An application for a certificate required in this division shall be filed with
the police chief upon forms provided by the city, and the application shall be
verified under oath and shall furnish the following information:
   (1)   The name and address of the applicant.
   (2)   The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of all
unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the transaction or
acts giving rise to such judgments.
   (3)   The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers.
   (4)   Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public
convenience and necessity require the granting of a certificate.
   (5)   The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant
and the location of proposed depots and terminals.
   (6)   The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicles of
the applicant.
   (7)   Such further information as the police chief may require.
(Ord. No. 100, § 3, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-58. Public hearing.
Upon the filing of an application for a certificate required in this division,
the city clerk shall fix a time and place for a public hearing on the
application. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant and to all
persons to whom certificates of public convenience and necessity have been
theretofore issued. Due notice shall also be given the general public by
publishing a notice of such hearing in the local newspaper. Any interested
person may file with the city clerk a memorandum in support of or opposition to
the issuance of a certificate.
(Ord. No. 100, § 4, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-59. Issuance.
(a)   If the city council finds that further taxicab service in the city is
required by public convenience and necessity and that the applicant is fit,
willing and able to perform such public transportation and to conform to the
provisions of this article and the rules promulgated by the city manager, the
police chief shall issue a certificate, stating the name and address of the
applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under the certificate, and the
date of issuance; otherwise, the application shall be denied.
(b)   In making these findings, the city council shall take into consideration
the number of taxicabs already in operation; whether existing transportation is
adequate to meet the public need; the probable effect of increased service on
local traffic conditions; and the character, experience and responsibility of
the applicant.
(Ord. No. 100, § 5, 10-3-1977; Ord. 222, § 57, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 90-60. Indemnity bond or liability insurance required.
(a)   No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued or
continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect an indemnity
bond for each vehicle authorized for personal injuries and property damage in
the amount of $1,000,000.00. Such bond shall inure to the benefit of any person
who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused
by the negligence of a holder, his servants or agents. Such bond shall be filed
in the office of the city clerk and shall have as surety a surety company
authorized to do business in the state.
(b)   The city council may in its discretion allow the holder to file, in lieu
of a bond, a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state. This policy shall conform to the
provisions of this section relating to bonds.
(Ord. No. 100, § 6, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-61. License fees.
No certificate shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder has
paid an annual license fee in the amount established by resolution for the
right to engage in the taxicab business and in the amount established by
resolution each year for each vehicle operated under a certificate of public
convenience and necessity. License fees shall be for the calendar year and
shall be in addition to any other license fees or charges established by proper
authority and applicable to the holder or the vehicles under his operation and
control.
(Ord. No. 100, § 7, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-62. Transfer of certificates.
No certificate of public convenience and necessity may be sold, assigned,
mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the consent of the city council.
(Ord. No. 100, § 8, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-63. Suspension and revocation of certificates.
(a)   A certificate issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked
or suspended by the city council if the holder thereof has:
   (1)   Violated any of the provisions of this article;
   (2)   Discontinued operations for more than 14 days; or
   (3)   Violated any ordinances of the city or the laws of the United States
or the state, the violations of which reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the
holder to offer public transportation.
(b)   Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given notice of
the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard.
(Ord. No. 100, § 9, 10-3-1977)
Secs. 90-64--90-85. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
DRIVER'S LICENSE
Sec. 90-86. Required.
No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the city, and no
person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so driven, and no
taxicab licensed by the city shall be so driven at any time for hire unless the
driver of the taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a
taxicab driver's license issued under the provisions of this division.
(Ord. No. 100, § 10, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-87. Application.
(a)   An application for a taxicab driver's license shall be filed with the
city clerk on forms provided by the city, and such application shall be
verified under oath and shall contain the following information:
   (1)   The names and addresses of four residents of the city who have known
the applicant for a period of two years and who will vouch for the sobriety,
honesty and general good character of the applicant.
   (2)   The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers.
   (3)   The educational background of the applicant.
   (4)   A concise history of his employment.
(b)   Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate from a reputable
physician of the city certifying that, in his opinion, the applicant is not
inflicted with any disease or infirmity which might make him an unsafe or
unsatisfactory driver. At the time the application is filed, the applicant
shall pay to the city clerk the sum established by resolution.
(Ord. No. 100, § 11, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-88. Examination of applicant; current state motor vehicle operator's
permit required.
Before any application for a taxicab driver's license is finally passed upon by
the city council, the applicant shall be required to pass a satisfactory
examination as to his knowledge of the city and to show that he has a current
motor vehicle operator's permit issued by the state.
(Ord. No. 100, § 12, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-89. Police investigation of applicant; traffic and police record.
The police department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a
taxicab driver's license; and a report of such investigation and a copy of the
traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the
application for the consideration of the city manager.
(Ord. No. 100, § 13, 10-3-1977; Ord. 222, § 58, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 90-90. Consideration of application.
The city manager shall, upon consideration of the application for a taxicab
driver's license and the reports and certificate required to be attached,
approve or reject the application. If the application is rejected, the
applicant may request a personal appearance before the city council to offer
evidence why his application should be reconsidered.
(Ord. No. 100, § 14, 10-3-1977; Ord. 222, § 59, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 90-91. Issuance of license; duration; annual fee.
(a)   Upon approval of an application for a taxicab driver's license, the
police chief shall issue a license to the applicant, which shall bear the name,
address, age, signature and photograph of the applicant.
(b)   Such license shall be in effect for the remainder of the calendar year. A
license for every calendar year thereafter shall issue upon the payment of the
fee established by resolution unless the license for the preceding year has
been revoked.
(Ord. No. 100, § 15, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-92. Display of license.
Every driver licensed under this division shall post his driver's license,
along with a recent photograph, in such a place as to be in full view of all
passengers while such driver is operating a taxicab.
(Ord. No. 100, § 16, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-93. Suspension and revocation.
The police chief is given the authority to suspend any driver's license issued
under this division for a driver's failure or refusing to comply with the
provisions of this article, such suspension to last for a period of not more
than ten days. The police chief is also given authority to revoke any driver's
license for failure to comply with the provisions of this article. However, a
license may not be revoked unless the driver has received notice and has had an
opportunity to present evidence in his behalf.
(Ord. No. 100, § 17, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-94. Failure to comply with city, state and federal laws.
Every driver licensed under this division shall comply with all city, state and
federal laws. Failure to do so will justify the police chief's suspending or
revoking a license.
(Ord. No. 100, § 18, 10-3-1977)
Secs. 90-95--90-115. Reserved.
DIVISION 4.
VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 90-116. Equipment and maintenance.
(a)   Vehicles must be licensed.
   (1)   Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle under the provisions of
this article, the vehicle shall be thoroughly examined and inspected by the
police department and found to comply with such reasonable rules and
regulations as may be prescribed by the police department. These rules and
regulations shall be promulgated to provide safe transportation and shall
specify such safety equipment and regulatory devices as the police chief shall
deem necessary.
   (2)   When the police department finds that a vehicle has met the standards
established by the police chief, the department shall issue a license to that
effect, which shall also state the authorized seating capacity of the vehicle.
(b)   Periodic inspections. Every vehicle operating under this article shall be
periodically inspected by the police department at such intervals as shall be
established by the police chief to ensure the continued maintenance of safe
operating conditions.
(c)   Vehicles must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Every vehicle
operating under this article shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition
according to rules and regulations promulgated by the police chief.
(Ord. No. 100, § 19, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-117. Designation of taxicabs.
Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each rear door, in painted letters
not less than three inches nor more than five inches in height, the name of the
owner, and, in addition, may bear an identifying design approved by the police
chief. No vehicle covered by the terms of this article shall be licensed whose
color scheme, identifying design, monogram, or insignia to be used on the
vehicle shall, in the opinion of the police chief, conflict with or imitate any
color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used on vehicles already
operating under this article, in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to
deceive or defraud the public. If, after a license has been issued for a
taxicab, the color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia is changed
so as to be, in the opinion of the police chief, in conflict with or imitate
any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used by any other
person, owner or operator, in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to
deceive the public, the license of or certificate covering such taxicabs shall
be suspended or revoked.
(Ord. No. 100, § 20, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-118. Taximeter required.
All taxicabs operated under the authority of this article shall be equipped
with taximeters fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them at all
times, day and night; and after sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be
illuminated. Taximeters shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism of
standard design and construction, driven either from the transmission or from
one of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving
mechanism. They shall be sealed at all points and connections which, if
manipulated, would affect their correct reading and recording. Each taximeter
shall have a flag to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not
employed, and it shall be the duty of the driver to throw the flag of such
taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of each trip.
Taximeters shall be subject to inspection by the police department. Any
inspector or other officer of the police department is authorized, either on
complaint of any person or without such complaint, to inspect any meter and,
upon discovery of any inaccuracy in the meter, to notify the person operating
the taxicab to cease operation. Thereupon the taxicab shall be kept off the
highways until the taximeter is repaired and in the required working condition.
(Ord. No. 100, § 21, 10-3-1977)
Secs. 90-119--90-140. Reserved.
DIVISION 5.
OPERATIONAL RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 90-141. Rates of fare; rate card required.
No owner or driver of a taxicab shall charge a sum for the use of a taxicab
other than that approved by the council. Every taxicab operated under this
article shall have a rate card setting forth the authorized rates of fare
displayed in such a place as to be in view of all passengers.
(Ord. No. 100, § 22, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-142. Receipts.
The driver of any taxicab shall upon demand by the passenger render to such
passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically printed
receipt or by a specially prepared receipt on which shall be the name of the
owner, license number or motor number, amount of meter reading or charges and
date of transaction.
(Ord. No. 100, § 23, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-143. Refusal of passenger to pay legal fare.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any of
the vehicles mentioned in this article after having hired the vehicle, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to hire any vehicle with intent to defraud the
person from whom it is hired of the value of such service.
(Ord. No. 100, § 24, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-144. Solicitation, acceptance and discharge of passengers.
(a)   Solicitation of passengers by driver. No driver shall solicit passengers
for a taxicab except when sitting in the driver's compartment of such taxicab
or while standing immediately adjacent to the curb side of the taxicab. The
driver of any taxicab shall remain in the driver's compartment or immediately
adjacent to his vehicle at all times when such vehicle is upon the public
street; except when necessary a driver may be absent from his taxicab for not
more than five consecutive minutes; and nothing contained in this subsection
shall be held to prohibit any driver from alighting to the street or sidewalk
for the purpose of assisting passengers into or out of such vehicle.
(b)   Prohibited solicitation. No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or
annoying tone of voice or by sign or in any manner annoy any person or obstruct
the movement of any persons, or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting
patronage.
(c)   Receipt and discharge of passengers on sidewalk only. Drivers of taxicabs
shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall pull up to
the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible or, in the absence of a sidewalk,
to the extreme right-hand side of the road and there receive or discharge
passengers, except upon one-way streets, where passengers may be discharged at
either the right- or left-hand sidewalk, or side of the roadway in the absence
of a sidewalk.
(d)   Cruising. No driver shall cruise in search of passengers except in such
areas and at such times as shall be designated by the police chief. Such areas
and times shall only be designated when the police chief finds that taxicab
cruising would not congest traffic or be dangerous to pedestrians and other
vehicles.
(e)   Solicitation of other common carrier passengers prohibited. No driver,
owner or operator shall solicit passengers at the terminal of any other common
carrier, nor at any intermediate points along any established route of any
other common carrier.
(f)   Additional passengers. No driver shall permit any other person to occupy
or ride in the taxicab unless the person first employing the taxicab shall
consent to the acceptance of additional passengers. No charge shall be made for
an additional passenger except when the additional passenger rides beyond the
previous passenger's destination, and then only for the additional distance so
traveled.
(g)   Restriction on number of passengers. No driver shall permit more persons
to be carried in a taxicab as passengers than the rated seating capacity of his
taxicab as stated in the license for the vehicle issued by the police
department. A child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger.
(h)   Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited. No driver shall refuse or
neglect to convey any orderly person, upon request, unless previously engaged
or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this article to do so.
(i)   Prohibitions of drivers. It shall be a violation of this article for any
driver of a taxicab to solicit business for any hotel, or to attempt to divert
patronage from one hotel to another. Neither shall such driver engage in
selling intoxicating liquors or solicit business for any house of ill repute or
use his vehicle for any purpose other than the transporting of passengers.
(j)   Prohibition of passengers. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any
taxicab to permit any person to stand on the running board of such vehicle
while the vehicle is in motion, and it shall be unlawful for any person to ride
on the running board of such vehicle when it is in motion.
(Ord. No. 100, § 25, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-145. Open stands; establishment; use.
(a)   The police chief of the city is authorized and empowered to establish
open stands in such places upon the streets of the city as he deems necessary
for the use of taxicabs operated in the city. The police chief shall not create
an open stand without taking into consideration the need for such stands by the
companies and the convenience to the general public. The police chief shall
prescribe the number of cabs that shall occupy such open stands. The police
chief shall not create an open stand in front of any place of business where
the abutting property owners object or where such stand would tend to create a
traffic hazard.
(b)   Open stands shall be used by the different drivers on a first come, first
served basis. The driver shall pull on to the open stand from the rear and
shall advance forward as the cabs ahead pull off. Drivers shall stay within
five feet of their cabs, and they shall not solicit passengers or engage in
loud or boisterous talk while at an open stand. Nothing in this section shall
be construed as preventing a passenger from boarding the cab of his choice that
is parked at open stands.
(Ord. No. 100, § 26, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-146. Call box stands; establishment; use.
(a)   Establishment. The police chief is authorized and empowered to establish
call box stands upon the streets of the city in such places as in his
discretion it deems proper. A holder desiring to establish a call box stand
shall make written application to the police chief. The applicant must attach
to the application the written approval of the abutting property owners of the
space, consenting to the creation of such stand. Upon filing of the
application, the police department shall make an investigation of the traffic
conditions at that place and shall thereafter file their written recommendation
to the police chief. The police chief shall then either grant or refuse the
application. When a call box stand has been established as provided in this
section, it shall be used solely by the holder to whom it was granted and his
agents and servants; and no other holder shall be permitted to use the stand;
however, no holder shall obtain permit for more than one such closed stand
within the downtown business area.
(b)   Use. A holder operating a call box stand as provided for in this section
shall be allowed to have on duty at such stand a starter, or other employee,
for the purpose of assisting in the loading or unloading of passengers from
cabs, for receiving calls and dispatching cabs, and for soliciting passengers
at such stand. The term "at such stand" means that part of the sidewalk
immediately adjacent to and of equal length with such call box stand. It shall
be unlawful for any such starter or other employee to go beyond the area
designated for the purpose of soliciting passengers or assisting them in
boarding such cabs.
(Ord. No. 100, § 27, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-147. Prohibitions of other vehicles.
Private or other vehicles for hire shall not at any time occupy the spaces upon
the streets that have been established as either open stands or call box
stands.
(Ord. No. 100, § 28, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-148. Taxicab service.
All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the city operating under the
provisions of this article shall render an overall service to the public
desiring to use taxicabs. Holders of certificates of public convenience and
necessity shall maintain a central place of business and keep it open 24 hours
a day for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching cabs. They shall
answer all calls received by them for services inside the corporate limits of
the city as soon as they can do so; and if services cannot be rendered within a
reasonable time, they shall notify the prospective passengers how long it will
be before the call can be answered and give the reason. Any holder who shall
refuse to accept a call anywhere in the corporate limits of the city at any
time when such holder has available cabs, or who shall fail or refuse to give
overall service, shall be deemed a violator of this article; and the
certificate granted to such holder shall be revoked at the discretion of the
police chief.
(Ord. No. 100, § 29, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-149. Manifests.
(a)   Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are recorded all
trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of each
trip and amount of fare; and all such completed manifests shall be returned to
the owner by the driver at the conclusion of his tour of duty. The forms for
each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the owner and shall be of a
character approved by the police chief.
(b)   Every holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall
retain and preserve all drivers' manifests in a safe place for at least the
calendar year next preceding the current calendar year, and such manifests
shall be available to the police chief.
(Ord. No. 100, § 30, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-150. Holder's records and reports.
(a)   Every holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall
keep accurate records of receipts from operations, operating and other
expenses, capital expenditures, and such other operating information as may be
required by the police chief. Every holder shall maintain the records
containing such information and other data required by this article at a place
readily accessible for examination by the police chief.
(b)   Every holder shall submit reports of receipts, expenses and statistics of
operation to the police chief for each calendar year, in accordance with a
uniform system prescribed by the police chief. These reports shall reach the
police chief on or before March 1 of the year following the calendar year for
which such reports are prepared.
(c)   All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of
taxicabs which result in death or injury to any person, or in damage to any
vehicle, or to any property in an amount exceeding the sum of $200.00 shall be
reported within 24 hours from the time of occurrence to the police department
in a form of report to be furnished by the department.
(d)   Service contract reports. It shall be mandatory for all holders of a
certificate of public convenience and necessity to file with the police chief
copies of all contracts, agreements, arrangements, memoranda or other writings
relating to the furnishing of taxicab service to any hotel, theater, hall,
public resort, railway station or other place of public gathering, whether such
arrangement is made with the holder or any corporation, firm or association
with which the holder may be interested or connected. Failure to file such
copies within seven days shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of a
certificate of any offending holder or the cancellation of any cab stand
privileges.
(Ord. No. 100, § 31, 10-3-1977)
Sec. 90-151. Advertising.
Subject to the rules and regulations of the city council, it shall be lawful
for any person owning or operating a taxicab or motor vehicle for hire to
permit advertising matter to be affixed to or installed in or on such taxicabs
or motor vehicles for hire.
(Ord. No. 100, § 32, 10-3-1977)
Chapters 91--93
RESERVED
Chapter 94
ZONING*
*Cross references—Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations,
ch. 6; businesses, ch. 10; floods, ch. 30; natural resources, ch. 38; planning,
ch. 50; signs, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70;
subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 78;
utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86.
State law references—City and Village Zoning Act, MCL 125.581 et seq.;
Municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq.
Article I. Purpose, Scope and Legislative Intent
Sec.
94-1.   Short title.
Sec.
94-2.    Purpose.
Sec.
94-3.    Legislative intent.
Sec.
94-4.    Ordinance enactment or amendment and existing uses, structures, or
lots.
Secs. 94-5—94-60. Reserved.
Article II. Zoning District Map and General Zoning Regulations
Sec.
94-61.   Establishment of districts.
Sec.
94-62.   Zoning district map.
Sec.
94-63.   General regulations.
Sec.
94-64.   Zoning of vacated areas.
Sec.
94-65.   Zoning of filled land and use of waters.
Sec.
94-66.   Zoning of annexed areas.
Sec. 94-67—94-90. Reserved.
Article III. General Administrative Provisions
Sec.
94-91.   Administration.
Sec.
94-92.   Relief from personal responsibility.
Sec.
94-93.   Duties of the zoning official.
Sec.
94-94.   Duties of the planning commission.
Sec.
94-95.   Building permits.
Sec.
94-96.   Administrative provisions.
Sec.
94-97.   Certificate of occupancy.
Sec.
94-98.   Enforcement, violations, penalties.
Sec.
94-99.   Interpretation and application.
Sec.
94-100.   Fees and performance guarantee.
Sec.
94-101.   Notice of hearing.
Secs. 94-102—94-120. Reserved.
Article IV. Zoning District Regulations
Sec.
94-121.   General intent and purpose, permitted uses, and dimensional
regulations.
Sec.
94-122.   AG: Single-family agriculture district.
Sec.
94-123.   RS-1, RS-2, RS-3: Single-family residential districts.
Sec.
94-124.   R2F: Two-family residential district.
Sec.
94-125.   RM: Multiple-family residential district.
Sec.
94-126.   MH: Manufactured home park residential district.
Secs. 94-127—94-130. Reserved.
Sec.
94-131.   O-1: General office district.
Sec.
94-132.   O-2: Specialized office district.
Secs. 94-133—94-140. Reserved.
Sec.
94-141.   C-1: Central business district.
Sec.
94-142.   C-2: General commercial district.
Sec.
94-143.   C-3: Local commercial district.
Secs. 94-144—94-150. Reserved.
Sec.
94-151.   M-1: Light manufacturing district.
Sec.
94-152.   M-2: General manufacturing district.
Secs. 94-153—94-160. Reserved.
Sec.
94-161.    PUD: Planned unit development district.
Secs. 94-162--94-170. Reserved.
Article V. Supplemental Regulations
Sec.
94-171.   Intent and purpose.
Sec.
94-172.   General regulations.
Sec.
94-173.   Supplemental use regulations.
Sec.
94-174.   Supplemental area regulations.
Sec.
94-175.   Supplemental height regulations.
Sec.
94-176.   Supplemental access regulations.
Sec.
94-177.   Supplemental environmental regulations.
Secs. 94-178--94-190. Reserved.
Article VI. Uses Authorized by Special Use Permit
Sec.
94-191.   General standards and requirements.
Sec.
94-192.   Listed special uses.
Sec.
94-193.   Appeals.
Secs. 94-194—94-220. Reserved.
Article VII. Site Plan Review and Landscape Standards
Division 1. Site Plan Review and Approval
Sec.
94-221.   Intent and purpose.
Sec.
94-222.   Uses subject to site plan review.
Sec.
94-223.   Administrative site plan review authority.
Sec.
94-224.   Planning commission site plan review authority.
Sec.
94-225.   Preliminary site plan review and approval.
Sec.
94-226.   Final site plan review and approval.
Sec.
94-227.   Standards for site plan review and approval.
Sec.
94-228.   Amendments to an approved site plan.
Sec.
94-229.   Extension of site plan approval.
Sec.
94-230.   Conformance to approved site plan.
Sec.
94-231.   Review standards for planning commission decision.
Secs. 94-232—94-240. Reserved.
Division 2. Landscape Standards
Sec.
94-241.   Landscape, screening and buffer requirements.
Secs. 94-242—94-260. Reserved.
Article VIII. Site Condominium Regulations
Sec.
94-261.   Intent and purpose.
Sec.
94-262.   General requirements and standards.
Sec.
94-263.   Approval required.
Sec.
94-264.   Preliminary site plan requirements.
Sec.
94-265.   Final site plan requirements.
Secs. 94-266—94-290. Reserved.
Article IX. Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
Sec.
94-291.   Intent and purpose.
Sec.
94-292.   General off-street parking and loading requirements.
Sec.
94-293.   Loading and unloading space requirements.
Secs. 94-294.—94-320. Reserved.
Article X. Nonconforming Uses of Land and Structures
Sec.
94-321.   Intent and purpose.
Sec.
94-322.   Nonconforming lot.
Sec.
94-323.   Nonconforming use of land.
Sec.
94-324.   Nonconforming structure.
Sec.
94-325.   Change in nonconforming use.
Sec.
94-326.   Repair and maintenance.
Sec.
94-327.   Change of tenancy or ownership.
Sec.
94-328.   District zoning change.
Sec.
94-329.   Increase in nonconformity.
Sec.
94-330.   Illegal use.
Sec.
94-331.   Abandonment of use.
Sec.
94-332.   Appeal.
Secs. 94-333—94-360. Reserved.
Article XI. Zoning Board of Appeals
Sec.
94-361.   Creation and membership.
Sec.
94-362.   Organization and procedure.
Sec.
94-363.   Duties and powers.
Sec.
94-364.   Appeals.
Sec.
94-365.   Variances.
Secs. 94-366—94-390. Reserved.
Article XII. Amendments
Sec.
94-391.   Intent and purpose.
Sec.
94-392.   Amendment initiation.
Sec.
94-393.   Filing fee.
Sec.
94-394.   Amendment procedures.
Sec.
94-395.   Public hearing.
Sec.
94-396.   Planning commission recommendations.
Sec.
94-397.   Consideration by the city council.
Sec.
94-398.   Protested amendment.
Sec.
94-399.   Notice of adoption.
Sec.
94-400.   Effective date.
Secs. 94-401—94-430. Reserved.
Article XIII. Conflicting Ordinances and Interpretation
Sec.
94-431.   Conflicting ordinances.
Sec.
94-432.   Interpretation.
ARTICLE I. PURPOSE, SCOPE AND LEGISLATIVE INTENT
Sec. 94-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Code for the City
of Mason.”
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-2. Purpose.
Pursuant to the authority granted to the City of Mason by the statutes of the
State of Michigan and Charter of the City of Mason, the purpose of this zoning
chapter is to:
   (1)   Promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of
city inhabitants.
   (2)   Provide for development within the city consistent with the master
plan of the city.
   (3)   Protect and enhance the character and the stability of agricultural
and open space areas, public recreation areas, residential areas, and
nonresidential areas and promote the orderly and beneficial development of such
areas.
   (4)   Provide adequate light, air, privacy, and convenience of access to all
individual property.
   (5)   Regulate the intensity of land use and determine the area of open
space surrounding buildings and structures necessary to protect the public
health and provide adequate light and air.
   (6)   Provide safe and improved public highways and streets within the city.
   (7)   Promote healthful surroundings for favorable living conditions and
family life in residential areas.
   (8)   Protect public and private land uses from fire, explosion, noxious
fumes, odors, excessive heat, dust, smoke, noise, glare, vibration, and other
health and safety hazards.
   (9)   Prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures
so far as possible and appropriate in each zoning district by regulating the
use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding them.
   (10)   Enhance the social, economic, and environmental stability of the city
to include stabilizing and preserving property and civic values.
   (11)   Provide for compact development of the city through infill of
property along existing utility and transportation systems and for compact
development along new utility and transportation systems as a means of
conserving the expenditure of funds for public improvements and services.
   (12)   Provide for the administration, amendment and enforcement of this
chapter, including the collection of fees in furtherance of, and the sanctions
for violations of this chapter.
   (13)   Provide for the establishment of zoning districts, the regulation of
the use of land within zoning districts and the adoption of a zoning district
map.
   (14)   Prescribe the duties and powers of the planning commission.
   (15)   Establish the zoning board of appeals and prescribe the duties and
powers of the zoning board of appeals.
   (16)   Provide for appeals and procedures to be followed in the
consideration of appeals.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-3. Legislative intent.
Zoning districts contained in this chapter each have a defined purpose and are
based upon the master plan for future development, improvement, and
redevelopment. The districts are sized to be adequate to accommodate long-term
needs, and yet must be monitored relative to any necessary changes or updating
in the future. While the various regulations limit the use of properties, the
chapter provides land owners with a range of choices, flexibility, and options
for development and improvement.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-4. Ordinance enactment or amendment and existing uses, structures, or
lots.
The use of a building, structure, land, or premise as existing and lawful at
the time of enactment of this chapter, may be continued subject to provisions
of article X of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Secs. 94-5—94-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ZONING DISTRICT MAP AND GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Sec. 94-61. Establishment of districts.
The following zoning districts are hereby established for the city:
AG district: Single-family agriculture district
RS-1 district: Low density single-family residential district
RS-2 district: Medium density single-family residential district
RS-3 district: High density single-family residential district
R2F district: Two-family residential district
RM district: Multiple-family residential district
MH district: Manufactured home park residential district
O-1 district: General office district
O-2 district: Specialized office district
C-1 district: Central business district
C-2 district: General commercial district
C-3 district: Local commercial district
—1 district: Light manufacturing district
M-2 district: General manufacturing district
PUD district: Planned unit development district
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-62. Zoning district map.
The boundaries of the respective districts are defined and established as
depicted on the map entitled "Zoning Map of the City of Mason, Michigan," which
is an integral part of this chapter, and which, with the explanatory matter
thereon, shall be the official zoning map of the city and shall be published as
part of this chapter and is hereby incorporated by reference.
   (1)   The official zoning map of the city and subsequent amendments to the
map shall be dated, certified, and bear the signature of the city manager. The
map shall be attested to by the city clerk, and shall bear the following words:
"This is to certify that the above map is the Official Zoning Map of the City
of Mason".
    (2)   If amendments are made in district boundaries or other matters
depicted on the official zoning map, such changes shall not be considered
final, and a building permit shall not be issued, until the appropriate
amendments have been made on the official zoning map. Such amendments shall be
made within ten working days after the effective date of the ordinance
amendment. Each amendment shall be accompanied by a reference number on the map
which shall refer to the official ordinance amendment adopted by the city
council. One copy of the official zoning map shall be maintained and kept up-
to-date in the office of the city clerk.
    (3)   In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed,
lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes made
thereto, the city council may, by ordinance, adopt a new official zoning map
which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning
map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions on the prior official
zoning map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the
zoning ordinance or the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map
shall comply with subsection (1) of this section. Unless the prior official
zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any
significant parts which remain, shall be preserved together with all available
records pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
    (4)   If because of the scale, lack of details, or illegibility of the
official zoning map, there is any uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict
regarding the intended location of any district boundaries shown on the map,
the following shall govern:
       a.   Where boundaries follow streets or highways, the centerline of the
street or highway shall be the boundary line or lines.
       b.   Where a zoning district is bounded by a stream, lake or other body
of water, and in the event of change in the shoreline, the boundary of said
district shall be the thread of a stream or the actual shoreline of a lake or
other body of water.
       c.   A boundary indicated as approximately following a recorded lot line
or the line bounding a tax parcel shall be construed as following such line.
       d.   A boundary indicated as following the municipal boundary line of
the city shall be construed as following such line.
       e.   A boundary indicated as following a railroad line shall be
construed as following the railroad right-of-way.
       f.   A distance not specifically indicated in the official zoning map
shall be determined by the scale of the map to the nearest foot.
      g.   Should the above not fully explain a question of boundaries, the
zoning board of appeals shall have the authority to make an interpretation
based upon the aforementioned standards and after receiving a recommendation
from the planning commission.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. 222, § 60, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 94-63. General regulations.
(a)   Every building or structure erected, any use of land, building or
structure, any structural alteration or relocation of an existing building or
structure, and any enlargement of, addition to or resumption of an existing use
of land, building or structure shall be subject to all regulations of this
chapter which are applicable within the zoning district in which such land use,
building or structure shall be located.
(b)   Uses are permitted by right only if specifically listed as uses permitted
by right in the various zoning districts. Accessory uses are permitted as
indicated in the various zoning districts, and if such uses are clearly
incidental to the permitted principal uses. Special uses are permitted as
listed, or where provided for, and if the required conditions are met.
(c)   No part of a setback area, or other open space, or off-street parking or
loading space required in connection with any use of land, building or
structure, for the purpose of complying with this chapter shall be included as
part of a setback area, open space, or off-street parking lot or loading space
similarly required for any other use, building or structure.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-64. Zoning of vacated areas.
If a street, alley or other public right-of-way within the city is vacated by
official governmental action and if the lands within the boundaries thereof
attach to and become part of lands adjoining the street, alley or public right-
of-way, such lands shall automatically acquire and be subject to the same
zoning regulations applicable to the adjoining lands to which the vacated
property becomes attached.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-65. Zoning of filled land and use of waters.
If earthen fill is placed in any lake or stream, the created land shall
automatically and without further government action acquire and be subject to
the same zoning regulations applicable to the lands to which the created land
attaches or is adjacent.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-66. Zoning of annexed areas.
(a)   When property is annexed into the city, said property shall continue to
be regulated under the township zoning ordinance for two years after becoming a
part of the city and then shall automatically and without further government
action become zoned as an AG district, unless the city council shall have
rezoned the property under the city zoning chapter within said two years.
(b)   When property is transferred to the city by agreement pursuant to Public
Act No. 425 of 1984 (MCL 124.21 et seq.), zoning of said property shall be as
designated in the agreement. If zoning of the property is not designated in the
agreement, said property shall be zoned in accordance with section 94-67(a).
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Secs. 94-67—94-90. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Sec. 94-91. Administration.
The city shall employ or contract a person to act as the zoning official
responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter in
accordance with division 2, article IV of chapter 2.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-92. Relief from personal responsibility.
The zoning official shall not be rendered personally liable and is hereby
relieved to the fullest extent permitted by law from all personal liability for
any damage to persons or property as a result of any required or permitted act
or omission in the lawful discharge of official duties under the provisions of
this chapter. Any suit instituted against the zoning official because of any
required or permitted act or omission in the lawful discharge of official
duties under the provisions of this chapter shall be defended by the legal
representative of the city until the termination of all proceedings and in no
case shall the zoning official be liable for any costs resulting from the
defense of such suit.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-93. Duties of the zoning official.
It shall be the responsibility of the zoning official to enforce the provisions
of this chapter and in so doing perform the following duties:
   (1)   The zoning official shall maintain one official copy of this chapter
and the official zoning map including amendments.
   (2)   The zoning official shall make inspections of buildings or premises in
order to properly carry out the enforcement of this chapter.
   (3)   The zoning official shall keep a record of every identifiable
complaint of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter including the
action taken in response to each complaint.
   (4)   The zoning official is authorized to issue and serve municipal
ordinance violation notices, and municipal civil infraction citations for
violations of this chapter designated as a civil infraction.
   (5)   The zoning official is authorized to issue appearance tickets, as
defined by section 9f of the Code of Criminal Procedure (MCL 764.9f), for all
other violations of this chapter or to seek a complaint and warrant from the
appropriate prosecuting official.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-94. Duties of the planning commission.
The following are some specific duties of the planning commission relating to
the administration of this chapter:
   (1)   Adopt rules and guidelines for the proper administration and
enforcement of the chapter.
   (2)   Act as a policy board on matters of enforcement and administration of
this chapter not covered by adopted rules or guidelines.
   (3)   Conduct public hearings as required by state law or this chapter.
   (4)   Review this chapter and master plan periodically as deemed appropriate
and recommend changes to the city council. This review should be conducted at
least once every five years.
   (5)   Review and approve the location, character, and extent of public
streets, squares, parks, or other public ways, grounds, or open spaces or
public buildings or structures to be constructed in the municipality and
prepare and annually update a capital improvement plan for public structures
and improvements for the ensuing five years.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-95. Building permits.
The following provisions shall apply in the issuance of any building permit in
addition to any other requirements for a particular use contained in this
chapter or the building code.
   (1)   Commencement. No excavation for, erection of, addition to, alteration
of, demolition of, or moving of a building or structure shall commence and no
use or change in use of land shall occur until the building official has issued
a building permit as required by the building code. A building permit shall not
be issued for those uses requiring a special use permit as provided for in this
chapter, until a special use permit has been approved. A building permit shall
not be issued for those uses requiring site plan review and approval until a
final site plan has been reviewed and approved, as provided in division 1 of
article VII of this chapter.
   (2)   Application for building permit. An application for building permit
shall be submitted prior to issuance of the permit and shall include all
information deemed necessary by the building official to demonstrate compliance
with applicable provisions of this chapter and the building code. An
application for building permit shall include the information described in this
section, however, the building official may determine that less or more
information is required based upon the type, scope, and/or complexity of the
project. Generally, an application for building permit should include the
following:
      a.   All applicable information required under the Michigan Residential
Code, Michigan Construction Code, and other applicable codes promulgated
pursuant to MCL 125.1504.
      b.   Site layout including:
         1.   An accurate boundary line survey showing the location, shape,
area, dimensions, north arrow, and legal descriptions of the parcel, location
of easements and centerline of all roads.
         2.   The location, setbacks, dimensions, and height of the existing
and/or proposed structures to be erected, altered, demolished, or moved on the
parcel shown to scale.
         3.   The existing or intended uses.
         4.   The proposed number of sleeping rooms, dwelling units, occupants,
employees, customers, and other users.
         5.   The location to scale of utility lines, wells and septic drain
fields.
         6.   The yard, open space and parking area dimensions.
         7.   The established street grades, proposed finished grades, any
change to the contour of the parcel involved and surface runoff and drainage
patterns.
         8.   The location of regulated waterways.
      c.   Evidence of compliance with this chapter, the building code, and all
other local, county, state and federal requirements that are applicable to the
proposed building, structure or land use.
      d.   Proof of legal or equitable title in order to assure compliance with
dimensional requirements of this chapter and to protect public easements from
encroachment.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-96. Administrative provisions.
(a)   Building permit deemed invalid.
   (1)   Any building permit shall become invalid if the authorized work does
not commence within 180 days after issuance of the permit or if the authorized
work is abandoned for a period of 180 days after commencement. The building
official may grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time for not more
than 180 days each upon justifiable cause.
   (2)   Any building permit shall become invalid one year after the date of
issuance. The building official may grant, in writing, one extension of time
for up to one year upon justifiable cause.
(b)   Previous approvals. No amendment of this chapter shall require changes in
the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a lawful
building permit has been issued or otherwise lawfully authorized if the
permitted activity has been physically commenced within 90 days after the date
of issuance of the building permit.
(c)   Revocation of permits. The building official may revoke a permit or
approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in case of any false
statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the plans on
which the permit or approval was based.
(d)   Inspection. The building official shall cause the appropriate inspections
to be made as required under this chapter and the building code. The building
official shall either approve that portion of the construction as completed or
shall notify the permit holder or an authorized agent that the construction
fails to comply with this chapter or the building code. These inspections shall
include:
   (1)   Periodic inspections. Periodic inspections required under the Michigan
Residential Code, Michigan Construction Code, and other applicable codes
promulgated pursuant to MCL 125.1504.
   (2)   Special inspections. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as
limiting inspections during regular business hours or whenever work is being
pursued and as may be considered appropriate by the respective official,
provided the inspector announces himself and presents his credentials if
requested. Any of the above inspections may be combined with other inspections
if all work necessary for these inspections has been completed and has not been
concealed.
(e)   Building permit and inspection fees. All fees for inspection and the
issuance of permits required under this chapter shall be collected in advance
by the city. The amount of such fees shall be established in accordance with
section 94-100 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-97. Certificate of occupancy.
(a)   Certificate of occupancy required. No land or building shall be used or
occupied until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building
official stating that the use and building comply with the provisions of this
chapter and the building code.
(b)   Certificate of occupancy for an existing building and use. A certificate
of occupancy may be issued upon request for existing buildings, structures, or
parts thereof, or existing uses of land if, after inspection, such buildings,
structures, or parts thereof, or such uses of land are found to be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the building code.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-98. Enforcement, violations, penalties.
(a)   Enforcement. The zoning official shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter unless otherwise specified by this code or required by law. It shall be
unlawful for any owner or occupant to allow or permit or fail to correct a
violation of the terms of this chapter or for any person to commence operations
of any kind that are in violation of the terms of this chapter. Any violations
shall be subject to the penalties herein prescribed.
(b)   Report of violation. Any building or land use activities considered
possible violations of the provisions of this chapter observed by or
communicated to the city police agency or to any city official shall be
reported to the zoning official.
(c)   Inspection of violation. The zoning official shall inspect each alleged
violation of this chapter within seven days of notification of the alleged
violation. Failure to comply with this section in a timely manner shall not be
a defense to any violation.
(d)   Correction period, notice requirements, violations. Whenever a violation
has been confirmed by the zoning official, the zoning official shall give
notice in writing by hand delivery or first class mail addressed to the owner
and occupant of the property where the violation exists and to any person(s)
otherwise responsible for said violation. The notice shall specify the location
and nature of the violation and shall indicate that the owner, occupant or
person otherwise responsible, is required to abate the violation or file the
necessary appeal forms with the zoning board of appeals. The notice shall
specify that the violation be abated or an appeal to the zoning board of
appeals be properly filed within no less than seven days or more than 30 days
of receipt of the notice. The time allowed in the notice for abatement or
appeal shall be determined at the discretion of the zoning official upon
consideration of the nature and severity of the violation and the risk of harm
to the public health, safety, and welfare of any continuing violation. If the
occupant or owner of the premises is unknown or cannot be located, notices
shall be given by posting a copy of said notice upon a conspicuous part of the
property where the violation is located and by mailing a copy of said notice by
first class mail, addressed to the owner or party in interest at the address
shown on the current tax records. It is unlawful for any person given notice
pursuant to this section to fail to either correct the violation or appeal to
the zoning board of appeals within the time prescribed by this chapter. If
appealed to the zoning board of appeals, the violation must be corrected within
30 days of a denial of an appeal.
(e)   Penalty provisions, costs of prosecution, daily violations. Unless a
provision of this chapter is expressly designated as a civil infraction, any
conviction for a violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor
violation punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90
days and/or by a fine of not more than $500.00, plus the costs of prosecution.
Where the violation is designated as a municipal civil infraction a person
found responsible shall be fined not more than $500.00 plus the direct and
indirect costs of the action not to exceed $500.00 pursuant to section 8727(3)
of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961 (MCL 600.8727(3)). Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate punishable offense.
The imposition of any fine or sentence shall not exempt the offender from
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Violation of this chapter is
hereby declared a nuisance per se and conviction of the penal provisions, or
finding of responsibility shall not preclude proceedings to abate such a
nuisance.
(f)   Cumulative rights and remedies. The rights and remedies provided herein
are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law.
(g)   Building permit refusal. The building official may refuse to issue a new
building permit to a person who has failed to correct pending violations of
this chapter or the building code.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-99. Interpretation and application.
In the interpretation, application and enforcement of this chapter, whenever
any of the provisions or limitations imposed or required herein are more
stringent than any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this chapter
shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more
stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this chapter, then the
provisions of such other law or ordinance shall govern.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-100. Fees and performance guarantee.
(a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow for the establishment of
fees and performance guarantees the city deems necessary to implement the
provisions of this zoning chapter.
(b)   Fees.
   (1)   The city council shall, by resolution, establish and set fees for
making application for building permits, site plan review, certificates of
occupancy, zoning appeals, and sale of copies of the zoning chapter and
official zoning map.
   (2)   The city council shall, by resolution, establish a fee schedule to
cover the cost of inspections required for the implementation of this zoning
chapter. Before considering any application submitted in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, the established fee shall be collected by the
city.
(c)   Performance guarantee.  The city, as a condition of approval for any
building permit, special use permit, or site plan, may require the provision of
a financial guarantee of performance in the form of a cash deposit, certified
check, irrevocable letter of credit, or surety bond acceptable to the city to
insure the proper and timely implementation and installation of required
improvements. The form, terms, and conditions of said performance guarantee
shall be the same as prescribed under section
74-163.
(d)   Fees for professional analysis. The city council may require the
applicant, upon the recommendation of the zoning official or the planning
commission, to pay a fee to cover the costs of a professional planning or
professional engineering analysis of an application for rezoning, a building
permit, a special use permit, a planned unit development or a site plan review.
Such action by the city council shall occur only if the action applied for is
of a complex nature that is determined by the city council to be beyond the
capability of the zoning official and/or the planning commission to formulate a
decision on the merits of the application without professional assistance.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 157, 11-6-2006)
Sec. 94-101. Notice of hearing.
The following shall be the minimum standards for notice of any hearing required
by this chapter or the Michigan Zoning Act except when said standards are in
conflict with other applicable requirements.
   (1)   Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city no less than 15 days before the date of the hearing.
   (2)   Notice of the hearing shall be given to the following persons:
      a.   The applicant or person who has otherwise caused the required
hearing to be scheduled.
      b.   The owners, at the address given in the last assessment role, and
occupants of the property for which approval is being considered.
      c.   The owners of all real property within 300 feet of the boundary for
the property for which the approval has been requested, as shown by the latest
assessment roll, regardless of whether the owner or property is located in the
zoning jurisdiction.
      d.   The occupants of any structure within 300 feet of the boundary for
the property for which the approval has been requested, regardless of whether
the owner or property is located in the zoning jurisdiction. Notification need
not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a
structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased
by different persons, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall be given
notice. If a single structure contains more than four dwelling units or other
distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different persons, notice may be
given to the manager or owner of the structure, who shall be requested to post
the notice at the primary entrance to the structure.
      e.   Members of the planning commission, or city council and planning
commission, if the hearing is being held by the city council.
      f.   For any group of adjacent properties numbering 11 or more that is
proposed for rezoning, the notice requirements of subsection (2) and the
requirements of subsection (5)b that street addresses be listed do not apply to
that group of adjacent properties.
   (3)   Notice of the hearing shall be given not less than 15 days before the
date of the public hearing. Notice under subsection (2) is considered to be
given when personally delivered or when deposited during normal business hours
for delivery with the United States Postal Service or other public or private
delivery service.
   (4)   If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be
used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one
occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one unit
owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or
organizations, one occupant of each unit shall receive notice.
   (5)   The notice of a hearing shall:
      a.   Describe the nature of the request.
      b.   Indicate the property which is the subject of the request and a
listing of all street addresses within the property(ies) which is (are) the
subject of the existing request. Street addresses do not need to be created and
listed if no such addresses currently exist. If there are no street addresses,
another means of identification may be used.
      c.   State when, where and at what time the request will be received
concerning the request.
      d.   Indicate when and the address where written comments will be
received concerning the request.
      e.   The location where the application documents can be viewed and
copied prior to the date of the hearing.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 157, 11-6-2006; Ord. No. 176, 5-4-2009)
Secs. 94-102—94-120. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sec. 94-121. General intent and purpose, permitted uses, and dimensional
regulations.
(a)   General intent and purpose. It is the purpose of every district defined
in this article to protect sensitive environmental resources and to ensure that
all uses are adequately served by public facilities and services including
sewage disposal, potable water, fire protection, streets, and sidewalks. Each
district is intended to accommodate permitted uses and structures in a manner
that minimizes negative impacts on abutting properties and complements the
unique character and identity of the city through appropriate architectural
design including building size, building height, building materials, building
location, signage, landscaping, buffering, safe circulation of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and other pertinent development features.
(b)   Permitted uses. The use regulations established in this article are
uniform throughout this chapter for each zoning district and shall be applied
consistently to each class of land, building or structure within each district
in order to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of the city. A use of land or structures not specifically mentioned
in the provisions of this chapter shall, upon application, be classified by the
zoning official who may seek the recommendation of the planning commission
prior to making a final determination. Uses that are contrary to federal, state
or local laws or ordinances are prohibited. Within each zoning district there
are three permitted categories of use defined as follows:
   (1)   Uses permitted by right. No structure or land shall be used and no
structure constructed except for one or more of the uses specified as uses
permitted by right unless otherwise provided for in this chapter.
   (2)   Accessory uses. A use of land or of a structure, or portion thereof,
which is customarily and naturally incidental to, subordinate to, and devoted
exclusively to the principal use of the land or structure and located on the
same lot with the principal use.
   (3)   Uses authorized by special use permit. A use of land or of a
structure, or portion thereof, which may be permitted through the application
and approval of a special use permit as provided for in article VI of this
chapter.
(c)   General development standards. This subsection defines general
development standards for each zoning district. Any use of land or structures
shall comply with these development standards unless otherwise provided for in
this chapter in addition to all applicable federal, state, and local
requirements.
   (1)   Dimensional regulations.
      a.   Lot dimensional regulations.
         1.   See table 100-1 in chapter 100 and related footnotes.
         2.   See section
74-133(a) in chapter 74.
      b.   Building dimensional regulations. See table 100-2 in chapter 100 and
related footnotes.
   (2)   Site plan review. Refer to division 1 of article VII of this chapter.
   (3)   Signage requirements. Refer to chapter 58.
   (4)   Parking requirements. Refer to article IX of this chapter.
   (5)   Supplemental regulations. Refer to article V of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 188, 4-2-2012)
Sec. 94-122. AG: Single-family agriculture district.
(a)   Intent and purpose.  It is the primary purpose of this district to
provide opportunities for the continuation of agricultural activities while
also providing opportunities for single-family residential development patterns
and lifestyles of a more rural and suburban character than provided elsewhere
in the city. It is also expected that property within this district may
transition to other more intensive uses. It is the intent of this district that
development ensure a stable and healthy residential environment with suitable
open spaces. The lot area requirements contained herein are minimum
requirements but larger lot areas may be required where natural site conditions
dictate and/or public sewer or water is not available. Persons considering
residing within this district should be aware that the traditional odors,
noises, dust, pesticide applications, and other generally recognized
agricultural activities associated with farming may continue on a long term
basis in this district. However, in light of the comparatively high-density
character of the city and the associated concentration of persons and families,
including school and religious facilities, intensive agricultural activities
such as large concentrated livestock operations are not considered appropriate
uses in this district.
(b)   Uses permitted by right.
   (1)   Single-family dwelling.
   (2)   Farm as defined in chapter 1 that does not include farm animals except
as specified in section 122(c).
   (3)   Public and private conservation areas and structures for the
conservation of water, soils, open space, forest, and wildlife resources (refer
to section
94-192(8)).
   (4)   Public areas, such as forest preserves, game refuges, forest type
recreation areas, and similar public uses of low intensity residential
recreational character (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (5)   A state licensed residential facility, except adult foster care
facilities for care and treatment of persons released from or assigned to or at
adult correctional facilities (refer to section
94-192(8)).
(c)   Permitted accessory uses.
   (1)   Accessory uses and structures as defined by this chapter.
   (2)   Home occupations (refer to section
94-173(a)).
   (3)   The keeping of customary farm animals, with the exception of hogs and
poultry, on a parcel used wholly or in part as a single-family residence
located outside of a platted or condominium subdivision, which is operated for
non-commercial or hobby purposes involving five or less animal units, and which
is sited and operated in accordance with generally accepted agricultural and
management practices and regulations issued by the Michigan Department of
Agriculture. No accumulation of refuse from animals is permitted within 150
feet of any public right-of-way or 75 feet of any property line.
   (4)   Roadside stands selling products grown or produced in Ingham County
provided that contiguous space for off-street parking of customer vehicles is
furnished.
   (5)   Rooming houses but not to exceed two rooming units.
   (6)   A family day care home licensed under the provisions of MCL 722.111 in
which one but fewer than seven minor children are received for care and
supervision in a private home for periods of less than 24 hours a day,
unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult
member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption.
(d)   Uses authorized by special use permit.
   (1)   Religious institutions and structures for religious worship (refer to
section
94-192(8)).
   (2)   Day care facility or foster care facility providing care for more than
six but not more than 12 individuals in a state licensed residential facility,
except adult foster care facilities for care and treatment of persons released
from or assigned to or at adult correctional facilities (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (3)   Public buildings including nonresidential governmental, utility, or
public service use excluding storage yards, transformer stations, and
substations (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (4)   Public or private educational structures or uses (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (5)   Cemeteries, public or private.
   (6)   Kennels, veterinary hospitals, veterinary clinics.
   (7)   Public event facilities and fair grounds (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (8)   Public or private recreation facilities including parks, playgrounds,
ball fields, athletic fields, swimming pools, community centers, golf courses,
and country clubs (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (9)   Planned residential developments (PRD) (refer to section
94-192(1)).
   (10)   Agricultural land uses, including farms with farm animals, livestock
feeding operations and livestock production facilities, which are sited and
operated in accordance with generally accepted agricultural and management
practices and regulations issued by the Michigan Department of Agriculture. No
accumulation of refuse from animals is permitted within 150 feet of any public
right-of-way or 75 feet of any property line.
   (11)   Stables, riding stables and equestrian centers.
   (12)   Drilling and exploring operations for oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon
materials.
(e)   Development standards. Any use of land or structures in this district
shall comply with the general development standards of section
94-121(c) of this chapter. In addition, the following standards shall also
apply to any use of land or structures in this district.
   (1)   The roof pitch ratio of the principle structure shall be a minimum of
four foot vertical rise to 12 foot horizontal run.
   (2)   The principle structure shall be attached to a solid foundation.
   (3)   A principle residential structure shall provide a minimum of 15% of
the total living space area as non-living space available for storage.
   (4)   A principle residential structure shall be constructed to be
compatible in design and appearance with conventional onsite constructed
structures.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 157, 11-6-2006)
Sec. 94-123. RS-1, RS-2, RS-3: Single-family residential districts.
(a)   Intent and purpose. It is the primary purpose of these districts to
provide opportunities for single-family residential development patterns and
lifestyles of a more suburban and urban character than available in the AG
district. The RS districts provide for varying lot sizes and development
densities to allow for variation in housing preferences and market conditions
and to provide the city with reasonable discretion in determining the most
appropriate district under specific conditions including on-site and
surrounding conditions. It is the intent of these districts that development
ensure a stable and healthy residential environment with suitable open spaces
and to prohibit uses that undermine this intent.
(b)   Uses permitted by right.
   (1)   Single-family dwelling.
   (2)   Public or private park land of a non-commercial nature composed
primarily of vegetated open space where the principal mode of travel to the
site is non-motorized and the principal activities at the site are low-
intensity uses such as nature conservation and interpretive areas, children's
playgrounds, sled hills, and open lawn areas for non-structured play. Such park
land is not to be interpreted to include skateboard parks, motorized
activities, team sports including sports fields, and activities that are
generally accompanied by public gatherings and spectators (refer to section 94-
192(8)).
   (3)   A state licensed residential facility, except adult foster care
facilities for care and treatment of persons released from or assigned to or at
adult correctional facilities (refer to section
94-192(8)).
(c)   Permitted accessory uses.
   (1)   Accessory uses and structures as defined by this chapter.
   (2)   Home occupations (refer to section
94-173(a)).
   (3)   A family day care home licensed under the provisions of MCL 722.111 in
which one but fewer than seven minor children are received for care and
supervision in a private home for periods of less than 24 hours a day,
unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult
member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption.
(d)   Uses authorized by special use permit.
   (1)   Religious institutions and structures for religious worship (refer to
section
94-192(8)).
   (2)   Day care facility or foster care facility providing care for more than
six but not more than 12 individuals in a state licensed residential facility,
except adult foster care facilities for care and treatment of persons released
from or assigned to or at adult correctional facilities (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (3)   Public buildings including nonresidential governmental, utility, or
public service use excluding storage yards, transformer stations, and
substations (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (4)   Public or private educational structures or uses (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (5)   Planned residential developments (PRD) (refer to section
94-192(1)).
   (6)   Bed and breakfast (refer to section
94-192(7)).
   (7)   Public or private recreation facilities including parks, playgrounds,
ball fields, athletic fields, swimming pools, community centers, golf courses,
and country clubs (refer to section
94-192(8)).
(e)   Development standards. Any use of land or structures in this district
shall comply with the general development standards of section
94-121(c) of this chapter. In addition, the following standards shall also
apply to any use of land or structures in this district.
   (1)   The roof pitch ratio of the principle structure shall be a minimum of
four foot vertical rise to 12 foot horizontal run.
   (2)   The principle structure shall be attached to a solid foundation.
   (3)   A principle residential structure shall provide a minimum of 15% of
the total living space area as non-living space available for storage.
   (4)   A principle residential structure shall be constructed to be
compatible in design and appearance with conventional onsite constructed
structures.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 157, 11-6-2006)
Sec. 94-124. R2F: Two-family residential district.
(a)   Intent and purpose.  It is the primary purpose of this district to
provide opportunities for one-family and two-family residential development
patterns and lifestyles and to provide opportunities for small multiple-family
housing options with appropriate limitations. It is the intent of this district
that development ensure a stable and healthy residential environment with
suitable open spaces and to prohibit uses that undermine this intent.
(b)   Uses permitted by right.
   (1)   Single-family dwelling.
   (2)   Public or private park land of a non-commercial nature composed
primarily of vegetated open space where the principal mode of travel to the
site is non-motorized and the principal activities at the site are low-
intensity uses such as nature conservation and interpretive areas, children's
playgrounds, sled hills, and open lawn areas for non-structured play. Such park
land is not to be interpreted to include skateboard parks, motorized
activities, team sports including sports fields, and activities that are
generally accompanied by public gatherings and spectators (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (3)   A state licensed residential facility, except adult foster care
facilities for care and treatment of persons released from or assigned to or at
adult correctional facilities (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (4)   Two-family dwelling.
   (5)   Multiple-family dwelling, not to exceed three dwelling units and two
stories, provided no such dwelling is located within less than 750 feet from
another such dwelling within the R2F district as measured by a straight line
between the closest points of the subject lots.
(c)   Permitted accessory uses.
   (1)   Accessory uses and structures as defined by this chapter.
   (2)   Home occupations (refer to section
94-173(a)).
   (3)   Rooming houses but not to exceed two rooming units.
   (4)   A family day care home licensed under the provisions of MCL 722.111 in
which one but fewer than seven minor children are received for care and
supervision in a private home for periods of less than 24 hours a day,
unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult
member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption.
(d)   Uses authorized by special use permit.
   (1)   Religious institutions and structures for religious worship (refer to
section
94-192(8)).
   (2)   Day care facility or foster care facility providing care for more than
six but not more than 12 individuals in a state licensed residential facility,
except adult foster care facilities for care and treatment of persons released
from or assigned to or at adult correctional facilities (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (3)   Public buildings including nonresidential governmental, utility, or
public service use excluding storage yards, transformer stations, and
substations (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (4)   Public or private educational structures or uses (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (5)   Planned residential developments (PRD) (refer to section
94-192(1)).
   (6)   Bed and breakfast (refer to section
94-192(7)).
   (7)   Public or private recreation facilities including parks, playgrounds,
ball fields, athletic fields, swimming pools, community centers, golf courses,
and country clubs (refer to section
94-192(8)).
(e)   Development standards. Any use of land or structures in this district
shall comply with the general development standards of section
94-121(c) of this chapter. In addition, the following standards shall also
apply to any use of land or structures in this district.
   (1)   The roof pitch ratio of the principle structure shall be a minimum of
four foot vertical rise to 12 foot horizontal run.
   (2)   The principle structure shall be attached to a solid foundation.
   (3)   A principle residential structure shall provide a minimum of 15% of
the total living space area as non-living space available for storage.
   (4)   A principle residential structure shall be constructed to be
compatible in design and appearance with conventional onsite constructed
structures.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 157, 11-6-2006; Ord. No. 230, 9-28-2020)
Sec. 94-125. RM: Multiple-family residential district.
(a)   Intent and purpose. It is the primary purpose of this district to provide
housing opportunities and lifestyles in the form of multiple family dwellings,
such as apartments and townhouses. It is the intent of this district that
development ensure a stable and healthy residential environment with suitable
open spaces and to prohibit uses that undermine this intent.
(b)   Uses permitted by right.
   (1)   Single-family dwelling.
   (2)   Public or private park land of a non-commercial nature composed
primarily of vegetated open space where the principal mode of travel to the
site is non-motorized and the principal activities at the site are low-
intensity uses such as nature conservation and interpretive areas, children's
playgrounds, sled hills, and open lawn areas for non-structured play. Such park
land is not to be interpreted to include skateboard parks, motorized
activities, team sports including sports fields, and activities that are
generally accompanied by public gatherings and spectators (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (3)   A state licensed residential facility, except adult foster care
facilities for care and treatment of persons released from or assigned to or at
adult correctional facilities (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (4)   Two-family dwelling.
   (5)   Multiple-family dwellings, not to exceed eight dwelling units per
building and not to exceed two stories per building.
(c)   Permitted accessory uses.
   (1)   Accessory uses and structures as defined by this chapter.
   (2)   Home occupations (refer to section
94-173(a)).
   (3)   Rooming houses but not to exceed four rooming units.
   (4)   A family day care home licensed under the provisions of MCL 722.111 in
which one but fewer than seven minor children are received for care and
supervision in a private home for periods of less than 24 hours a day,
unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult
member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption.
(d)   Uses authorized by special use permit.
   (1)   Religious institutions and structures for religious worship (refer to
section
94-192(8)).
   (2)   Day care facility or foster care facility providing care for more than
six but not more than 12 individuals in a state licensed residential facility,
except adult foster care facilities for care and treatment of persons released
from or assigned to or at adult correctional facilities (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (3)   Public buildings including nonresidential governmental, utility, or
public service use excluding storage yards, transformer stations, and
substations (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (4)   Public or private educational structures or uses (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (5)   Planned residential developments (PRD) (refer to section
94-192(1)).
   (6)   Bed and breakfast (refer to section
94-192(7)).
   (7)   Multiple-family dwellings containing more than eight dwelling units
per building or more than two stories per building.
   (8)   Public or private recreation facilities including parks, playgrounds,
ball fields, athletic fields, swimming pools, community centers, golf courses,
and country clubs (refer to section
94-192(8)).
(e)   Development standards. Any use of land or structures in this district
shall comply with the general development standards of section
94-121(c) of this chapter. In addition, the following standards shall also
apply to any use of land or structures in this district.
   (1)   The roof pitch ratio of the principle structure shall be a minimum of
four foot vertical rise to 12 foot horizontal run.
   (2)   The principle structure shall be attached to a solid foundation.
   (3)   A principle residential structure shall provide a minimum of 15% of
the total living space area as non-living space available for storage.
   (4)   A principle residential structure shall be constructed to be
compatible in design and appearance with conventional onsite constructed
structures.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 157, 11-6-2006)
Sec. 94-126. MH: Manufactured home park residential district.
(a)   Intent and purpose.  It is the primary purpose of this district to
provide housing opportunities and lifestyles in the form of manufactured
housing communities as regulated under the Mobile Home Commission Act (MCL
125.2301 et seq.) and the Mobile Home Commission rules promulgated there under.
It is the purpose of this district that, because of the comparative speed at
which a manufactured housing community can be constructed and because of the
potential for a rapid increase in demand upon public infrastructure and
services, the district be established only where development will not outpace
the ability of the city to effectively manage and accommodate demands upon
public infrastructure and services and maintain the quality of life, local
character, and identity of the city. It is the intent of this district that
development ensure a stable and healthy residential environment with suitable
open spaces and to prohibit uses that undermine this intent.
(b)   Uses permitted by right.
   (1)   Manufactured home park in compliance with the state Mobile Home
Commission Act (MCL 125.2301 et seq.).
   (2)   Public or private park land of a non-commercial nature composed
primarily of vegetated open space where the principal mode of travel to the
site is non-motorized and the principal activities at the site are low-
intensity uses such as nature conservation and interpretive areas, children's
playgrounds, sled hills, and open lawn areas for non-structured play. Such park
land is not to be interpreted to include skateboard parks, motorized
activities, team sports including sports fields, and activities that are
generally accompanied by public gatherings and spectators (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (3)   Day care or foster care providing care for six or less individuals in
a state licensed residential facility, except adult foster care facilities for
care and treatment of persons released from or assigned to or at adult
correctional facilities (refer to section
94-192(8)).
(c)   Permitted accessory uses.
   (1)   Accessory uses and structures as defined by this chapter.
   (2)   Home occupations (refer to section
94-173(a)).
(d)   Uses authorized by special use permit.
   (1)   Religious institutions and structures for religious worship (refer to
section
94-192(8)).
   (2)   Day care facilities or foster care facility providing care for more
than six but not more than 12 individuals in a state licensed residential
facility, except adult foster care facilities for care and treatment of persons
released from or assigned to or at adult correctional facilities (refer to
section
94-192(8)).
   (3)   Public buildings including nonresidential governmental, utility, or
public service use excluding storage yards, transformer stations, and
substations (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (4)   Public or private educational structures or uses (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (5)   Multiple-family dwellings.
   (6)   Public or private recreation facilities including parks, playgrounds,
ball fields, athletic fields, swimming pools, community centers, golf courses,
and country clubs (refer to section
94-192(8)).
(e)   Development standards. Any use of land or structures in this district
shall comply with the general development standards of section
94-121(c) of this chapter. In addition, the following standards shall also
apply to any use of land or structures in this district.
   (1)   Parking requirements. Paved parking spaces for two vehicles are
required for each home site. The location of parking spaces on corner sites
shall not obstruct traffic visibility. Visitor parking spaces shall be provided
within 500 feet of each site at a ratio of one visitor space per three sites.
Refer to article IX of this chapter for additional requirements.
   (2)   Access. Ingress and egress shall be to a major public street which
shall be paved to a minimum width of 33 feet. Entrances and exits shall be
provided with adequate acceleration and deceleration lanes as required by the
city.
   (3)   Internal street width.
      a.   Two-way streets. A minimum width of 21 feet where no parallel
parking is permitted, 31 feet where parking is permitted on one side, and 41
feet where parking is permitted on both sides.
      b.   One-way streets. A minimum width of 13 feet where no parallel
parking is permitted, 23 feet where parking is permitted on one side, and 33
feet where parallel parking is permitted on both sides.
      c.   Dead-end streets. The vehicular turn-around for dead end streets
shall comply with the standards for a cul-de-sac in chapter 74.
   (4)   Utilities. All public utilities shall be provided by the park
developer and furnished to each site underground only. Fire hydrants shall be
provided with sufficient water supply pipe sizing as determined by the fire
chief and so spaced that no site is farther than 400 feet from a hydrant.
   (5)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks not less than four-feet wide shall be provided to
each manufactured home park site.
   (6)   Common open space. Each manufactured home park shall provide at least
eight percent of the total site area for common open space. The planning
commission may approve a common open space system for the manufactured home
park which is evenly distributed throughout the site and represents not less
than eight percent of the total site area.
   (7)   Landscaping. The manufactured home park shall meet the landscape
requirements as outlined in division 2 of article VII of this chapter. In
addition, trees of one-inch caliper minimum shall be installed and maintained
on both sides of the street at a maximum spacing of 50 feet. A perimeter green
belt of not less than 15 feet shall be provided which shall include fencing,
landscaping, or screening for adjacent land uses.
   (8)   Building permits. A building permit shall be issued before a
manufactured unit is placed on a site in a manufactured home park. A
manufactured unit may not be occupied until a certificate of occupancy has been
issued by the building official.
   (9)   Design and operating standards. The design, development, operation and
business practices of manufactured home parks shall be subject to all current
rules promulgated by the state Mobile Home Commission under the Mobile Home
Commission Act (MCL 125.2301 et seq.), which are hereby incorporated by
reference as part of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Secs. 94-127--94-130. Reserved.
Sec. 94-131. O-1: General office district.
(a)   Intent and purpose. It is the primary purpose of this district to provide
opportunities for business establishments that are predominantly comprised of
professional offices, medical offices, administrative offices, and other
businesses of a similar office character.
(b)   Uses permitted by right.
   (1)   Offices for attorneys, accountants, architects, engineers, and similar
professions.
   (2)   Offices for financial institutions, real estate offices, insurance
offices, investment brokers, credit reporting agencies, business management and
consulting, information technology services and consulting, and similar
business offices.
   (3)   Photographic studios.
   (4)   Professional services establishments providing human health care on an
outpatient basis.
   (5)   Medical, optical and dental offices and laboratories.
   (6)   Offices for non-profit organizations, professional associations, labor
unions, civic-social-fraternal organizations, political organizations, and
religious organizations.
   (7)   Music, dance, or performing arts studios.
   (8)   Personal service establishments.
   (9)   Single family residences (refer to section
94-123).
(c)   Permitted accessory uses.
   (1)   Accessory uses and structures as defined in this chapter.
   (2)   Automatic teller machines (walk-up only).
(d)   Uses authorized by special use permit.
   (1)   Religious institutions and structures for religious worship (refer to
section
94-192(8)).
   (2)   Day care facility or foster care facility providing care for more than
six but not more than 12 individuals in a state licensed residential facility,
except adult foster care facilities for care and treatment of persons released
from or assigned to or at adult correctional facilities (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (3)   Public buildings including nonresidential governmental, utility, or
public service use excluding storage yards, transformer stations, and
substations (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (4)   Public or private educational structures or uses (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (5)   Mortuaries and funeral homes (not including crematories).
   (6)   Research, development, and prototype manufacturing.
   (7)   Any use permitted in this district involving one or more structures
that occupy, either individually or collectively, more than 15,000 square feet
of gross floor area.
   (8)   Two family.
(e)   Development standards. Any use of land or structures in this district
shall comply with the general development standards of section
94-121(c) of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. 211, 9-5-2017; Ord. 218, 5-21-2018)
Sec. 94-132. O-2: Specialized office district.
(a)   Intent and purpose. It is the primary purpose of this district to provide
in areas of a predominantly residential character, opportunities for office
establishments which, because of the uses authorized and the required site
development standards, are deemed compatible with such residential areas and
which may be a benefit to such areas as a result of the services provided.
(b)   Uses permitted by right.
   (1)   Offices for professional practitioners in the component fields of
medicine, dentistry, psychiatry, and psychology including practitioners
committed to ministering to individual and community health. These offices can
include group or clinical practice and therapeutic paramedical services.
   (2)   Offices for the practice of law, professional services, business
services, scientific endeavors, creative activities, and the operation of
professional associations, societies, and institutes.
   (3)   Single family residence (refer to section
94-123).
(c)   Permitted accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures as defined in
this chapter.
(d)   Uses authorized by special use permit.
   (1)   Day care facility or foster care facility providing care for more than
six but not more than 12 individuals in a state licensed residential facility,
except adult foster care
      facilities for care and treatment of persons released from or assigned to
or at adult correctional facilities (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (2)   Two-family residences (refer to section
94-124).
   (3)   Bed and breakfast (refer to section
94-192(7)).
   (4)   Any use permitted in this district involving one or more structures
that occupy, either individually or collectively, more than 15,000 square feet
of gross floor area.
(e)   Development standards. Any use of land or structures in this district
shall comply with the general development standards of section
94-121(c) of this chapter.
(f)   Uses specifically prohibited. Consistent with the specialized purpose of
this district, the following uses are specifically prohibited.
   (1)   Veterinary clinics.
   (2)   Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, adult foster care large group
home (13 to 20 individuals), and adult foster care congregate facility (more
than 20 individuals).
   (3)   Retail sales and services.
   (4)   Personal services such as hair, cosmetic, and body care.
   (5)   Materials processing such as photo labs, chemical and testing labs.
   (6)   Mortuaries and funeral homes.
   (7)   Any land use which produces noise, glare, vibration, or odor at the
property line.
   (8)   Any land use which generates vehicular and/or pedestrian movement in
excess of that which is normally prevailing in the district or adjoining
districts.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. 218, 5-21-2018)
Secs. 94-133—94-140. Reserved.
Sec. 94-141. C-1: Central business district.
   (a)   Intent and purpose. It is the primary purpose of this district to
provide opportunities for business establishments in the area generally
referred to as the downtown center in the city master plan that address the
local day-to-day office, retail, and service needs of residents of, and
visitors to, the city. It is the intent of this district to prohibit uses that
draw from a regional population causing excessive traffic levels or that may
otherwise undermine the intended function and character of the historic
business area of the city.
   (b)   Uses permitted by right.
      (1)   Offices for financial institutions, real estate offices, insurance
offices, investment brokers, credit reporting agencies, business management and
consulting, information technology services and consulting, and similar
business offices.
      (2)   Photographic studios.
      (3)   Professional services establishments providing human health care on
an outpatient basis.
      (4)   Medical, optical and dental offices and laboratories.
      (5)   Offices for non-profit organizations, professional associations,
labor unions, civic-social-fraternal organizations, political organizations,
and religious organizations.
      (6)   Music, dance, or performing arts studios.
      (7)   Offices for professional practitioners in the component fields of
medicine, dentistry, psychiatry, and psychology including practitioners
committed to ministering to individual and community health. These offices can
include group or clinical practice and therapeutic paramedical services.
      (8)   Offices for the practice of law, professional services, business
services, scientific endeavors, creative activities and similar professions,
and the operation of professional associations, societies, and institutes.
      (9)   Retail trade, office and personal service businesses including
financial institutions, hardware and appliance stores, barber and beauty shops,
clothing, food, restaurants, with or without outdoor food and drink service
(refer to section
94-173(j), drug, variety, furniture, jewelry, self-service and/or drop off
laundry including dry cleaning performed off-premise, small job printing
provided non-explosive fluids are used and similar uses when conducted within a
building and no part of which consists of manufacturing or processing on the
premises.
      (10)   Bed and breakfast (refer to section
94-192(7)).
      (11)   Residential use located above a business use that meets the
minimum floor area standards of the RM multiple-family residential district.
      (12)   Establishments licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages where
consumption is allowed on and/or off the premises.
      (13)   Public assembly buildings, indoor theaters, and auditoriums.
   (c)   Permitted accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures as defined in
this chapter.
   (d)   Uses authorized by special use permit.
      (1)   Public buildings including nonresidential governmental, utility, or
public service use excluding storage yards, transformer stations, and
substations (refer to section
94-192(8)).
      (2)   Public or private educational structures or uses (refer to section
94-192(8)).
      (3)   Vehicular drive-in service when associated with a principal use.
      (4)   Off-street public or private parking facilities (refer to section
94-192(8)).
      (5)   Boarding and rooming houses.
      (6)   Pub, tavern, or restaurant with outdoor entertainment, including
music.
      (7)   Any use permitted in this district involving one or more structures
that occupy, either individually or collectively, more than 15,000 square feet
of gross floor area.
      (8)   Monopole telecommunication towers and antennae in accordance with
the requirements of section
94-173(d)(13)(a)5.
      (9)   Short-term dwelling rental (refer to section
94-192(11)).
   (e)   Development standards. Any use of land or structures in this district
shall comply with the general development standards of section
94-121(c) of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 156, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 161, 9-4-2007; Ord.
No. 166, 8-4-2008; Ord. No. 227, 10-7-2019; Ord. No. 239, 11-9-2022; Ord. No.
255, 11-18-2024)
Sec. 94-142. C-2: General commercial district.
   (a)   Intent and purpose. It is the primary purpose of this district to
provide opportunities for business establishments that address the retail and
service needs of both local and regional populations, including the highway
traveler and uses that draw from a regional market or which uniquely benefit
from close proximity to the US-127 interchanges.
   (b)   Uses permitted by right.
      (1)   Offices for financial institutions, real estate offices, insurance
offices, investment brokers, credit reporting agencies, business management and
consulting, information technology services and consulting, and similar
business offices.
      (2)   Photographic studios.
      (3)   Professional services establishments providing human health care on
an outpatient basis.
      (4)   Medical, optical and dental offices and laboratories.
      (5)   Offices for non-profit organizations, professional associations,
labor unions, civic-social-fraternal organizations, political organizations,
and religious organizations.
      (6)   Music, dance, or performing arts studios.
      (7)   Offices for professional practitioners in the component fields of
medicine, dentistry, psychiatry, and psychology including practitioners
committed to ministering to individual and community health. These offices can
include group or clinical practice and therapeutic paramedical services.
      (8)   Offices for the practice of law, professional services, business
services, scientific endeavors, creative activities and similar professions,
and the operation of professional associations, societies, and institutes.
      (9)   Retail trade, office and personal service businesses including
financial institutions, hardware and appliance stores, barber and beauty shops,
clothing, food, restaurants with or without outdoor food and drink service
(refer to section
94-173(j)), drug, variety, furniture, jewelry, self-service and/or drop-off
laundry including dry cleaning performed off-premise, small job printing
provided non-explosive fluids are used and similar uses when conducted within a
building and no part of which consists of manufacturing or processing on the
premises.
      (10)   Boarding and rooming houses.
      (11)   Bed and breakfast (refer to section
94-192(7)).
      (12)   Residential use located above a business use that meets the
minimum floor area standards of the RM multiple-family residential district.
      (13)   Establishments licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages where
consumption is allowed on and/or off the premises.
      (14)   Outdoor retail sales and service.
      (15)   Wholesale businesses.
      (16)   Plumbing, heating, retail sales and service and other similar
uses.
      (17)   Farm machinery and implement sales.
      (18)   Nursery, shrubbery, and garden supply centers.
      (19)   Public assembly buildings, indoor theaters, and auditoriums.
   (c)   Permitted accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures as defined in
this chapter.
   (d)   Uses authorized by special use permit.
      (1)   Community commercial centers (refer to section
94-192(5)).
      (2)   Public buildings including nonresidential governmental, utility, or
public service use excluding storage yards, transformer stations, and
substations (refer to section
94-192(8)).
      (3)   Public or private educational structures or uses (refer to section
94-192(8)).
      (4)   Vehicular drive-in service.
      (5)   Off-street public or private parking facilities.
      (6)   Communication towers and antennas (refer to section
94-173(d)).
      (7)   Hotels and motels.
      (8)   New and used motor vehicle, boat and trailer sales and service.
      (9)   Automobile service stations and automobile repair garages (refer
section
94-192(2)).
      (10)   Automatic and self-serve car wash.
      (11)   Mini-warehouse.
      (12)   Adult businesses (refer to section
94-173(h)).
      (13)   Pub, tavern, or restaurant with outdoor entertainment including
music.
      (14)   Any use permitted in this district involving one or more
structures that occupy, either individually or collectively, more than 15,000
square feet of gross floor area.
      (15)   The manufacturing, compounding, processing or treatment of
beverage and food products for wholesale.
   (e)   Development standards. Any use of land or structures in this district
shall comply with the general development standards of section
94-121(c) of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 156, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 166, 8-4-2008; Ord.
No. 256, 11-18-2024)
Sec. 94-143. C-3: Local commercial district.
(a)   Intent and purpose. It is the primary purpose of this district to provide
opportunities for business establishments that address the local day-to-day
office, retail, and service needs of the city's residents and visitors, and
nearby surrounding populations, and which are not located in the city's
historic business area (C-1 District) nor cater to the highway traveler or
serve more regional populations, for which the C-2 District has been
established.
(b)   Uses permitted by right.
   (1)   Offices for financial institutions, real estate offices, insurance
offices, investment brokers, credit reporting agencies, business management and
consulting, information technology services and consulting, and similar
business offices.
   (2)   Photographic studios.
   (3)   Professional services establishments providing human health care on an
outpatient basis.
   (4)   Medical, optical and dental offices and laboratories.
   (5)   Offices for non-profit organizations, professional associations, labor
unions, civic-social-fraternal organizations, political organizations, and
religious organizations.
   (6)   Music, dance, or performing arts studios.
   (7)   Offices for professional practitioners in the component fields of
medicine, dentistry, psychiatry, and psychology including practitioners
committed to ministering to individual and community health. These offices can
include group or clinical practice and therapeutic paramedical services.
   (8)   Offices for the practice of law, professional services, business
services, scientific endeavors, creative activities and similar professions,
and the operation of professional associations, societies, and institutes.
   (9)   Retail trade, office and personal service businesses including
financial institutions, hardware and appliance stores, barber and beauty shops,
clothing, food, restaurants with or without outdoor food and drink service
(refer to section 94-173(j)), drug, variety, furniture, jewelry, self-service
and/or drop-off laundry including dry cleaning performed off-premise, small job
printing provided non-explosive fluids are used and similar uses when conducted
within a building and no part of which consists of manufacturing or processing
on the premises.
   (10)   Bed and breakfast (refer to section
94-192(7)).
   (11)   Residential use located above a business use that meets the minimum
floor area standards of the RM multiple-family residential district.
   (12)   Establishments licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages where
consumption is allowed on and/or off the premises.
   (13)   Enclosed public assembly buildings, indoor theaters, and auditoriums.
   (14)   Veterinary clinics and hospitals, not including kennels.
(c)   Permitted accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures as defined in
this chapter.
(d)   Uses permitted by special use permit.
   (1)   Public buildings including nonresidential governmental, utility, or
public service use excluding storage yards, transformer stations, and
substations (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (2)   Public or private educational structures or uses (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (3)   Vehicular drive-in service when associated with a principal use.
   (4)   Off-street public or private parking facilities (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (5)   Boarding and rooming houses.
   (6)   Pub, tavern, or restaurant with outdoor entertainment, including
music.
   (7)   Community commercial centers (refer to section
94-192(5), except that the lot area and width shall comply with the standards
listed in section
94-121(c)(1)(a)).
   (8)   Outdoor retail sales and service (refer to section
94-192(10)).
(e)   Development standards. Any use of land or structures in this district
shall comply with the general development standards of section
94-121(c) of this chapter; except that any use permitted in this district
involving one or more structures, either individually or collectively, shall
not exceed 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. 156, passed 9-5-2006; Ord. 166, 8-4-2008; Ord.
No. 209, 6-5-2017)
Secs. 94-144—94-150. Reserved.
Sec. 94-151. M-1: Light manufacturing district.
(a)   Intent and purpose. It is the purpose of this district to provide
opportunities for a variety of industrial activities that can be generally
characterized as being of low intensity, including the absence of objectionable
external affects such as noise, fumes, vibrations, odors and traffic patterns,
and resulting in limited demands for additional public services. Manufacturing
operations in this district are generally intended to utilize previously
prepared materials as opposed to the use, alteration, or manipulation of raw
materials.
(b)   Uses permitted by right.
   (1)   Industrial parks.
   (2)   Research, development, and prototype manufacturing facilities and
offices.
   (3)   Warehousing, grain elevators, grain storage, refrigerated storage,
bulk storage of petroleum products, and general storage.
   (4)   Local and regional transit and passenger transportation facilities,
and trucking terminals, maintenance and service facilities.
   (5)   Laundry services.
   (6)   The manufacturing, compounding, processing or treatment of such
products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, and food products.
   (7)   Assembly of merchandise such as electrical appliances, and electronic
or precision instruments.
   (8)   Printing, lithographic, blueprinting, copying, and similar uses.
   (9)   Light manufacturing activity which, by the nature of the materials,
equipment, and processes utilized, is to a considerable extent clean, quiet,
and free from any objectionable or dangerous nuisance or hazard including any
of the following goods or materials:
      a.   Furniture and fixtures.
      b.   Paper and paperboard products.
      c.   Jewelry, silverware and plated ware.
      d.   Musical instruments and parts.
      e.   Toys and sporting goods.
      f.   Signs, advertising displays and canvas products.
      g.   Office computing and accounting equipment.
      h.   Jobbing and repair machine shops.
   (10)   Body and paint shops for automobiles and other vehicles.
(c)   Permitted accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures as defined in
this chapter.
(d)   Uses authorized by special use permit.
   (1)   Day care facilities serving the principal uses in the —1 district if
the planning commission determines that the nature of the principal use and/or
the relative location of the principal use or other uses to the day care
facility does not pose any significant threat to the safety of children
attending the day care facility (refer to section
94-192(8)).
   (2)   Public buildings for governmental utility or public service use,
including storage yards, transformer stations, and substations (refer to
section
94-192(8)).
   (3)   Communication towers and antennas (refer to section
94-173(d)).
   (4)   Sale of repaired, used vehicles, by special use permit as an accessory
use (refer to section
94-151(c)) to a paint and body shop for automobiles and other vehicles (refer
to section
94-151(b)(10)) which meets and complies with the following conditions and
criteria.
      a.   Only the sale of vehicles which have been purchased in a state of
disrepair and then repaired at the premises operated as a body and paint shop
pursuant to section
94-151(b)(10).
      b.   The sale of repaired vehicles shall not exceed a total sum of
eighteen (18) per calendar year.
      c.   No advertising shall occur to be placed on the premises indicating
the sale of used vehicles. This shall include no “for sale” signage on the
vehicle itself unless such vehicle is located on the premises where it is not
readily visible to the general public from any nearby roads.
      d.   No repaired vehicles shall be kept or stored at the front of the
site or at any location on the site where they are reasonably visible to the
general public from abutting roadways.
      e.   The owner maintain accurate records on the premises for each vehicle
purchased for repair reflecting the date of purchase, purchase price, seller, a
brief description of repairs accomplished, and sale price. Such records shall
be made available for inspection by the zoning official upon request.
      f.   Compliance with all other provisions of these Ordinances including
the requirements for a Special Use Permit as well as section
94-151(e).
      g.   The owner complies with any federal, state, or county ordinances or
requirements relative to the sale of vehicles, obtains all required licenses
and/or permits and maintains them in good standing at all times.
      h.   For purposes of the subsection
94-151(d)(4), the following definitions shall apply:
         1.   Vehicles shall means and refer to automobiles, trucks,
motorcycles, and similar items.
         2.   State of disrepair shall mean that the vehicle in question had
such damage or necessitated repairs to its power train, chassis, other non-
exterior visible items and/or body work and where the necessary repairs, at
normal retail pricing would exceed twenty-five (25%) of the retail value of the
vehicle, after repair.
(e)   Development standards. Any use of land or structures in this district
shall comply with the general development standards of section
94-121(c) of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 195, 11-18-2013)
Sec. 94-152. M-2: General manufacturing district.
(a)   Intent and purpose. It is the primary purpose of this district to provide
opportunities for a variety of industrial activities, including assembly,
packaging, fabrication, processing, compounding, and manufacturing processes
that rely on raw materials or previously prepared materials.
(b)   Uses permitted by right.
   (1)   Industrial parks.
   (2)   Research, development, and prototype manufacturing facilities and
offices.
   (3)   Warehousing, grain elevators, grain storage, refrigerated storage,
bulk storage of petroleum products, and general storage.
   (4)   Local and regional transit and passenger transportation facilities,
and trucking terminals, maintenance and service facilities.
   (5)   Laundry services.
   (6)   The manufacturing, compounding, processing or treatment of such
products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, and food products.
   (7)   Assembly of merchandise such as electrical appliances, and electronic
or precision instruments.
   (8)   Printing, lithographic, blueprinting, copying, and similar uses.
   (9)   Light manufacturing activity which by the nature of the materials,
equipment, and processes utilized are to a considerable extent clean, quiet,
and free from any objectionable or dangerous nuisance or hazard including any
of the following goods or materials:
      a.   Furniture and fixtures.
      b.   Paper and paperboard products.
      c.   Jewelry, silverware and plated ware.
      d.   Musical instruments and parts.
      e.   Toys and sporting goods.
      f.   Signs, advertising displays and canvas products.
      g.   Office computing and accounting equipment.
      h.   Jobbing and repair machine shops.
   (10)   Body and paint shops for automobiles and other vehicles.
   (11)   Heavy construction and general building companies.
   (12)   Industrial manufacturing, processing, or assembling of the following:
      a.   Prefabricated buildings and structural members.
      b.   Fabricated metal products including heavy machinery and industrial
equipment.
      c.   Stone, clay, and glass products.
      d.   Aluminum, bronze, copper, copper-alloy and other non-ferrous
castings.
      e.   Machinery such as engines, turbines, farm implements, and industrial
machinery and equipment.
      f.   Transportation equipment, such as motor vehicles and non-motorized
vehicles and parts.
      g.   Agricultural products.
      h.   Biological products, drugs, medicinal, chemical and pharmaceutical
products.
      i.   Monuments, cut stone and stone products.
(c)   Permitted accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures as defined in
this chapter.
(d)   Uses authorized by special use permit.
   (1)   Above ground storage of flammable liquids or combustible materials.
   (2)   Cement and asphalt plants.
   (3)   Communication towers and antennas (refer to section
94-173(d)).
   (4)   Junk and salvage yards (refer to section
94-192(3)).
   (5)   Livestock auction yard and livestock transport facilities.
   (6)   Refineries and power generating plants.
   (7)   Railroad terminals.
   (8)   Meat or poultry processing plant.
   (9)   Dry or liquid bulk blending plant.
   (10)   Nitrogen fertilizer and anhydrous ammonia.
   (11)   Repair and storage of damaged mobile homes.
   (12)   Racetrack or racing theatre (refer to section
94-192(9)).
   (13)   Casino (refer to section
94-192(9)).
   (14)   Removal and disposal of soil, sand, gravel, and other materials
(refer to section
94-192(4)).
   (15)   Drilling, exploring and production operations for oil, gas, or other
hydrocarbon materials.
(e)   Development standards. Any use of land or structures in this district
shall comply with the general development standards of section
94-121(c) of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Secs. 94-153—94-160. Reserved.
Sec. 94-161. PUD: Planned unit development district.
(a)   Intent and purpose. It is the purpose of this district to establish
provisions for the submission, review and approval of applications for specific
development proposals that rely on more flexible land use and development
standards than would normally be permitted by other districts. Such
developments shall be authorized as "planned unit developments" pursuant to
Section 4b of the City/Village zoning Act. It is the purpose of this district
that such PUD districts and development be established only where it is
determined that such approval supports the objectives of this chapter and
results in a benefit to the community that would not otherwise be realized
under traditional district provisions. Such benefit may address innovation in
land use and site layout; economy and efficiency in the use of land, natural
resources, energy, and the providing of public services and utilities; useful
open space; improved housing, employment, and shopping opportunities; and
greater compatibility of design and use with the characteristics of the project
area and between neighboring properties. This district and its provisions is
not intended as a device for ignoring this chapter or the planning upon which
it is based. To this end, the provisions of this section are intended to result
in land use and development substantially consistent with the planned
development pattern for the city, with modifications and departures from
generally applicable chapter requirements made in accordance with standards
provided in this section to ensure appropriate, fair, and consistent decision
making.
(b)   Uses permitted by right. Any land use authorized in this chapter is
permitted in this district as a principal use provided that public health,
safety, and welfare are not impaired and the essential character of the
proposed development meets the general intent of the Master Plan. Where the
Master Plan provides for residential development patterns, commercial and other
non-residential uses may be permitted as part of a development which also
contains a residential component, provided that the applicant demonstrates that
the residential uses will be predominant. The planning commission shall
determine predominance of use after taking into account the following criteria:
   (1)   The extent to which a non-residential use serves residents in the
development compared to others who travel to the site.
   (2)   The amount of traffic generated by the non-residential use.
   (3)   The operational hours of the non-residential use.
   (4)   The proportional land area allocated to the non-residential use.
   (5)   The building area allocated to the non-residential use.
(c)   Permitted accessory uses. Any accessory use authorized in this chapter is
permitted in this district if such use is consistent with the requirements of
subsection (b).
(d)   Uses authorized by special permit. Any use authorized by special use
permit in this chapter is permitted in this district as if such uses were
permitted by right. No special use permits are required in this district.
(e)   Site development standards and deviations. The site development standards
for all proposed individual land uses and facilities in this district shall
conform to this chapter and any applicable sections of this code, including
such standards pertaining to lot area and dimensions, density, lot coverage,
setbacks, building height, parking, loading, landscaping and screening, road
widths, and similar requirements, except that the city council may permit
deviations from such standards where such deviations will result in a higher
quality of development than would be possible without the deviations.
   (1)   Except where a deviation is granted, standards pertaining to lot area
and dimensions, density, lot coverage, and setbacks shall comply with those
standards of the district which most closely characterizes the dominant
character of the development.
   (2)   Except where a deviation is granted, mixed uses shall comply with the
regulations applicable for each individual use, including those standards
contained in article VI, of this chapter. If regulations are inconsistent with
each other, the regulations applicable to the most dominant use shall apply.
   (3)   Deviation from development standards may be authorized only upon a
finding by the city council that there are adequate features or planning
mechanisms designed into the project to achieve the objectives intended to be
accomplished with respect to each of the standards from which a departure is
sought.
(f)   PUD is a separate district. A PUD is permitted only in association with a
PUD District. The approval of a PUD shall require an amendment to the Zoning
Map constituting a part of this chapter so as to designate the property "PUD",
and the PUD shall be subject to the approved PUD application including a site
plan.
(g)   Minimum eligibility criteria. The following minimum eligibility criteria
shall be met for PUD approval.
   (1)   Recognizable and substantial benefit. The development shall result in
a recognizable and substantial benefit to the ultimate users of the project and
to the community. Such benefit must otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely under
the regulations of other districts.
   (2)   Availability and capacity of public services. The proposed type and
intensity of use shall not result in an unreasonable burden on public services,
facilities, and utilities.
   (3)   Compatibility with the master plan. The proposed development shall be
in accordance with the goals and policies of the City of Mason Master Plan.
   (4)   Compatibility with the intent and purpose. The proposed development
shall be consistent with the intent and purpose as stated in subsection (a).
   (5)   Economic impact. The proposed development shall not impede the
continued use or development of surrounding properties for uses permitted on
such properties.
   (6)   Unified control of property. The proposed development shall be under
single ownership or control such that there is a single person or entity having
responsibility for completing the project in conformity with this chapter and
the specifications of the PUD approval. This provision shall not prohibit a
transfer of ownership or control, upon due notice to the zoning official.
(h)   Approval procedure.
   (1)   Optional preapplication conference. Prior to the submission of a
preliminary site plan for PUD approval, the applicant may request a meeting
with one or more representatives of the planning commission and city council,
together with such consultants and other officials and staff as either the city
or the applicant deem appropriate. The purpose of the meeting is to inform city
officials of the general theme for the proposed development and to provide the
potential applicant with information regarding land development policies,
procedures, standards and requirements of the city pertaining to the proposed
development. Statements made in the course of a preapplication conference shall
not be legally binding commitments. At or prior to the preapplication
conference (or conferences), the applicant may present a general sketch plan of
the proposed PUD that provides an overview of the proposed project.
   (2)   Preliminary plan: application, public hearing, and action.
      a.   The applicant shall submit to the zoning official 20 copies of a PUD
application supplied by the zoning official, which shall also include a
preliminary site plan. The zoning official shall forward copies to the planning
commission. The preliminary site plan shall comply with the requirements of
division 1 of article VII of this chapter and include a detailed text
description of the proposed development and all requirements from which the
applicant is seeking a departure. The zoning official shall transmit copies of
the PUD application to other agencies and individuals selected to review such
plans including city staff, city consultants, the county drain commissioner,
and the county road commission.
      b.   The planning commission shall review the application, including
comments by any reviewing agencies or individuals, and shall be entitled to
make reasonable inquiries of and receive answers from the applicant. Following
review of the application, including the preliminary site plan, the planning
commission shall act on the application as if it were an application for
rezoning, and in doing so, shall follow the provisions of article XII of this
chapter.
      c.   Following the public hearing and any fact finding and additional
studies, the planning commission shall prepare written findings regarding the
application's conformance with the applicable requirements of this chapter,
including the site plan approval standards of division 1 of article VII of this
chapter and the special use approval standards of section 94-191(f). The
planning commission shall recommend to the city council to approve, deny, or
approve with conditions the application, including the preliminary site plan.
The planning commission shall prepare and transmit a report to the city council
stating its conclusions and recommendation, the basis for its decision, and any
recommended conditions relating to an affirmative decision.
      d.   After holding a public hearing on the application with notice as
provided in section
94-101 of this chapter, the city council shall take final action to approve,
deny, or approve with conditions the application, including the preliminary
site plan. In reviewing the application, the city council shall consider the
applicable requirements of this chapter, including the site plan approval
standards of division 1 of article VII of this chapter and the special use
approval standards of section
94-191(f). The city council shall prepare and transmit a report to the
applicant stating its conclusions and decision, the basis for its decision, and
any conditions relating to an affirmative decision. The effect of city council
approval of the application shall be:
         1.   To authorize the fundamental PUD character and layout embodied in
the preliminary plan, including any conditions applied to the approval, prior
to the preparation of a final site plan.
         2.   To authorize a change to the zoning map to classify the subject
property as PUD upon approval of the final site plan by the city council.
   (3)   Final plan and permit issuance:
      a.   Within 24 months following receipt of preliminary plan approval, the
applicant shall submit to the zoning official 20 copies of a final plan, or
phase one of a final plan, including a final site plan conforming with division
1 of article VII of this chapter and including a detailed text description of
the proposed development and all regulations from which the applicant is
requesting a departure. If the final plan has not been submitted within such
period, the preliminary plan approval shall become null and void unless the
city council extends the time for submission of the final plan upon a showing
by the applicant that no material change of circumstances has occurred having
bearing on the original action of the city council.
      b.   The zoning official shall record the date of the receipt of the
final site plan and transmit copies to the planning commission and other
agencies or individuals selected to review such plans including city staff,
city consultants, the county drain commissioner, and the county road
commission.
      c.   The planning commission shall review the final plan and shall be
entitled to make reasonable inquiries of and receive answers from the
applicant. The planning commission shall prepare and transmit a report to the
city council stating its conclusions and recommendation, the basis for its
recommendation, and any conditions relating to an affirmative decision. The
planning commission shall recommend to the city council to approve, deny, or
approve with conditions the final plan. The city council shall take final
action to approve, deny, or approve with conditions the final plan. In
reviewing the final plan, the city council shall consider the applicable
requirements of this chapter, including the site plan approval standards of
division 1 of article VII of this chapter and the special use approval
standards of section 94-191(f). The city council shall prepare and transmit a
report to the applicant stating its conclusions and decision, the basis for its
decision, and any conditions relating to an affirmative decision.
      d.   If and when the final site plan is approved, all improvements and
use of the property shall be in conformity with the final site plan and any
conditions imposed. The applicant shall record an affidavit with the register
of deeds containing the legal description of the entire project, specifying the
date of approval, and declaring that all future improvements will be carried
out in accordance with the approved PUD unless a revision is approved by the
city council upon request or approval of the applicant or applicant's
transferee and/or assignees. Upon receipt of the recorded documents, the zoning
official shall issue a permit for that portion of the PUD project receiving
final site plan approval and the city administrator shall amend the zoning map
of the city.
(i)   Phasing.
   (1)   Where a project is proposed for construction in phases, the project
shall be so designed that each phase, when completed, shall be capable of
standing on its own in terms of the presence of services, facilities, and open
space, and shall contain the necessary components to insure protection of
natural resources and the health, safety and welfare of the users of the PUD
and residents, businesses and properties of the surrounding area.
   (2)   In developments that include mixed components such as residential and
commercial, the city council may require that a specified portion of one
component be constructed prior to the initiation of construction of other
components, to ensure the intent and spirit of the PUD as approved. For
example, if a city area is planned for predominantly residential development
and a PUD application is approved that consists of both residential and
commercial components, the city council may require that a certain portion of
the residences be constructed prior to the initiation of construction of the
commercial component.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 157, 11-6-2006)
Secs. 94-162—94-170. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
Sec. 94-171. Intent and purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to establish miscellaneous regulations which
shall apply equally and uniformly to all zoning districts.
Sec. 94-172. General regulations.
(a)   Rear dwelling prohibited. No building in the rear of and on the same lot
with a principal building shall be used for residential purposes except for
watchmen, caretakers and domestic employees whose employment is related to the
functions of the principal building, provided that all other requirements of
this chapter are satisfied.
(b)   Uses of structures for temporary dwellings. No structure shall be used
for dwelling purposes that does not meet the minimum standards, as defined in
this chapter and the building code. No garage, or other accessory building,
trailer coach, cellar, basement, tent, cabin, or other partial structure,
whether of a fixed or portable construction, shall be erected or moved onto a
lot and used for any dwelling purpose unless said structure is in compliance
with this chapter and the building code.
(c)   Temporary buildings. Temporary buildings shall be permitted by the
building official in connection with the issuance of a building permit for uses
incidental to permitted construction work. Such buildings shall be removed upon
the completion of the construction work or upon the building permit becoming
invalid unless an extension is granted pursuant to section 94-96(a).
(d)   Site development regulations.
   (1)   Residential front yard use. On any lot in a residential district and
on any lot used for residential purposes, that portion lying in front of the
building line shall be used only for landscaping purposes and nothing other
than landscaping materials, permitted signs and permitted driveways shall be
parked, placed, erected, or planted thereon.
   (2)   Fences and walls. Except as otherwise permitted in this chapter,
fences or walls shall have a maximum height of six feet and shall be ornamental
in design. No fence or wall with a height greater than three feet shall be
constructed in the front yard of a residential building.
   (3)   Vision clearance across corner lot. (See figure 100-103 in chapter
100).
      a.   Nothing shall interfere with traffic visibility across the
triangular area of a lot formed by the intersection of two public or private
streets or combination thereof measuring 25 feet along the road right-of-way
lines in each direction from the corner of said lot. Nothing shall interfere
with traffic visibility across the triangular area adjacent to the intersection
of a public or private street and a driveway formed by measuring seven feet
along the driveway lines and 60 feet along the road right-of-way in each
direction from the edge of said driveway. No fence, structure, or planting
taller than three feet shall be erected or maintained in said triangular areas
except trees with branches no lower than eight feet above the ground. However,
nothing shall be permitted in the triangular area adjacent to a driveway.
      b.   In all manufacturing zones, where corner lots abut a railroad and a
major or minor street, no structure, fence, or plantings shall be erected or
maintained within a triangular area formed by measuring 200 feet along the
property lines in each direction from the corner of said lot. However, if the
intersection is controlled by automatic flashers installed pursuant to legal
authority, the clear vision area may be reduced in accordance with subsection
94-172(h)(3)a.
   (4)   Residential rear yard measurement. Wherever there is a public alley
abutting the rear of a residential lot for the full width of that lot,
measurement of the depth of the abutting rear yard may be made to the center of
such alley.
   (5)   Rear yard use. A rear yard may be occupied by buildings or structures
for accessory uses permitted in the district provided that such structures
comply with subsection
94-173(g)(4) and other applicable provisions of this chapter and the building
code.
   (6)   One main building per lot. Every building hereafter moved, erected or
structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein provided and, except
in the case of an approved planned unit development as herein defined, there
shall be no more than one main building and permitted accessory buildings on
one lot within a residential zone.
   (7)   Restriction on building location. No building permit shall be issued
for any building or structure at any location within the proposed future
outside lines of any new, extended, or widened street, avenue, place, or other
public way, or any park, playground, or other public grounds or extensions
thereof as shown on any certified plat adopted pursuant to Public Act No. 222
of 1943, (MCL 125.51 et seq.). Any owner denied a permit within such area shall
have the right to appeal such decision to the zoning board of appeals pursuant
to the procedures and review standards provided at Section 4 of Public Act 222
of 1943 (MCL 125.54).
   (8)   Buildings to be moved.
      a.   Any building or structure, which has been wholly or partially
erected on any premises, shall not be moved from, or placed upon, any lot in
the city until a building permit has been issued. Any such building or
structure shall fully conform to all the provisions of this chapter in the same
manner as a new building or structure.
      b.   Before a building permit may be issued for moving a building or
structure, the building official shall inspect same and shall determine if it
is in a safe condition to be moved, whether it may be reconditioned to comply
with the building code and other city requirements for the use and occupancy
for which it is to be used, and whether it may be moved.
      c.   Trees removed from the public right-of-way to facilitate the move of
a building or structure, other than nuisance trees as determined by the city,
shall be replaced by the party to whom the building permit is issued.
         1.   Trees used to replace removed trees shall be of a species and
size approved by the tree commission of the city. Tree replacement shall be
according to the following:
            i.   Each removed tree of over two-inch caliper up to 15-inch
caliper shall be replaced by one new tree.
            ii.   Each removed tree of over 15-inch caliper up to 35-inch
caliper shall be replaced by two new trees.
            iii.   Each removed tree of over 35-inch caliper shall be replaced
by three new trees.
         2.   All replacement trees shall be planted within one year of tree
removal and in locations determined by the city.
         3.   A performance guarantee in accordance with section
94-100 of this chapter may be required to assure compliance with these
requirements for tree replacement.
   (9)   Building grades. Any building requiring yard space shall be located at
such an elevation that a minimum sloping grade of not less than two percent
shall be maintained for a minimum distance of ten feet from the building to
cause the flow of surface water to run away from the walls of the building.
When a new building is constructed on a vacant lot adjacent to an existing
building, the existing established grade of the adjacent lot shall be
considered in determining the grade around the new building and the yard around
the new building shall be established so as to not increase the run-off of
surface water onto adjacent property. Grades shall be approved, in writing, by
the building official.
   (10)   Double frontage lots. On double frontage or through lots, a front
yard, as prescribed for the district, shall be provided on both streets.
   (11)   Removal of soil, sand or other materials. Top soil, sand, gravel or
other materials from the land shall not be removed from any premises within the
city except for the purposes of necessary excavation for the construction of
permitted structures, or in accordance with an approved special use permit.
   (12)   Mobile home and trailer dwellings prohibited. No mobile home, motor
home, house trailer, trailer coach or trailer shall be used as a dwelling or
place for human habitation, living, sleeping or eating, in the city, except as
approved by the building official or otherwise provided in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Sec. 94-173. Supplemental use regulations.
(a)   Home occupation.
   (1)   Intent. It is the intent of this section to set forth the requirements
for establishing a home occupation as an accessory use of a single-family
detached dwelling unit. Such home occupations could involve crafting,
electronic or mail order sale or marketing of goods, the provision of services,
or instruction in a craft or the fine arts which is conducted entirely within
the dwelling unit by one or more persons, all of whom reside within the
dwelling, and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling as a residence.
   (2)   Location. Home occupations shall be allowed only as an accessory use
in those districts specifically allowing such use as provided in article IV of
this chapter.
   (3)   Regulations and standards. Home occupations shall meet the following
regulations and standards:
      a.   There shall be no outdoor on-site storage of materials, inventory,
equipment, or accessory items, or display of materials, inventory, goods, or
supplies used in the conduct of the home occupation.
      b.   Only members of the immediate family who reside on the premises
shall be employed in any part of the operation of the home occupation. All
activities related to the home occupation shall be carried on entirely within
the dwelling unit.
      c.   Home occupations are permitted only in the principal structure/
building. However, in no case shall more than 25 percent or 480 square feet,
whichever is smaller, of the gross floor area of the principal building be
utilized for a home occupation.
      d.   A home occupation shall not generate an undue amount of traffic in
excess of that prevailing or expected for the general area in which it is
located. The home occupation shall not generate more than ten round trips per
day, excluding trips generated by the occupants of the home. Adequate parking
spaces shall be provided on the premises for persons patronizing the
establishment.
      e.   Home occupations shall maintain at least two on-site parking spaces
dedicated for the permanent residents. All parking spaces shall be located in
compliance with article IX of this chapter.
      f.   The establishment of a home occupation shall not necessitate
exterior modification or alter the fire rating, except as may be required by
the building official, of any structure/building on the property.
      g.   Home occupations shall not be open to the public except between the
hours of 7 a.m. to 8 p.m., unless otherwise provided by special use permit.
      h.   No food or beverages shall be sold to be consumed on the premises.
      i.   No amusement games or devices shall be provided for or by customers
on the premises.
      j.   Uses prohibited as home occupations shall include the following:
         1.   Convalescent and nursing homes.
         2.   Day care centers or nursery schools, except as provided for in
this chapter.
         3.   Funeral homes.
         4.   Kennels.
         5.   Medical or dental clinics or hospitals, or animal hospitals.
         6.   Refuse collection businesses.
         7.   Repair of automobiles, motorcycles, boats, trailers, trucks or
similar equipment or vehicles.
      k.   The use of a detached garage or accessory building for home
occupation is not permitted.
      l.   All signs shall be in compliance with the provisions of section
58-127(a)(1) in chapter 58.
      m.   The home shall be in compliance with all other applicable laws and
ordinances.
(b)   Solid waste disposal.
   (1)   Intent. Receptacles for the temporary storage of refuse or recyclable
material are permitted in all districts as an accessory use to any use other
than single-family residential uses, subject to the requirements of this
section and division 2 of article VII of this chapter. The requirements of this
section shall apply to any receptacle commonly referred to as a dumpster or any
other container or group of containers having a total capacity of more than
four 30-gallon cans.
   (2)   Location. All receptacles shall be located in a rear or side yard,
shall not encroach upon required parking areas, and shall be clearly accessible
to servicing vehicles. Receptacles shall be located as far as practicable from
any adjoining residential district or use but shall in no instance be located
closer than 15 feet, or the minimum side yard setback of the particular zoning
district in which it is located, whichever is greater, of any residential
property line or district.
   (3)   Regulations and standards.
      a.   Screening. Receptacles shall be screened from view from adjoining
property and public streets and thoroughfares. Receptacles shall be screened on
three sides with a permanent wall or fence of not less than the minimum height
required in section
94-241(h) or two feet above the highest wall of the enclosed receptacle,
whichever is higher. The fourth side of the receptacle screening shall be
equipped with an opaque lockable gate that is the same height as the other
sides. The wall or fence should blend with the materials, color and style of
the development.
      b.   The location and method of screening of all receptacles shall be
shown on the site plans and shall be subject to the approval of the designated
site plan approval body in accordance with division 1 of article VII of this
chapter.
      c.   Receptacle locations shall be consolidated to minimize the number of
collection sites and located so as to reasonably equalize the distance from the
buildings they serve.
      d.   Receptacles shall be situated so as to not cause excessive nuisance
or offense to occupants of the development they serve or of nearby buildings.
      e.   Concrete pads of appropriate size and construction shall be provided
for all receptacles regulated by this section. Aprons shall be provided for
loading of a single receptacle with a capacity of one and one-half cubic yards
or more.
      f.   If a receptacle enclosure is situated directly adjacent to parking
spaces or drives, it shall be protected at its base by concrete curb blocks.
      g.   The area inside and around the outside of a receptacle enclosure
shall be maintained and litter free at all times. The enclosure shall also be
maintained and repaired as necessary.
   (4)   Compost piles. Composting shall be limited to manufactured commercial
compost containers or equivalent containers and shall be regulated the same as
other types of receptacles covered in this section.
(c)   Satellite dish antenna.
   (1)   Intent. The use of a satellite dish antenna shall be permitted in all
districts as an accessory use. A satellite dish antenna is an apparatus capable
of receiving communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located
in a planetary orbit.
   (2)   Location.
      a.   No satellite dish antenna may be located in any front yard or side
yard open space unless mounted to and located completely within four feet of a
building wall.
      b.   No satellite dish antenna may be located within any required parking
area.
      c.   No satellite dish antenna may be constructed such that any part of
the antenna or supporting structure is closer to a lot line than the minimum
setback for the district in which the antenna is located.
      d.   Satellite dish antennas greater than 24 inches in diameter are
prohibited on the roof or walls of any building in residentially zoned
districts.
      e.   Roof-mounted satellite dish antennas shall be mounted directly upon
the roof of a building and shall not be mounted upon appurtenances such as
chimneys, towers, poles, or spires.
   (3)   Regulations and standards.
      a.   The placement of any satellite dish antenna greater than 24 inches
in diameter by any means in any zoning district is prohibited unless a site
plan thereof is approved by the planning commission in accordance with the
standards contained in division 1 of article VII of this chapter.
      b.   Only one satellite dish antenna per residential dwelling unit shall
be permitted.
      c.   All satellite dish antennas and the construction and installation
thereof shall conform to the building code.
      d.   The surface of any satellite dish antenna shall be painted or
treated so as not to reflect glare from sunlight or artificial lighting.
      e.   No satellite dish antenna shall be:
         1.   Linked physically to or with any structure which is not on the
same lot.
         2.   In excess of an overall diameter of 12 feet.
         3.   Located such that any portion of a roof-mounted antenna is more
than ten feet above the highest point of a roof.
         4.   Located such that any portion of a roof-mounted antenna is less
than four feet from the edge of the roof.
         5.   Supported by structural supports other than corrosion-resistant
metal.
         6.   Wired to a receiver, except by wires located at least four inches
beneath the ground in a rigid conduit or other wiring configuration approved by
the building official.
(d)   Wireless telecommunications towers and antennas. The purpose of this
section is to establish the procedures and guidelines for the siting of
wireless communications towers and antennas. In furtherance of this purpose,
the city shall give due consideration to the master plan, zoning map, existing
land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the
location of towers and antennas, subject to the following definitions, review
requirements, and criteria. The objectives of this section are to:
   (1)   Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts
of towers and antennas;
   (2)   Direct the location of towers to appropriate nonresidential areas;
   (3)   Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
   (4)   Encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary
option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;
   (5)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent
possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
   (6)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that
minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful
design, positioning, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging
techniques;
   (7)   Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to
provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently;
   (8)   Consider the public health and safety of communication towers;
   (9)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
   (10)   Applicability. All towers or antennas in the city shall be subject to
these regulations, except as provided in the following.
      a.   Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas. Other than
the provisions of subsections
94-173(d)(11)e. and f., this chapter shall not govern any tower, or the
installation of any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned by or
operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used
exclusively for receive-only antennas.
      b.   AM array. For purposes of implementing this chapter, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which
functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower.
Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the
outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units
may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by right.
   (11)   General requirements.
      a.   Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing
structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or
tower on such lot.
      b.   Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including
setback requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other such requirements,
the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or
towers may be located on leased parcels within such lot.
      c.   Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:
         1.   Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or,
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so
as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
         2.   At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and
surrounding buildings.
         3.   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral
color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the
supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as
visually unobtrusive as possible.
      d.   Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required
by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
      e.   State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of
the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and
antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the
towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such towers and
antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six
months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a
different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal
agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised
standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower
or antenna at the owner's expense.
      f.   Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural
integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in the state construction codes and the
applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries
Association. If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a tower fails to
comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or
property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner
shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards.
Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna as a public nuisance
at the owner's expense.
      g.   Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this chapter and shall not be regulated or permitted as
essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.
      h.   Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
      i.   Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements of
subsection
94-173(d)(13)b.
   (12)   Uses permitted by administrative review. The zoning official may
administratively approve a permit for any wireless communication facility for
which all support equipment is screened from view and which complies with one
of the following criteria:
      a.   A roof mounted antenna not exceeding ten feet in height and located
on a nonresidential structure.
      b.   Antennas and supporting equipment cabinets and structures which are
architecturally integrated with a principal building or structure so as not to
be recognized as antennas.
      c.   Up to three whip antennas with a maximum height of 20 feet.
      d.   Collocation of a wireless communication antenna on an existing
monopole support structure, on a public water tower, athletic field light
standard, electrical utility transmission tower or distribution pole, or on an
existing tower or pole within the right-of-way or easement of an electrical
utility company in any district of the city, provided:
         1.   The antenna does not extend more than 30 feet above the highest
point of the structure;
         2.   The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations;
and
         3.   The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
   (13)   Uses permitted by special use permit. No wireless communications
facilities other than those permitted by administrative review by subsection
94-173(d)(12) of this chapter shall be permitted except subject to the granting
of a special use permit after review and approval by the planning commission
pursuant to article VI of this chapter, subject to the general standards
applicable to a special use permit as set forth at subsection
94-191(f), the goals set forth at subsection
94-191(a), and the following additional standards:
      a.   Location criteria.
         1.   Facilities shall be sited to minimize views to the extent
reasonably possible from residential areas or the public right-of-way.
         2.   Support structures will be located in all geographic districts to
minimize their view from neighboring properties and public rights-of-way.
         3.   Mounted wireless communication facilities are permitted in all
districts except single-family and two-family districts, except that roof-
mounted antennas are not permitted in any residential district.
         4.   Monopoles and similar support structures are permitted as a
principle or accessory use only in the M-2 general manufacturing district, and
those portions of the M-1 light manufacturing district, and those commercial
districts lying south of a line created by Kipp Road extended and north and
west of lines created by North Street and Buhl Street extended.
         5.   Monopoles not to exceed 150 feet in height are also permitted in
the C-1 central business district by special use permit, provided the structure
is located on publicly-owned property and is constructed and maintained for
joint use by three or more users, at least one of which shall be a local or
state governmental agency operating communication facilities for public safety
services as defined under the Homeland Security Act.
         6.   Monopoles and similar support structures are prohibited in parks,
school grounds or other areas heavily trafficked by children.
         7.   Lattice or guyed towers or antennas or similar structures are
prohibited in all districts.
      b.   Development and design standards.
         1.   Setbacks.
            i.   Wireless communications facilities including all anchors or
pads shall be sited so that the anchors and pads for the structure meet the
minimum setback requirements of the zoning district where they are located and
do not cross into another zoning district.
            ii.   Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the
minimum standards shown in table 100-3 in chapter 100.
            iii.   Mounted wireless communication facilities shall meet the
required setbacks for the structure upon which they are located and shall be
situated to provide for maximum safety on the site.
         2.   Spacing requirements. Monopole tower structures shall be
separated from all other towers by a minimum of 750 feet. For purposes of this
subsection, the separation distance between towers shall be measured by drawing
or following a straight line between the base of the existing or approved
structure and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed
tower. The minimum tower separation distance shall be calculated and applied
irrespective of city jurisdictional boundaries.
         3.   Height of the support structure must be the minimum necessary to
support the required coverage; however, in no case shall the antenna or its
support structure exceed:
            i.   For a single user, 90 feet.
            ii.   For two users, 120 feet.
            iii.   For three or more users, 150 feet.
         4.   Support structures shall be painted in unobtrusive colors, unless
in accordance with any other statutory or regulatory requirements.
         5.   Where an equipment building accompanying the support structure is
erected, it shall be designed to be compatible with the adjacent architecture.
         6.   Landscaping and visual impact requirements.
            i.   Landscaping shall be provided in sufficient quantity around
the perimeter of the required security fencing, as well as adjacent to any
buildings and anchors. Site access entrances shall also be landscaped. This
information shall be presented on a landscape plan.
            ii.   When located on an otherwise undeveloped site, the existing
natural vegetation of the property shall be maintained to the greatest extent
possible. The applicants shall provide information on a landscape plan
regarding existing vegetation which is proposed to be removed and methods for
replacement. In no case shall an entire site be graded and/or cleared for
installation of a wireless communication tower.
            iii.   Whether a freestanding or mounted wireless communications
facility is proposed, the applicants shall demonstrate how the accessory
building's design will limit adverse visual impacts to neighboring property
owners.
            iv.   Lighting at the facility and accessory structures shall be
designed so not to adversely affect adjacent property owners and shall be in
compliance with FAA standards.
      c.   Safety and security requirements.
         1.   All new wireless communication facilities shall be designed
within the applicable ANSI/EIA standards (RSA-22, Revision E), and so as not to
be in conflict with existing airport locations and flight patterns.
         2.   The applicant shall, in conjunction with the application, submit
a statement that is certified and sealed by a licensed architect or engineer
indicating that the proposed wireless communication facility is in compliance
with all Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations and all building
code requirements.
         3.   All wireless communication facilities shall maintain
comprehensive general liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do
business in Michigan with combined limits of not less than $1,000,000, and the
applicant shall supply the city with proof of same prior to construction.
         4.   Security fencing shall be installed completely around
freestanding facilities, any accessory utility structures and guy anchors.
Access shall be provided only by a locked gate. Security fencing shall not be
required for mounted facilities.
         5.   All towers or similar facilities, antenna structures, accessory
utility structures and guy anchors and pads shall be equipped with anti-
climbing devices.
      d.   Collocation.
         1.   In order to maximize the efficiency of the provision of wireless
communication services, while also minimizing the impact of such facilities on
the community, collocation shall be encouraged. All applicants for wireless
communication facilities shall be required to provide information regarding the
feasibility of collocation at proposed or existing sites. Furthermore, all
applicants shall be required to provide a notarized letter of intent to lease
excess space on the proposed facility and commit itself to the following:
            i.   Respond to any requests for information from another potential
shared use applicant;
            ii.   Negotiate in good faith and allow for leased shared use if an
applicant demonstrates that it is technically feasible; and
            iii.   Make no more than a reasonable charge for a shared use
lease.
         2.   Should collocation be proposed at a wireless communication
facility, accessory mechanical buildings shall either be situated directly
adjacent to or abutting each other and separated by a firewall, shall be placed
underground, or shall be designed in a manner which limits the number and size
of the building(s) on the site. On-site constraints, such as existing
topographical and other natural features, may be considered when reviewing a
proposed collocation design. Accessory mechanical buildings shall be designed
to be consistent in design, style and exterior appearance. Review and approval
of accessory mechanical building(s) at a collocation-site shall be made by the
planning commission.
      e.   Abandonment.
         1.   Wireless communication facilities which have been abandoned or
are unused or disconnected from the network for a period of 12 months shall be
immediately removed from the site at the cost of the facility applicant or
successor.
         2.   Upon removal of a tower from a site, the foundation shall also be
removed to a depth of at least six feet. Additionally, the fencing and
accessory structure(s) shall be demolished and removed from the site at the
cost of the facility applicant or successor.
      f.   Application requirements. Applications for a special use permit as
set forth in this section shall contain the following in addition to the
requirements or article VI of this chapter:
         1.   An explanation of the need of the applicant's clientele for this
communications capacity.
         2.   Site and landscape plans drawn to scale.
         3.   The method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
         4.   A report including a description of the tower with technical
support for the tower design.
         5.   Documentation establishing the structural integrity of the tower
for the proposed uses.
         6.   The general capacity of the tower, and information necessary to
assure that ANSI standards are met.
         7.   A statement of intent on whether excess space will be leased.
         8.   Proof of ownership or authorization to utilize the proposed site.
         9.   Copies of any easements necessary.
         10.   An analysis of the area containing existing topographical
contours.
         11.   A presentation size map which shows an inventory of existing and
proposed tower installations within the city and within one mile of the border
thereof, including specific information about the location, height and design
of each tower. The zoning official may share such information with other
applicants applying for administrative approvals or seeking special use permits
under this chapter or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the
city, provided, however, that the zoning official is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are
available or suitable.
         12.   An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made
diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to install or collocate the applicant's
telecommunications facilities on towers or usable antenna support structures
owned by the city or other persons located within a one-mile radius of the
proposed tower site.
         13.   A written statement from a registered professional engineer that
the proposed tower or telecommunications facilities cannot be installed or
collocated on another person's tower or usable antenna support structure
located within a one-mile radius of the proposed tower site.
(e)   Swimming pools. Pools used for swimming or bathing shall not be located
in any front yard and shall conform to the applicable yard and setback
requirements for an accessory structure. In no instance shall a swimming pool
be located closer than ten feet from any property line. Any fencing, barriers,
and structures shall comply with the state construction code and county health
department specifications. Any lights used for illumination of a swimming pool
shall be arranged or shaded so as to reflect light away from adjoining
premises.
(f)   Junk storage, inoperable vehicles, restorable vehicles.
   (1)   Junk storage.
      a.   No person shall store, place, abandon or permit to be stored,
placed, abandoned, or allow to remain, in any district, a dismantled, partially
dismantled, unlicensed, unrestorable, or inoperable motor vehicle, junk,
rubbish, trash, old furniture, used lumber, unused or discarded machines or
equipment, or litter upon any premises, except in an approved and licensed
salvage or junk yard or in the case of motor vehicles unless confined in a
wholly enclosed structure.
      b.   No person shall store, place, abandon or permit to be stored,
placed, abandoned, or allow to remain, in any district, wrecked or inoperable
farm machinery, unless hidden from all vantage points from the general public.
   (2)   Restorable vehicles.
      a.   A junk vehicle is considered an inoperable vehicle that is not a
"restorable vehicle". A "restorable vehicle" is defined as a vehicle actively
being restored in connection with a hobby.
      b.   The restorable vehicle must be in active use as the object of the
restoration effort.
      c.   All junk vehicles or inoperable vehicles that do not qualify as
restorable vehicles shall not be parked or stored in the open in any zoning
district of the city. The only exception is vehicles parked in connection with
a business legitimately using such vehicles, such as a body shop or wrecking
yard, in zoning districts where such businesses are authorized. In such cases
vehicle storage must meet the screening requirements in division 2 of article
VII of this chapter.
   (3)   Standards.
      a.   No inoperative, restorable vehicle shall be parked or stored in the
front yard or within the required setback of the side yard of property in any
zoning district.
      b.   No more than one restorable vehicle may be stored in the open in
inoperable condition on any residential lot. A cover or wrap is to be provided
to conceal the vehicle parked in the open.
      c.   All doors, hatches, and trunk lids shall be secured against entry by
small children.
      d.   Inoperable vehicles described in this section are not permitted in
the RS-1, RS-2, and RS-3 districts unless such vehicles qualify as restorable
vehicles.
      e.   Open storage of parts, tools, and materials is forbidden.
(g)   Accessory structures. Any garage or other structure used for motor
vehicle storage or as an accessory structure shall satisfy the following:
   (1)   Authorized accessory structures may be erected as a part of the
principal structure, may be connected to the principle structure by a roofed
over porch, patio, breeze way, or similar structure, or may be completely
detached from the principle structure. If connected to the principal structure,
an accessory structure shall be made an integral part of it, and shall comply
in all respects with the requirements applicable to the principal structure. An
accessory structure not attached and not made a part of the principal structure
shall not be nearer than ten feet from any other structure on the same lot and
shall also comply with the front, rear and side yard requirements of this
chapter.
   (2)   In all residential zoning districts, the storage of commercial
vehicles in accessory structures shall be limited as provided in subsection
94-292(d) of this chapter.
   (3)   Space in a garage accessory to a multiple-family unit or a motel shall
not be rented out except to occupants of the principal dwelling.
   (4)   The total lot coverage of all accessory structures shall not exceed 35
percent of the area of any rear yard.
   (5)   Side yard. In all districts accessory structures shall not be erected
nearer to a side lot line than the permitted setback distance for the district
unless otherwise permitted by this chapter. In the RS-1, RS-2, RS-3, and R2F
districts, an accessory structure may be erected not closer than two feet from
the side lot lines if the following requirements are satisfied:
      a.   The accessory structure is not attached to, and is located
completely behind, the associated principal structure.
      b.   The interior and/or exterior surfaces of the wall facing a side lot
line are constructed of fire-resistant material as approved by the building
official if any portion of that wall is closer than five feet from a side lot
line.
   (6)   Rear yard. In all districts accessory structures shall not be erected
nearer to a rear lot line than the permitted setback distance for the district
unless otherwise permitted by this chapter. In the RS-1, RS-2, RS-3 and R2F
districts, an accessory structure may be erected nearer to a rear lot line than
the permitted setback distance for the district provided the accessory
structure is not attached to, and is located completely behind, the associated
principal structure, and pursuant to the following:
      a.   Where there is a public alley abutting the rear of a lot for the
full width of that lot, an accessory structure may be erected not closer than
ten feet from a rear lot line.
      b.   Where there is not a public alley abutting the rear of a lot for the
full width of that lot, an accessory structure may be erected not closer than
five feet from a rear lot line.
   (7)   Corner lot. Where the rear line of a corner lot coincides with the
side line of an adjoining lot in a residential district, an accessory building
shall not be closer than the side yard setback requirement of said adjoining
lot.
   (8)   Accessory structures shall not include structures, fabrications,
items, or enclosures originally designed for other purposes. The following are
specifically prohibited from being used as accessory structures in the city.
      a.   Mobile home.
      b.   Travel trailers.
      c.   Former vehicles such as buses and ambulances.
      d.   Motor homes.
      e.   Semi-trailer.
      f.   Other similar structures, fabrications, items, or enclosures.
(h)   Adult businesses.
   (1)   Intent. The intent of this section is to regulate the location of, but
not to exclude, adult businesses in the city by preventing the concentration of
such uses in close proximity to each other and to minimize the negative impacts
of their operation by separating such uses from residential, office/commercial
and other areas of public congregation. This regulation is done with the
understanding that the city recognizes that there are some uses which, because
of their very nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics,
particularly if several of them are concentrated under circumstances having a
deleterious effect upon adjacent residential, office and commercial areas. The
city recognizes that the regulation of such uses is necessary to ensure that
adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of
surrounding residential neighborhoods, nonresidential areas or other places of
public congregation.
   (2)   Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings set forth below:
      a.   Adult bookstore means an establishment which has, as a significant
portion of its stock in trade, books, periodicals, magazines, newspapers,
pamphlets, pictures, photographs, motion picture films and/or videotapes, or
novelty items or paraphernalia which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein, or an establishment
with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material which
exceeds 35 percent of the floor area of the establishment.
      b.   Adult business means adult bookstores, adult movie theaters, adult
personal service businesses, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, massage
parlors and nude modeling studios, or any combination thereof, as defined in
this section.
      c.   Adult business, significant portion means a business where the stock
in trade or services provided meets one or more of the following criteria:
         1.   Thirty-five percent or more of the stock, materials, novelties or
services provided are classified as adult materials and/or services as defined
in subsection
94-173(h)(2).
         2.   Thirty-five percent or more of the usable floor area of the
building in which the adult business is located, is used for the sale, display
and/or provision of services classified as adult materials and/or services, as
defined in subsection
94-173(h)(2).
         3.   Thirty-five percent of the gross revenues of the business are
derived from the sale or payment of an admission fee for adult materials and/or
services as defined in subsection
94-173(h)(2).
         4.   The advertising (signs, publications, television, radio, and
other media) associated with the business depicts, describes or relates to
specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.
      d.   Adult cabaret means an establishment (which may or may not include
the service of food or beverages) having as an activity the presentation or
display of male or female impersonators, dancers, entertainers, waiters,
waitresses or employees who display specified anatomical areas as defined
herein.
      e.   Adult motion picture theater means an establishment which offers for
sale the viewing of motion picture films, videotapes, pictures or photographs,
television, or other visual media, which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activity or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, for the observation
of patrons therein.
      f.   Adult novelties means objects, items, and/or devices offered for
sale which are designed for sexual stimulation or which stimulate human
genitals.
      g.   Adult personal service business means a business having as its
principal activity a person, while nude or while displaying specified
anatomical areas, as defined herein, providing personal services for another
person. Such businesses include modeling studios, body painting studios,
wrestling studios, personal dance rooms, and conversation parlors.
      h.   Massage means offering for sale through the use of physical,
mechanical or other devices, the manipulation of body muscle or tissue by
rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or vibrating of the body of another.
      i.   Massage parlor means an establishment wherein private massage is
practiced, used or made available as a principal use of the premises.
      j.   Nude modeling studio means a place which offers as its principal
activity the providing of models to display specified anatomical areas, as
defined herein, for artists and photographers for a fee.
      k.   Offered for sale means offered in exchange for money, a membership
fee or any other valuable consideration.
      l.   Sexual intercourse includes genital coitus, fellatio, cunnilingus,
anal intercourse or any other intrusion, however slight, of any person's body.
      m.   Sodomy means sexual intercourse with a member of the same sex or an
animal.
      n.   Specified anatomical areas means:
         1.   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
         2.   Less than a fully opaque covering of:
            i.   A female individual's breast below a point immediately above
the top of the nipple and areola.
            ii.   Any individual's genitals.
            iii.   Any individual's anus.
      o.   Specified sexual activities means:
         1.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
         2.   Fondling or other erotic touching of specified anatomical areas.
         3.   Human genitalia in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (3)   Location of uses. Any existing building or land, or new building
hereinafter erected, converted or structurally altered or used for an adult
business, shall meet all of the following conditions:
      a.   An adult business shall only be permitted in the C-2 general
commercial district with the approval of a special use permit.
      b.   No adult business, as defined herein, shall be permitted within a
600-foot radius of an existing adult business. Measurement of the 600-foot
radius shall be made from the outermost boundaries of the lots or parcels upon
which the existing and proposed adult uses are situated.
      c.   No adult business, as defined herein, shall be permitted within a
600 foot radius of any residentially used or zoned land as depicted on the
official zoning map and defined in this chapter. Measurement of the 600-foot
radius shall be made from the outermost boundaries of the lots or parcels upon
which the proposed adult use and the residential use are situated.
      d.   No adult business, as defined herein, shall be permitted within a
1,000-foot radius of a school, library, park, playground, licensed group day
care center, church, convent, monastery, synagogue or similar place of worship
or public congregation. Measurement of the 1,000-foot radius shall be made from
the outermost boundaries of the lots or parcels upon which the proposed adult
use and the place of worship or public congregation are situated.
   (4)   Miscellaneous requirements.
      a.   No person shall reside in or permit any person to reside in the
premises of an adult business.
      b.   The provisions of this section regarding massage parlors shall not
apply to hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, medical clinics or the offices
of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, psychologist, clinical social
worker or family counselor who is licensed to practice his or her respective
profession in the State of Michigan, or who is permitted to practice
temporarily under the auspices of an associate or an establishment duly
licensed in the state of Michigan, clergymen, certified members of the American
Massage and Therapy Association and certified members of the International
Myomassethics Federation who have a current massage therapist license.
(i)   Hotel, motel, transient lodging facilities.
   (1)   Intent. The following shall set forth the requirements for
construction and site development of transient housing accommodations within
the city.
   (2)   Standards.
      a.   Minimum floor area for each guest unit shall contain not less than
250 square feet.
      b.   The minimum lot area shall be one acre with a minimum width of 150
feet, provided that there shall be at least 800 square feet of lot area for
each guest.
      c.   The maximum lot coverage of all buildings, including accessory
building shall not exceed more than 25 percent of the area within the boundary
lines of land developed at any one time.
      d.   Minimum yard dimensions. All buildings shall observe a setback of
not less than 75 feet from any road right-of-way, and not less than 40 feet
from any side or rear property line.
      e.   Site screening. The site may be enclosed by open structure wood or
wire fences, shrubs and/or trees which, along any yard line, shall not exceed
six feet in height. No screening shall impair safe vertical or horizontal sight
distance for any moving vehicles. Screening at least four feet high shall be
erected to prevent headlight glare on adjacent residential or agricultural
property. No screening shall be closer than 50 feet to any street line, except
headlight screening shall not be closer than 30 feet.
      f.   Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be arranged so that it is
deflected from adjacent properties, streets and thoroughfares, and shall not
impair the safe movement of traffic.
   (3)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses such as meeting rooms, taverns, bars,
or similar uses are permitted provided such shall be conducted within the same
building as the principal use. A caretaker or proprietor's residence shall be
permitted as an accessory use.
   (4)   Motor vehicle access.
      a.   Site plans. All site plan proposals submitted for this use shall
provide for the proper handling of traffic on the highway, frontage road, or
street giving access to the district. No access by motor vehicles, other than
stated herein, shall be permitted to a minor or residential street. All points
of entrance or exit shall be no closer than 50 feet from the intersection of
the right-of-way lines of two streets.
      b.   Interstate or interchange site location. Whenever a proposed use is
located adjacent to or within one-half mile of an existing, or planned state or
interstate limited access highway interchange, it shall be incumbent upon the
applicant to show that the proposed site location shall not cause unsafe
traffic congestion resulting at or in conjunction with said limited access
interchange, and the applicant shall request and submit with the application a
written recommendation from the Traffic Division of the Michigan Department of
State Highways. In no case, shall private access drives be less than 200 feet
from an interchange.
   (5)   Signs shall be those identifying any of the permitted uses within the
zoning district and shall be in accordance with the provisions of any
applicable city chapter.
   (6)   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be in accordance
with the provisions of article IX of this chapter except that required parking
shall be furnished on the immediate premises.
   (7)   The storage of refuse and space required for the accumulation and out
loading of garbage, trash, scrap, waste, and containers therefore shall comply
with the standards in section
94-173(b).
(j)   Outdoor food and drink service areas. It is the intent of this section to
set forth the requirements for establishing outdoor food and drink service
areas at a pub, tavern, or restaurant.
   (1)   General standards.
      a.   Provide a drawing to scale showing the seating plan and the layout
of the outdoor dining space to be used in relation to adjacent properties and
other public and private fixtures and amenities.
      b.   Trash receptacles shall be provided in food and drink service areas
where table service is not provided. Trash receptacles shall be emptied when
full and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.
      c.   Seating may not be placed in a way that obstructs pedestrian
circulation or interferes with the opening of doors of buildings or parked
vehicles.
      d.   An opaque fence or wall six feet in height shall be erected along
all property lines abutting residentially zoned or used property.
      e.   Lighting shall be deflected away from abutting residentially zoned
or used property.
   (2)   Establishments utilizing the public right-of-way shall do so only
under a license granted by the city council which shall be revocable at the
will of the council and shall include the following minimum standards in
addition to the general standards of this section:
      a.   Establishments shall agree to defend, indemnify, and hold the city
and its elected and appointed officers, agents, and employees harmless from all
liability for damages or personal injuries resulting from any occurrence on the
licensed property as a result of the establishment's use or occupancy of the
public right-of-way and shall provide public liability insurance naming the
city as an additional named insured in a form and with limits acceptable to the
city.
      b.   Establishments must maintain a minimum of four feet of unobstructed
sidewalk within the public right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007; Ord. No. 161, 9-4-2007; Ord.
No. 166, 8-4-2008; Ord. No. 187, 2-6-2012; Ord. 217, 5-21-2018)
Sec. 94-174. Supplemental area regulations.
No portion of a lot can be used more than once in complying with the provisions
for lot area and yard dimensions for the construction of a proposed building or
the alteration of an existing building.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-175. Supplemental height regulations.
It is the intent of this chapter that certain structural appurtenances shall be
permitted to exceed the height limitations of this chapter. No portion of any
such structural appurtenance shall be used for human occupancy or for
commercial enterprise. Any exception to height limitations shall be only to
such height as may be necessary to accomplish the purpose the subject
appurtenance is intended to serve and so as not to become a hazard to aviation.
Structural appurtenances exceeding the maximum height limitations established
by the capital region airport authority within ten miles of a public airport
shall not be allowed without the approval of the capitol region airport
authority, the Michigan Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aeronautics,
and/or any other agency having jurisdiction. If the roof area of structural
appurtenances permitted to exceed the height limitations exceeds 20 percent of
the gross roof area of the structure, said appurtenances shall be considered as
integral parts of the whole structure and thereby shall not exceed the height
limitations. Structural appurtenances which may be permitted to exceed height
limitations include the following:
   (1)   Structural appurtenances which are ornamental in purpose, such as
church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, ornamental towers, flag poles and
monuments.
   (2)   Structural appurtenances to mechanical or structural functions, such
as chimneys, smoke stacks, solar collectors, water tanks, elevator and
stairwell penthouses, ventilators, bulkheads, radio towers, masts, aerials,
television antennas, fire hose towers, cooling towers, and heating, ventilation
and air conditioning equipment.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-176. Supplemental access regulations.
(a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards and
regulations to encourage reasonable access to land uses and buildings according
to their access needs, while also ensuring safe and efficient travel within and
through the city including minimizing disruptive and potentially hazardous
traffic conflicts; ensuring safe access by emergency vehicles; and protecting
the substantial public investment in the street system by preserving capacity
and avoiding the need for unnecessary and costly reconstruction that disrupts
business and traffic flow.
(b)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
   (1)   Access point. The connection at the street right-of-way line between
the street and the connecting driveway, service drive, other street, or other
vehicular access way.
   (2)   Service drive. A local street or private road typically located in
front of principal buildings (front service drive) and parallel to a
thoroughfare classified as an arterial, for providing access to abutting
properties while also controlling access to the arterial through reduced access
points to the arterial. In the case of a rear service drive, the service drive
is located behind such buildings.
(c)   Application of this section. The standards and regulations of this
section shall be applied by the body or body(s) designated authority by this
chapter to approve development plans including the construction of homes and
businesses, platted and condominium subdivisions, and institutional uses. Such
approving bodies shall coordinate their review of specific development
proposals with the standards and regulations of this Section, and the review by
other agencies as required by law including the Michigan Department of
Transportation.
(d)   General standards for access.
   (1)   All lots created in the city shall have frontage on a public street,
or a private road approved by the city, and take their lot access from such
frontage so as to provide safe, convenient access for fire protection, other
emergency vehicles, and any required off-street parking. Curb cuts and
driveways accessing public roads shall be located only upon the approval of the
city and appropriate state authorities as required by law.
   (2)   All plans for structures to be erected, altered, moved or
reconstructed, and for the use of premises within the city shall contain a plan
for the proposed access to the premises which shall be part of the site plan
required pursuant to this chapter. No plan shall be approved unless such access
is onto a dedicated public street or an approved private road.
   (3)   Access drives shall enter perpendicular to the existing public street
or private road except where prohibited by physical conditions.
   (4)   Wherever a corner lot exists at the intersection of two streets,
access shall be taken from the street presenting the least hazard.
   (5)   The location of new access points shall conform to road improvement
plans or corridor plans that have been adopted by a public body.
(e)   Standards for residential uses.
   (1)   For any access point or driveway located less than two feet from an
adjoining property line, provisions shall be made to the satisfaction of the
building official to control water runoff onto the adjoining property.
   (2)   An access point serving a single-family dwelling shall be a minimum of
15 feet from the nearest right-of-way line of an intersecting street.
   (3)   A driveway serving a single-family or two-family dwelling shall be a
minimum of 9 feet wide.
   (4)   A lot containing one single-family dwelling or one two-family dwelling
shall have no more than one access point to the street upon which it relies for
access.
   (5)   No more than 25 dwellings shall be served by a single access point
except upon finding that a second alternative and reasonable means of emergency
vehicle access is available.
   (6)   In the case of the development of a platted or condominium
subdivision, all lots made part of such subdivision shall have their access
point from roads within such subdivision.
(f)   Standards for Office, Commercial and Industrial Uses.
   (1)   The minimum distance an access point may be located from an adjoining
non-residential property line shall be 15 feet. The minimum distance an access
point may be located from an adjoining residential property line shall be 25
feet.
   (2)   An access point shall be a minimum of 25 feet from the nearest right-
of-way line of an intersecting street.
   (3)   No parcel shall be provided more than one access point for the first
150 feet of parcel frontage, and no more than one access point shall be
provided for parcels with additional frontage except upon a showing that the
projected trip generation necessitates additional access points and no feasible
alternative exists such as the reliance on shared access as provided in sub-
sections (4), (5) and (6) below.
   (4)   The sharing or joint use of a driveway by two or more property owners
shall be encouraged. The sharing or joint use of a driveway by two or more
property owners may be required in association with the approval of a site plan
where such a shared or joint use driveway is feasible and practical, and where
the lack of such a shared or joint use driveway would result in inappropriately
spaced access points that are contrary to nationally-recognized engineering
standards and public safety and welfare. The shared driveway shall be
constructed along the midpoint between the two properties unless a written
easement is provided that allows traffic to travel across one parcel to access
another, and/or access the public street.
   (5)   The use of front or rear service drives shall be encouraged. The use
of front or rear service drives may be required in association with the
approval of a site plan where such a drive is feasible and practical, and where
the lack of such drive would result in inappropriately spaced access points
that are contrary to nationally-recognized engineering standards and public
safety and welfare.
   (6)   Where a proposed parking lot is adjacent to an existing parking lot of
a similar use, or of a differing use, and traffic flow between the two uses is
anticipated, there shall be a vehicular connection between the two parking lots
where determined physically feasible by the site plan approving body. For
developments adjacent to vacant properties, the site shall be designed to
provide for future connection. A written access easement signed by both
landowners shall be presented as evidence of the parking lot connection prior
to the issuance of any building permit.
(g)   Traffic impact study. In the case of a proposed use that is likely to be
characterized by trip generation rates in excess of 100 trips per peak hour,
the applicant shall submit a traffic impact study with the building permit/site
plan application for the use. The preparer of the study shall be either a
registered traffic engineer or transportation planner. If the study involves
geometric design, the study shall be prepared or supervised by a registered
engineer with a background in traffic engineering. The qualifications of the
author of the study shall be included in the application. The applicant may be
required by a reviewing body to submit a traffic impact study though the use
may be characterized by less than 100 trips per peak hour in the case where a
reviewing body determines existing conditions warrant a study such as existing
traffic conflicts in the immediate area, the proximity of existing access
points, the lack of a left turn lane for the road providing access to the site,
or other factors deemed to be relevant by the reviewing body. The traffic
impact study shall address, at a minimum:
   (1)   Description of the proposed internal vehicular circulation system
including the location of all access points into the project; parking and drop-
off circulation; loading/unloading circulation; and pedestrian, bicycle, and
transit circulation.
   (2)   Analysis of existing traffic conditions in the immediate area, based
on current data.
   (3)   Projected trip generation at the project site or along the roads
abutting the site, based on the most recent edition of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers Trip Generation manual, or more recent studies of a
minimum of three similar uses with similar surroundings in Michigan.
   (4)   Illustrations of current and projected turning movements at access
points into the project.
   (5)   Description of the anticipated impact of the projected trip generation
on abutting and nearby streets, including increases in congestion, available
capacity of streets and impacts on levels of service of such streets, and
proposed mitigation measures to minimize any conflict issues.
   (6)   Justification for the need of the number and location of proposed
access points into the project.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-177. Supplemental environmental regulations.
(a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote a healthy environment
as it relates to the city's natural resources; sensitive ecosystems; the
integrity of the city's land, water, and air; the quality of the city's visual
environment, including the management of lighting and its impact upon traffic
safety, adjacent land uses and the night sky; and the provision of adequate
sewage disposal and potable water. All provisions of this section apply to all
structures, buildings and uses unless otherwise noted.
(b)   Compliance with local, county, state, and federal regulations. All land
uses and construction activities shall conform with the provisions of this
section and all local, county, state and federal regulations including the
State Fire Marshall, Michigan Department of Agriculture, Michigan Department of
Labor and Economic Growth, Ingham County Health Department, Ingham County Drain
Commissioner, Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, Federal
Communications Commission, and all local, county, state and federal regulations
related to loading/unloading, transport, storage, use and/or disposal of
hazardous substances.
(c)   Discharges and flammable/hazardous materials.
   (1)   No dust, fumes, or noxious, odorous matter shall be discernible at or
beyond the property line. Any atmospheric discharge requiring a permit from the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality or federal government shall have
said permit(s) as a condition of approval for such use. This subsection shall
not apply to farm operations in compliance with most current published
Generally Accepted Agricultural Management Practices of the Michigan Commission
of Agriculture.
   (2)   It shall be unlawful to discharge any materials in such a way or of
such nature or temperature as can contaminate any surface waters, land or
aquifers, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or objectionable
elements, except in accord with standards approved by the Michigan Department
of Environmental Quality.
(d)   Noise. The use of any lot shall not cause the emittance of sound from any
source or combination of sources, which when measured in accordance with the
procedure described herein, exceeds the sound level limits in this subsection.
This subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles registered for use on public
roads, agricultural operations, home landscape maintenance machines and snow
blowers that meet their respective product requirements, the emission of sound
for the purposes of alerting persons of an emergency or emergency vehicle, and
the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
   (1)   Measurement of sound level shall be made using a microphone set at a
height of approximately four and one half feet along the lot line of the lot on
which the sound source being measured is located.
   (2)   A violation shall not be deemed to exist unless the sound level
measured is at least six decibels higher than the sound level measured with the
sound source or sources not in operation.
   (3)   All measurements shall be made using a sound level meter which meets
the most current requirements of the American National Standards Institute
"Type 2 or Type 1 Sound Level Meters," and which has been set for fast meter
response and the A-weighting network.
   (4)   Sound level limits.
      a.   Adjacent lot in a residential or other non-commercial or non-
industrial district.
         1.   7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.: 55 dba
         2.   10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.: 50 dba
      b.   Adjacent lot in a commercial district.
         1.   7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.: 65 dba
         2.   10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.: 60 dba
      c.   Adjacent lot in an industrial district.
         1.   7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.: 70 dba
         2.   10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.: 65 dba
(e)   Light. The following regulations and standards shall apply to all uses
except for single-family and two family dwellings:
   (1)   No lighting shall in any way impair the safe movement of traffic on
any road.
   (2)   A wall, fence, or berm, at least five feet in height shall be erected
to prevent vehicle headlight glare from shining onto adjacent residential
property. No wall/fence shall in any way impair safe vertical or horizontal
sight distance for any moving vehicles.
   (3)   Lighting shall be designed and constructed to ensure that direct and
reflected light is confined to the lot or parcel upon which the light source is
located.
   (4)   Exterior lighting shall be so installed that the surface of the source
of light shall be hooded or louvered to the greatest extent practical so that:
      a.   Light sources shall not be visible from beyond the lot lines and
shall be so arranged to reflect light away from adjacent properties.
      b.   No more than one foot candle power of light shall cross a lot line
five feet above the ground on a residentially used lot.
      c.   Lighting is directed downward as much as is possible and appropriate
for the application.
   (5)   Outdoor lighting for recreation and amusement areas need not comply
with subsection (4) provided the lighting is designed with baffling and glare
guards to ensure that no more than one foot candle power of light shall cross a
lot line five feet above the ground on a residentially used lot, and such
lighting is turned off during hours the facility is closed.
(f)   Drifted and blown material. The drifting or airborne transmission beyond
the lot line of dust, particles, or debris from any open stockpile shall be
unlawful and may be summarily caused to be abated.
(g)   Vibration. All machinery shall be mounted and operated in order to
prevent transmission of ground vibration exceeding a displacement of three one-
thousandths of one inch, as measured at the property line.
(h)   Odor. The emission of noxious, odorous matter in quantities which are
readily detectable at any point along lot lines when diluted in the ratio of
one volume of odorous air to four or more volumes of clean air is prohibited.
(i)   Gases. The escape of or emission of any gas which is injurious or
destructive or explosive shall be unlawful and shall be abated.
(j)   Glare and heat. An operation producing intense glare or heat shall be
performed within an enclosure so as to completely obscure and shield such
operation from direct view from any point along the lot line, except during the
period of construction of the facilities to be used and occupied.
(k)   Electromagnetic radiation. Propagation of electromagnetic radiation shall
comply with all local, state, and federal regulations which are hereby adopted
by reference as a part of this chapter.
(l)   Radioactive materials. Radioactive materials and radiation shall not be
emitted in excess of levels or quantities established as safe by local, state,
or federal regulations which are hereby adopted by reference as part of this
chapter.
(m)   Airborne emissions. Airborne emissions shall be in compliance with state
requirements.
(n)   Other forms of pollution. It shall be unlawful to discharge into the air,
onto the ground or into the water any material or materials in excess of
standards approved by the state or the county public health department.
(o)   Grading and filling of property. The final grade surface of ground areas
remaining after the construction of a building or structure and any earth
changes made in connection with the use of land shall be designed and
landscaped such that surface water flows away from the building or structure
and is collected or managed in a manner which avoids the following:
   (1)   Any increase in surface water discharge onto adjacent properties or
public roads.
   (2)   The erosion of or filling of any road drainage facility.
   (3)   The blockage of any public watercourse.
   (4)   The creation of standing water over a private sewage disposal drainage
field.
   (5)   Any unnecessary impoundment of surface water.
(p)   Required water supply and sanitary sewer facilities. No structure for
human occupancy shall be erected, altered, or moved upon any lot or premises
and used in whole or in part for dwelling, business, industrial, or
recreational purposes unless it shall be provided with a safe, potable water
supply and with a safe and effective means of collection, treatment, and
disposal of human excreta and normal domestic wastes by connection to the city
wastewater treatment system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
All such installations and facilities shall conform with the minimum
requirements of the city and any other local, county, or state requirements.
(q)   Soil erosion/sedimentation, soil/groundwater contamination.
   (1)   All development in all districts shall conform to the applicable
Erosion/Sedimentation Ordinance and general rules and part 91 of the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.9101 et seq.).
   (2)   A pollution incident prevention plan (PIPP) must be provided to the
city by an owner or agent wherever uses or conditions exist on any parcel of
property located in the city which could result in detectable soil or ground
water contamination.
(r)   Drainage channels and floodplains. Drainage channels and floodplains,
which exist within the City of Mason are essential for the maintenance of the
health and general welfare of the people of the city. Any encroachment, filling
or obstruction of these drainage channels or floodplains is a violation of this
chapter. Such property may be developed, however, for reasonable use provided
that a special use permit is approved by the planning commission and that prior
to granting said permit the city has referred the matter to appropriate
permitting agencies and has received advice and recommendation. The applicant
shall furnish needed topographic data, engineering studies, site plan and
similar data necessary to determine the effects of flooding, impoundment of
water, flow restrictions and other effects on the flow of water and possible
harm to persons, property, or natural resources from the proposed development.
(s)   Dumping or disposal of waste. The use of land for dumping or disposal of
scrap iron, junk, garbage, rubbish, trash, or other refuse, or of ashes, slag
or other industrial, commercial or household wastes or by-products is
prohibited in all districts, except under a special use permit.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Secs. 94-178—94-190. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. USES AUTHORIZED BY SPECIAL USE PERMIT
Sec. 94-191. General standards and requirements.
(a)   Intent and purpose. The intent of this article is to provide a set of
procedures and standards for specific uses of land or structures that will
allow, on one hand, practical latitude for the developer, but that will at the
same time, maintain sound provisions for the protection of the health, safety
and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. In order to provide
controllable and reasonable flexibility, this article permits detailed review
of certain specified types of land use activities which, because of their
particular and unique characteristics, require special consideration in
relation to the welfare of adjacent properties and to the community as a whole.
Uses possessing these characteristics may be authorized within certain zoning
districts by the issuance of a special use permit. By such a procedure, the
city has the opportunity to impose conditions and safeguards upon each use
which are deemed necessary for the protection of the public welfare. The
following sections, together with previous references in other articles of this
chapter, designate specific uses that require a special use permit and, in
addition, specify the procedures and standards which must be met before such a
permit can be issued.
(b)   Permit procedures. An application for a special use permit for any use
shall be submitted and processed under the following procedures:
   (1)   Submission of application. An application shall be submitted on a form
through the zoning official for consideration by the planning commission. The
application shall be accompanied by payment of a fee as established by
resolution of the city council to cover costs of processing the application as
well as site plan review fees that may be required. No part of any fee shall be
refundable.
   (2)   Required information. One copy of an application for a special use
permit shall be submitted to the zoning official and accompanied by 20 copies
of a preliminary site plan in compliance with division 1 of article VII of this
chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to furnish sufficient
evidence to demonstrate compliance of the proposed use with the provisions of
this chapter.
   (3)   Acceptance of application.
      a.   Upon receipt of an application for a special use permit, the zoning
official shall review the application for completeness. If the application is
found to be complete, the zoning official shall issue a dated receipt of
acceptance to the applicant and schedule consideration of the application by
the planning commission. If the application is found to be incomplete, the
zoning official shall return the application to the applicant with a written
description of what additional information is required.
      b.   The planning commission reserves the right to find that an
application is incomplete. An application which is found to be incomplete shall
be returned to the applicant with a written description of what additional
information is required and the previously issued receipt of acceptance shall
be considered void.
   (4)   Time frame.
      a.   Acceptance of application. The zoning official shall issue a receipt
of acceptance or return the application as incomplete within ten business days
after submission.
      b.   Meeting date. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on
the application within 45 days of the date of the receipt of acceptance by the
zoning official.
   (5)   Notice for review. The zoning official shall notify the agencies and
individuals identified in section 94-394(d), or other agencies or individuals,
of receipt of the special use application as deemed appropriate by the zoning
official or the planning commission.
   (6)   Written comments. Any person may present any petition or document
supporting a position for or against an application. All documents shall be
submitted to the zoning official no later than 4:00 p.m. the day of the public
hearing at which the application will be considered. Documents so submitted
will be provided to the planning commission at the public hearing.
   (7)   Project start. Until a special use permit has been issued for any use
requiring the same in this chapter, and until a proper building permit has been
granted pursuant to the special use permit, there shall be no construction or
excavation on said land, nor shall there be made any use of land related to the
request for the special use permit.
(c)   Public hearing. After accepting an application for a special use permit
as complete, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the special
use request and the preliminary site plan. Notice of the public hearing shall
be pursuant to section 94-101.
(d)   Review and decision. The planning commission may approve, approve with
conditions, or deny an application for special use permit. The review of a
special use permit application and the associated site plan shall be made by
the planning commission in accordance with the procedures and standards
specified in this chapter.
   (1)   An application for special use permit and the associated preliminary
site plan shall be approved if both are found to be in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, and other applicable local, county, state, or
federal laws, rules or regulations. The planning commission may defer a
decision in order to obtain that information deemed necessary to making an
informed decision.
   (2)   The applicant may make changes to the application and site plan in
order to achieve compliance with this chapter. Such changes shall be noted on
the application or site plan or the planning commission may require that these
documents be resubmitted incorporating said changes.
   (3)   Approval and issuance of a special use permit shall signify concurrent
approval of the application and preliminary site plan, therefore any subsequent
authorized modification to the site plan shall become part of the special use
permit and shall be enforceable as such.
   (4)   The decision to approve or deny a request for a special use permit
shall be retained as a part of the record of action on the request and shall
incorporate a statement of conclusions which specifies the basis for the
decision, any changes to the originally submitted application and site plan
necessary to insure compliance with the chapter, and any conditions imposed
with approval.
   (5)   Once a special use permit is issued, all site development and use of
land on the property affected shall be consistent with the approved special use
permit unless a change conforming to chapter requirements is approved by the
planning commission.
   (6)   The concurring vote of a majority of the members appointed to and
serving on the planning commission shall be necessary to approve a special use
permit.
   (7)   The planning commission shall defer all proceedings on an application
for a special use permit upon the request of the applicant when less than eight
members of the planning commission are present for consideration of and voting
on said special use. The right of deferment shall be considered waived by the
applicant if deferment is not requested immediately upon the opening of the
hearing conducted pursuant to section 94-191(c). When deferment is requested as
required, the planning commission shall, at that time, determine the date of a
future regular or special meeting for the continuation of the hearing and
consideration of the matter. Notice previously given for the original hearing
date shall constitute notice of the future hearing date with no further notice
required.
(e)   Required site plan review. A preliminary site plan must be submitted with
the application for a special use permit. After approval and before issuance of
a building permit or certificate of occupancy, a final site plan shall be
submitted for review by the zoning official. The zoning official may request
review by the planning commission of the final site plan. The site plan review
shall be in conformance with division 1 of article VII of this chapter.
(f)   Basis of determination. Before approving a special use permit, the
planning commission shall find by clear and convincing proof that the
applicable standards set forth by this chapter shall be satisfied by the
completion and operation of the proposed development. The planning commission
shall review the particular circumstances and facts of each proposed use in
terms of these standards and shall make written findings showing that such use
shall:
   (1)   Be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and that such a use will not change the
essential character of adjacent property or the zoning district in which it is
proposed.
   (2)   Not be hazardous or disturbing to uses in the same general vicinity
and will be a substantial improvement to property in the immediate vicinity and
to the community as a whole.
   (3)   Be served adequately by essential facilities and services, such as
highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse
disposal, water and sewage facilities, and schools.
   (4)   Not create additional requirements at public cost for public
facilities and services.
   (5)   Not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, and equipment or
conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any person, property, or
the general welfare by noise, fumes, glare, or odors.
   (6)   Not be located such that it will directly or indirectly have a
substantial adverse impact on the natural resources of this city.
   (7)   Be in compliance with other applicable local, county, state, or
federal rules and regulations.
(g)   Conditions. The planning commission may impose such reasonable conditions
upon the approval of a special use permit as are deemed necessary to protect
the general welfare, protect individual property rights, and insure that the
intent and objectives of this chapter will be satisfied.
   (1)   The conditions may include those necessary to insure that public
services and facilities affected by a proposed use will be capable of
accommodating the increased service and facility loads caused by the use.
   (2)   The conditions may include those necessary to protect the natural
environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to insure compatibility
with adjacent uses, and to promote the use of land in a socially and
economically desirable manner.
   (3)   The conditions shall be designed to protect natural resources, the
public health, safety, and welfare, as well as the social and economic well-
being of those who will use the land or engage in the activity under
consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed
land use or activity, and the community as a whole.
   (4)   The planning commission may require a performance guarantee in
accordance with section 94-100 of this chapter.
   (5)   The special use permit may be limited for a specified period of time
only where the subject use has some naturally limiting factor.
   (6)   The conditions may include that a specified percentage of the
authorized construction and/or development be completed within a specified
period of time. Failure to meet this requirement shall invalidate special use
authorization for only that portion of the project not developed as required.
(h)   Effective date of special use permit. The special use permit shall become
effective when the application has been approved by the planning commission.
   (1)   A building permit shall not be issued until approval of such special
use permit by the planning commission.
   (2)   Land subject to a special use permit may not be used or occupied for
purposes of such special use until after a certificate of occupancy for same
has been issued pursuant to this chapter.
(i)   Transfer and expiration of special use permit. The city shall notify the
applicant, in writing mailed to the address listed on the application, that a
special use permit has become invalid.
   (1)   A special use permit shall be valid for as long as the permitted use
continues in accordance with the terms stated therein unless otherwise stated
in the special use permit. If the use permitted by the special use permit is
not established in compliance with the terms of the special use permit within
12 months from the date of its issuance, then the special use permit shall
automatically expire and be of no further effect or validity. This period of
time may be extended by the planning commission for good cause for an
additional six months.
   (2)   Approval of a special use permit shall be valid regardless of change
of ownership provided that all terms and conditions of the permit are met by
subsequent owner.
   (3)   If the use permitted under the special use permit ceases or is vacated
for 12 months, the special use permit shall automatically expire and be of no
further effect or validity.
(j)   Re-application. No application for a special use permit which has been
denied, wholly or in part, shall be resubmitted until the expiration of one
year from the date of such denial except on the grounds of newly discovered
evidence or proof of changed conditions, as determined by the planning
commission.
(k)   Compliance with requirements. It shall be the duty and obligation of the
owner and operator of the property to at all times be in compliance with the
use requirements of this chapter and the stipulations of the special use permit
under which their particular use is governed. Failure thereof shall be a
violation of this chapter and may subject the owner and/or operator to the
penalties and remedies provided in article III of this chapter and the
continuance thereof is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se.
(l)   Special use deemed a conforming permitted use. Any use for which a
special use permit has been granted shall be deemed a conforming permitted use
provided that the proposed use is subsequently built, operated, and maintained
in compliance with this chapter, including conditions approved as part of the
special use permit.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-192. Listed special uses.
   Special land uses listed in this section shall satisfy the supplementary
standards found in this section in addition to the general standards found in
section 94-191. The following are the listed special uses subject to this
section:
   (1)   Planned residential developments (PRD).
      a.   Intent and purpose. The intent and purpose of a PRD shall be the
same as that described for a PUD under section
94-161(a) insofar as subsection
94-161(a) is consistent with other requirements of this section.
      b.   Permitted uses. Only the following uses may be permitted in a PRD:
         1.   All uses permitted by right in the district in which the PRD is
proposed.
         2.   Any additional uses which can be shown to be compatible with the
general objectives of the master plan as well as integral to the specific PRD
scheme in which they are contained. For the purpose of this section, an
integral use shall be defined as a use which has a specific functional
relationship with other uses contained in the development, such as a day care
center which serves primarily the needs of residents of the development.
      c.   Site development standards and deviations. All proposed individual
land uses and facilities in a PRD shall be in conformance with the standards of
the district in which the PRD is proposed and any other applicable sections of
this code, including such standards pertaining to lot area and dimensions,
density, lot coverage, setbacks, building height, parking, loading, landscaping
and screening, road widths, and similar requirements, except that the planning
commission may permit deviations from such standards where such deviations will
result in a higher quality of development than would be possible without the
deviations.
         1.   Any deviation from applicable standards affecting density shall
not result in an increase in density in excess of 30% of the density allowed in
the district in which the PRD is proposed.
         2.   Except where a deviation is granted, mixed uses shall comply with
the regulations applicable for each individual use, including applicable
standards for special uses contained in Article VI of this chapter. If
regulations are inconsistent with each other, the regulations applicable to the
most dominant use shall apply.
         3.   Deviation from development standards may be authorized only upon
a finding by the planning commission that said deviation will encourage
creative design including the enhancement of open space and the protection of
natural features, and that there are adequate features or planning mechanisms
designed into the project to achieve the objectives intended to be accomplished
with respect to each of the standards from which a deviation is sought.
      d.   Minimum eligibility criteria. A PRD shall satisfy the minimum
eligibility criteria for a PUD as provided by section
94-161(g) insofar as such criteria are consistent with this section.
      e.   Phasing. A PRD may be constructed in phases in the manner described
for a PUD as provided by section
94-161(1) insofar as such phasing is consistent with this section.
   (2)   Auto service station. Location and special needs for auto service
stations require careful planning to properly integrate this type of use into
the pattern of other commercial and retail activities and special
consideration, therefore, must be given to location, site, layout, use and
storage facilities, traffic safety and compatibility with surrounding uses. The
following are minimum requirements:
      a.   Site size of 20,000 square feet with a minimum width of 150 feet of
frontage on a major street.
      b.   Buildings shall be set back 50 feet from all street right-of-way
lines and shall not be less than 25 feet from a property line of a
residentially used lot. Structures, except signs and buildings, shall be no
closer than 15 feet to the street right-of-way line.
      c.   All activities connected with auto service, except sale of gasoline
and associated products, shall be carried on within the building. Outdoor
storage of wrecked or partially dismantled vehicles is prohibited.
      d.   No more than two driveway approaches shall be permitted directly
from any major street nor more than one drive approach from any minor street,
each of which shall not exceed 30 feet in width at the property line. If the
property fronts on two or more streets, the driveway shall be located as far
from the street intersection as practicable, but not less than 30 feet measured
from the intersecting corner lot lines. All parking areas shall be constructed
from hard-surface materials together with curb, gutter, and sidewalks as exist
in the area.
      e.   An opaque fence or wall six feet in height shall be erected along
all property lines abutting residentially used lots.
      f.   Lighting shall be deflected away from adjacent residential
properties.
   (3)   Junk and salvage yards. Dealers in junk or salvage shall maintain such
records of operation as required by the laws of the State of Michigan and
satisfy the requirements of this section and any other applicable parts of this
chapter.
      a.   No junk or salvage operation shall be located on the same lot as a
residential use.
      b.   All junk or salvage material shall be stored in a building
constructed specifically for that purpose, provided however, that junk
automobiles, farm machinery, or recreational vehicles, and parts thereof,
stored for the purpose of dismantling may be stored on an outdoor lot. Such a
lot shall have an opaque fence or wall eight feet in height which encloses the
view of said dismantled automobiles from any public road or street and from
adjoining residential and commercial properties. Outdoor storage shall be
completely within the enclosed area and shall not exceed the height of the
fence.
      c.   Junk and salvage yards adjacent to a residential or agricultural
zone shall be set back from the property line 100 feet with an intervening
greenbelt. The planning commission may reduce the setback requirements of this
provision where, by reason of natural or artificial barriers, topographic
conditions, the use of natural screening, or the nature of operations, a lesser
setback would substantially meet the purpose and intent of this chapter.
      d.   No open burning shall be permitted and all industrial processes
involving the use of cutting, compression, or packaging shall be conducted
within a completely enclosed building.
      e.   Signs are permitted only as they apply to the junk or salvage
business.
      f.   No materials, trash, or garbage causing offensive odors or
unsanitary conditions shall be stored on the premises.
   (4)   Removal and disposal of soil, sand, gravel, and other materials. To
minimize and avoid open and dangerous excavations, accumulations of stagnant
water, erosion of land and conditions unfit for growing of turf and other land
uses, harmful and dangerous landfills and potential pollution of the city water
supply, the removal of soil, sand, stone, gravel or the dumping of such
material or other refuse on any lands in the city, except in the excavation for
a structure pursuant to a building permit, is prohibited unless by a special
use permit issued by the planning commission. In permitting such use, the
commission shall condition the permit on the following requirements:
      a.   A fence, adequate to protect trespassing children, and at least six
feet in height shall be placed around the entire periphery of the property and
no closer than 50 feet to the top of any slope.
      b.   No slope shall exceed an angle with the horizontal of 45 degrees.
      c.   The planning commission shall establish truck traffic haul routes
where necessary to minimize traffic hazards and road damage to and from the
site.
      d.   Depleted or abandoned areas shall be rehabilitated progressively to
a condition entirely lacking in hazards, inconspicuous and blended with the
surrounding ground topography. A site reclamation plan must be submitted and
approved by the planning commission prior to the granting of a special use
permit.
      e.   All slopes, banks, pits and denuded areas shall be reasonably
graded, filled and treated to prevent erosion.
      f.   All material used for landfill shall be reasonably leveled, covered
and graded and no refuse shall be dumped at any location, which might imperil
the city water supply or endanger persons or property.
      g.   A performance guarantee in accordance with section
94-100 of this chapter may be required to assure compliance with these
requirements.
   (5)   Community commercial center. The unique and changing characteristics
of this type of business activity requires standards and procedures
specifically designed to provide for the flexible application of protective
regulations to ensure that a safe, efficient, attractive and pleasing shopping
environment can be created and maintained.
      a.   Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. Except as herein
specified, the district regulations shall apply to area, height, bulk and
placement requirements.
         1.   Lot size. Not less than five acres.
         2.   Lot frontage. Not less than 300 feet.
         3.   Minimum yard setbacks. Where side or rear yard setbacks, or
vehicular parking abuts a residential area, a minimum yard setback of 25 feet
shall be provided with an intervening fence or wall and greenbelt adjacent to
the residential area. No parking shall be permitted within the front yard
setback.
         4.   Minimum floor area. Not less than 800 square feet per business
unit.
      b.   Parking areas and circulation.
         1.   All areas accessible to vehicles or pedestrians shall be clearly
illuminated, adequately graded and paved, clearly marked and maintained, and
adequately drained.
         2.   Automobile circulation design shall provide access to and from
the parking areas without backing-up or interfering with traffic onto or from
an external street under normal anticipated traffic conditions and, where
deemed necessary, the front yard setback requirement may be increased to insure
against such congestion and/or to provide for safe ingress and egress. A
determination shall be made by the planning commission that the external access
street to the shopping center shall be fully capable of absorbing the maximum
hourly traffic generated by the center without undue interference to other
traffic and pedestrians in the area.
         3.   All ingress and egress approaches from the external street shall
have adequate acceleration and deceleration lanes.
         4.   Design of the site shall consider pedestrian protection by
providing site access sidewalks and internal walkways separated from the
traffic circulation and parking bays. Such pedestrian walkways shall be a
minimum of five-feet wide.
   (6)   Temporary outdoor use. Temporary and seasonal uses on private property
in all districts may be permitted by the planning commission when such uses do
not impede pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Such uses may include sale of
Christmas trees, shrubbery, flowers, fruits and vegetables in season, sidewalk
or garage sales or short-term promotional activities. The licensee shall be
required to indemnify the city against the cost of removing and cleaning up any
waste or debris, or replacing or repairing any damage to public facilities. If
approved, a license shall be issued specifying the terms, conditions and time
limitations of the activity in accordance with the applicable city ordinance.
      a.   Any temporary use of public streets or public property shall be
permitted only by the prior approval of the city council, and the council
shall, where deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest,
require an adequate personal injury and property damage liability policy
indemnifying the city against any claim, suit or loss occasioned by the use of
city streets or public property.
      b.   Any license issued shall be carried by the owner in charge of the
activities or posted on the property by the licensee and shall be available for
inspection by a police officer at all times.
   (7)   Bed and breakfast. It is the intent of this section to provide
standards for the utilization of the older large residential structures located
in older neighborhoods of the city as bed and breakfast accommodations for
tourists while maintaining the character of the surrounding neighborhoods. Bed
and breakfast accommodations are subject to the following requirements:
      a.   Meals shall only be served to residents, the guests of residents,
employees, family members and overnight guests. There shall be no food
preparation in any guest sleeping room. Restaurant type operation is
prohibited.
      b.   Accessory retail or service uses to a bed and breakfast
establishment shall be prohibited including gift shops, antique shops,
restaurants, and bakeries.
      c.   Each premises must be occupied and operated by its owner. The
dwelling unit in which the bed and breakfast operations take place shall be the
principal residence of the operator, who shall live on the premises while the
operation is active. The living area for the owner/operator may be separated
from the guest rooms. No more than six transient/guest rooms shall be provided.
      d.   Only one sign shall be allowed for identification purposes only.
Such sign shall be non-illuminated and unanimated, be mounted flat against the
wall of the principal building or freestanding, and not exceed four square feet
in area. The planning commission, in its sole discretion, shall approve the
indirect lighting of any sign on the site.
      e.   Exterior solid waste facilities beyond what might normally be
expected for a single-family dwelling shall be prohibited.
      f.   Additions or modifications to a structure for the purpose of
accommodating additional guests shall be allowed only if such additions or
modifications maintain the character of the buildings on, and within the
neighborhood of, the property operating a bed and breakfast. Physical
modifications to the structure may be permitted including the provision of
barrier free access in order to meet building code requirements.
      g.   Meals for bed and breakfast patrons shall be prepared using the same
kitchen facilities as are used for the residents. Kitchen facilities shall
comply with all appropriate city, county and state regulations.
      h.   One off-street parking space per room to be rented shall be
provided, in addition to the parking required for a single-family dwelling.
Parking shall be arranged so as not to pose negative impacts on adjacent
properties or necessitate on-street parking.
      i.   All sleeping rooms in the bed and breakfast shall be provided in
accordance with the Michigan Residential Code promulgated pursuant to MCL
125.1504 and the additional requirements of MCL 125.1504b.
      j.   Every bed and breakfast bedroom shall contain a functional smoke
detector, and an approved fire extinguisher shall be located on each floor on
which such sleeping rooms are located.
      k.   Bed and breakfast bedrooms shall be a minimum of 120 square feet for
the first two occupants and an additional 30 square feet for each additional
occupant in that bedroom.
      l.   One-bathroom group for every three sleeping rooms shall be provided,
with a minimum of two bathrooms for the exclusive use of bed and breakfast
guests.
      m.   The stay of bed and breakfast occupants shall be no more than 14
consecutive days and not more than 30 days in any one calendar year.
      n.   The operator of each facility shall keep a list of the names of all
persons staying at the bed and breakfast, which list shall be available for
inspection by the zoning official.
      o.   The bed and breakfast use shall not cause a nuisance to adjoining
residences due to noise, odor, lighting, or traffic.
      p.   All dimensional requirements and setbacks shall be maintained for
the district in which the bed and breakfast is located. No unique or special
equipment or mechanical devises shall be permitted that are not common for
single-family dwelling use.
   (8)   Institutional structures and uses. In recognition of the institutional
types of nonresidential uses which may be found compatible with and useful in
residential areas, and in recognition of the peculiar and unique functional
requirements of certain types of institutional uses, the planning commission
may authorize such uses by special use permit when in compliance with the
general standards and specific requirements of this article.
      a.   Institutional uses include the following:
         1.   Institutions for human care including hospitals, sanitariums, day
care, nursing or convalescent homes, homes for the aged, and philanthropic
institutions, but not institutions for substance abuse patients or correctional
institutions.
         2.   Religious uses including churches, or similar places of worship,
convents, parsonages, parish houses and other houses for clergy.
         3.   Education and social uses including public and private schools,
auditoriums and other places of assembly, centers for social activities,
lodges, fraternities, and sororities.
         4.   Public buildings and public service uses including publicly owned
and operated buildings, public utility buildings and structures, transformer
stations and substations, gas regulator stations, radio, television, and
microwave towers.
         5.   Recreation uses including parks, playgrounds, ball fields, public
swimming pools, stadiums, community centers, and country clubs.
      b.   Site location standards. In addition to any other regulations or
requirements of this chapter, the following standards shall be utilized to
evaluate any institutional use for approval:
         1.   An institutional use shall preferably be located at the edge of a
residential district, or abutting a business or industrial district or public
open space.
         2.   All means shall be utilized to face an institutional use on a
major street with motor vehicle egress and ingress thereon to avoid the impact
of traffic generated by the institutional use in the surrounding area.
         3.   An institutional use shall preferably be located on a site that
offers natural or manmade barriers that will lessen the effect of the
institutional use on the surrounding area.
         4.   A proposed institutional use shall not require costly or
uneconomical extensions of public services inconsistent with the growth of the
district.
   (9)   Racetrack, racing theater, and casino. To recognize and accommodate
the unique and functional requirements of this use, the intensity of the use,
the exceptional demands on transportation facilities and public services that
may be generated, the potential for excessive light, noise, dust, odors and
fumes, all of which require that special consideration be given to siting,
location, layout, parking, storage, traffic circulation, hours of operation,
and to ensure compatibility with neighboring uses, such uses shall be subject
to the following additional requirements:
      a.   Minimum site.
         1.   Racetrack. Twenty acres with an aggregate minimum frontage of not
less than 300 feet on at least two major streets.
         2.   Racing theatre. A minimum site of ten acres with at least 200
feet of frontage on at least one major street.
         3.   Casino. A minimum site of ten acres with at least 200 feet of
frontage on at least one major street.
         4.   Adequate ingress and egress from major street approaches shall be
available through appropriate deceleration and acceleration and turning lanes
as determined by the city traffic engineer.
      b.   Setbacks. All buildings shall be set back 100 feet from the public
street right-of-way and 50 feet from all side and rear lot lines. Parking
facilities shall be set back 50 feet from the public street right-of-way and 25
feet from all side and rear lot lines.
      c.   Lighting. Lighting shall be contained on site, directed inward and
downward and not be deflected onto adjacent properties. Except for entry
drives, no lighting fixtures shall be located within the required setbacks.
      d.   Parking requirements. There shall be provided one-half paved parking
spaces per seat or one space per 6 feet of bench seating in the stadium or
grandstand areas of such facilities plus the following additional parking:
         1.   One paved parking space for each employee on the largest shift of
the facility and each owner and trainer.
         2.   One paved parking space per 50 square feet of usable floor area
in any area where food or beverage is sold.
         3.   One paved parking space per 100 square feet of usable floor area
for all betting areas or viewing areas where seats are not provided.
         4.   One paved parking area suitable to accommodate parking of one
truck and horse trailer for each horse entered on the daily racing card.
      e.   Hours of operation. Such facility shall not be opened to the public
except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday
and 12:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. on Sunday.
   (10)   Outdoor retail sales and service. Location and special needs for
outdoor retail sales and service require careful planning to properly integrate
this type of use into the pattern of the local commercial activities that is
compatible with adjacent populations including size, site layout, screening,
duration, hours of operation and compatibility of surrounding areas. The
following minimum standards shall apply:
      a.   Sales and service shall be limited to 15% of the gross floor area of
the individual business unit.
      b.   Outdoor retail sales and service hours shall not exceed 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Sunday.
      c.   All merchandise shall be removed from the outdoor sales area and
placed within a fully enclosed building during non-business hours.
      d.   Permanent outdoor display areas may be allowed provided they are
fully screened from view on all sides at all times of year.
   (11)   Short term rentals for legal dwelling units are permitted in the C1
Central Business District. No more than six adults per bathroom may occupy a
unit. No more than two adults per bed.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 156, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 227, 10-7-2019; Ord.
No. 239, 11-9-2022; Ord. No. 255, 11-18-2024)
Sec. 94-193. Appeals.
Appeals from decisions of the planning commission in cases involving the
granting or denial of any special use permit which is required pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed with the city clerk, along with a fee as established by
resolution of the city council, and shall be decided by the city council.
   (1)   Standing to appeal. An appeal from any decision of the planning
commission involving a special use permit may be filed only by the following
persons, hereinafter referred to as appellants:
      a.   The zoning official.
      b.   The applicant for the special use permit.
      c.   An owner or occupant of real property within 300 feet of the
premises in question.
      d.   A person who has suffered or may suffer a substantial damage which
is not common to other property owners or residents of the city at large,
provided such an appeal by a non-abutting property owner or occupant shall
state sufficient facts indicating special damages to confer standing as
determined at the sole discretion of the city council.
   (2)   Time for appeal. All appeals under this section must be filed in
writing with the city clerk within 21 days following the issuance of the
written decision of the planning commission.
   (3)   Contents of the letter of appeal. The letter of appeal shall specify
the reasons for appeal and which of the general standards and specific criteria
of this chapter the planning commission is alleged to have incorrectly applied.
The appeal review shall be limited to those issues stated in said appeal.
   (4)   Appeal review. The city clerk shall forward a letter of appeal for
review by the city council at a regular meeting within 21 days of filing. The
city council shall first take action verifying the standing to appeal of the
appellant. If the appellant is found to have standing, the council shall then
take action to schedule the appeal for consideration at a subsequent regular or
special meeting not less than seven days from taking said action.
   (5)   Notice. Notice of the city council meeting for consideration of the
appeal shall be given in accordance with section 94-101.
   (6)   Scope of review.
      a.   The appeal shall be considered by the city council solely on the
written record unless the appellant specifically requests oral argument in the
letter of appeal, in which case the council shall consider any relevant
information presented in oral argument. The written record shall include the
letter of appeal, the minutes of public hearings and informational hearings
conducted by the planning commission, the applications, site plans, and any
other documentation presented to the planning commission prior to its decision,
written staff reports and recommendations considered by the commission, written
comments and documentation presented to the planning commission, and written
responses to any questions posed by the city council to any person prior to its
decision.
      b.   If oral argument is requested, the city council shall allow only
those persons with standing to appeal, as defined in section
94-193(1), to speak on the appeal. Any person allowed to speak on the appeal
shall limit their comments to the specific information addressed in the letter
of appeal.
      c.   The city council shall reverse or modify a decision of the planning
commission only if substantial rights of the appellant have been prejudiced by
a decision found to be any of the following:
         1.   In violation of this chapter or the state Zoning Enabling Act.
         2.   In excess of the authority granted to the commission by this
chapter.
         3.   Made upon unlawful procedure.
         4.   Not supported by competent, material and substantial evidence on
the record as a whole.
         5.   A clearly unwarranted or unreasonable exercise of discretion, or
an arbitrary or capricious abuse of discretion.
   (7)   Decision. The city council may affirm, reverse, modify, or remand a
decision of the planning commission. The city council shall render its decision
on appeal within 60 days of receipt of the appeal as provided in subsection
94-193(4) of this chapter, except that if a decision is remanded to the
commission for a supplemental record, the council shall render its decision
within 60 days of receipt of the supplemental record.
      a.   The city council may remand appeals to the planning commission for
the making of a supplemental record on designated issues or for reconsideration
by the planning commission. In the event that the planning commission
reconsiders a decision on remand, the reconsidered decision may be appealed in
the same manner as the original decision.
      b.   When action is taken to modify a decision of the planning commission
the city council shall, to that end, have all of the powers of the planning
commission.
   (8)   Form of decision. If the city council takes no action to reverse or
modify a decision of the planning commission within 60 days of receipt of the
record or supplemental record, the decision of the planning commission shall
become final. Decision by the council to reverse or modify a decision of the
planning commission shall state in writing which of the provisions of
subsection
94-193(6)c. have been violated and shall contain a concise statement of the
relevant provisions of the record and reasons in support of its decision. After
considering the appeal, the council may designate one of its members to prepare
a written proposal for decision to reverse or modify in which case the written
decision shall be approved and issued within 30 days thereafter.
   (9)   Stay. An appeal to the city council shall stay the exercise of all
rights and proceedings under the challenged special use permit. The council may
modify a stay pending its final decision if necessary to protect against
imminent peril to life or property.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Secs. 94-194—94-220. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. SITE PLAN REVIEW AND LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
DIVISION 1.
SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL
Sec. 94-221. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent of this article to require site plan review and approval for
certain structures and uses that can be expected to have a significant impact
on natural resources, traffic patterns and the character of future development
in the immediate area and the entire community. The requirements contained in
this article are intended to ensure that all development within the city is in
conformance with the intent and purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-222. Uses subject to site plan review.
The uses of land and structures listed in this section shall receive final site
plan review and approval in accordance with this article prior to the granting
of a building permit or a certificate of occupancy.
   (1)   Uses in the O-1, O-2, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts.
   (2)   Uses in the planned unit development district.
   (3)   Multiple-family dwelling uses.
   (4)   Uses permitted by special use permit.
   (5)   Platted subdivisions (refer to chapter 74).
   (6)   Site condominium developments.
   (7)   Public and governmental facilities.
   (8)   Off-premise signs.
   (9)   Grading and filling in any district which alters the flow of surface
water to or from the property.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 230, 9-28-2020)
Sec. 94-223. Administrative site plan review authority.
The zoning official may approve or deny any site plan for the use of land and
structures listed in this section. The zoning official may refer any submitted
site plan to the planning commission for review and approval.
   (1)   All uses of existing principal and accessory buildings which do not
increase the base or footprint of the structure.
   (2)   All uses of land and buildings which do not increase the number of
required off-street parking spaces by more than two spaces.
   (3)   Outdoor food and drink service areas at a pub, tavern, or restaurant
unless otherwise permitted by special use permit.
   (4)   A single detached accessory structure up to 200 sq. ft., or multiple
detached accessory structures up to a total cumulative of 200 sq. ft.; this
item is exempt from site plan review fees.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 166, 8-4-2008; Ord. No. 250, 8-19-2024)
Sec. 94-224. Planning commission site plan review authority.
The planning commission may approve, approve with conditions, or deny any site
plan when referred and reviewed in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-225. Preliminary site plan review and approval.
(a)   Intent, purpose, consideration concurrent with final site plan. All uses
of land and structures which are subject to the requirements of this article
shall receive preliminary site plan review and approval prior to the submission
of a final site plan unless the zoning official determines that concurrent
preliminary and final site plan review and approval will promote the general
welfare of the city. The standards for both preliminary and final site plan
review and approval in this article shall be applied when concurrent
consideration is allowed. The planning commission may require separate
preliminary and final site plan review and approval for any plan subject to
consideration by the commission.
(b)   Preliminary site plan application. The owner or designated agent shall
file an application requesting preliminary site plan review and approval with
the zoning official. The application shall be accompanied by the information
required in this section and be accompanied by the appropriate fees as
established by resolution of the city.
(c)   Preliminary site plan application requirements. All applications for
preliminary site plan review and approval shall comply with the basic required
submittal standards of subsection
94-225(d)(1) of this chapter. The additional required submittal standards of
subsection
94-225(d)(2) of this chapter shall be satisfied by any application for
preliminary site plan review and approval involving the following uses of land
or structures.
   (1)   Planned unit development.
   (2)   Planned residential development.
   (3)   Site condominium development.
   (4)   Public and government facility.
   (5)   Any use in the M-1 or M-2 zones.
   (6)   Hotel or motel.
   (7)   Multiple-family with 12 or more units.
   (8)   Community commercial center.
   (9)   Any use involving one or more structures that occupy, either
individually or collectively, more than 15,000 square feet of gross floor area
   (10)   Other uses as determined by the designated site plan approval body,
except that for such other uses, at the sole discretion of the designated site
plan approval body, specific requirements of subsection
94-225(d)(2) of this chapter may be waived.
(d)   Preliminary site plan submittal standards. It is the intent of this
section to establish standards for submittal requirements that are consistent
with the level of complexity of a proposed development. Further, it is the
intent of this section to provide flexibility for the zoning official and
planning commission to require submittal of sufficient information to evaluate
the impact of a proposed development on nearby property and the city at large
and to demonstrate compliance with this chapter.
   (1)   Basic required submittal standards. Any application for preliminary
site plan review and approval shall include at minimum the following
information:
      a.   Name, address, and phone number of applicant and designated agent,
if applicable.
      b.   Legal description of subject property with tax parcel number.
      c.   Proof of ownership or proof of land control for the subject
property.
      d.   Existing uses on subject property and abutting properties.
      e.   Zoning of subject property.
      f.   Description of intent including proposed principle and accessory
uses.
      g.   Statement of facts showing how the proposal meets applicable
standards of this chapter including an itemized list of known or potential
variances from the standards of this chapter.
      h.   Site plan. Drawings or sketches of the subject property showing the
following:
         1.   North arrow.
         2.   Drawing date.
         3.   Site size.
         4.   Contiguous property in which applicant has ownership interest.
         5.   Proposed pedestrian and vehicle circulation systems.
         6.   Location of existing and proposed structures including existing
and proposed front, side, and rear yard setbacks.
         7.   Location of existing and proposed uses.
         8.   Location of existing and proposed off-street parking and curb
cuts.
         9.   Location and nature of proposed signage.
         10.   Location of existing and proposed easements.
         11.   Location and screening of refuse facilities.
      i.   Landscape sketch plan meeting the requirements of section 94-241 of
this chapter.
   (2)   Additional required submittal standards. Any application for
preliminary site plan review and approval involving any of the uses listed in
subsection
94-225(c) of this chapter shall include at minimum the following information.
      a.   All information required in subsection
94-225(d)(1) of this chapter.
      b.   Zoning of property within 500 feet of the subject property.
      c.   Vicinity map showing the location of the subject property and the
following information:
         1.   Minimum scale of 1" = 600'.
         2.   North arrow.
         3.   Street names.
         4.   Schools.
         5.   Parks and recreation facilities.
         6.   Shopping areas.
         7.   Major streets and highways.
         8.   Major public buildings.
      d.   Site plan. Scaled drawings of the subject property showing the
following:
         1.   Minimum scale of 1" = 100', north arrow, date, titles.
         2.   Location of existing watercourses, depressions, ponds, marshes,
wetlands, other regulated water bodies, and other unique natural features.
         3.   Base flood level.
         4.   Location, size, nature of existing and proposed rights-of-way,
easements, other encumbrances.
         5.   Streets with proposed street names.
         6.   Proposed loading areas.
         7.   Proposed lighting plan.
         8.   Proposed access to existing public streets.
         9.   Number, dimensions, size of buildings.
         10.   Number, dimensions, size of lots or other land divisions.
         11.   Number, dimensions, size of dwelling units.
         12.   Boundaries of construction phases.
         13.   Architect schematic plans, elevations, and/or perspective
sketches of proposed buildings.
         14.   Existing and proposed grading contours at two-foot intervals.
         15.   Basis of any calculations.
         16.   Seal of a professional engineer, architect, landscape architect
or community planner licensed in the State of Michigan.
         17.   Location and proposed use of common open spaces.
      e.   How legal title is held, regulated, maintained.
         1.   Proposed easements, covenants, articles of association.
         2.   Soil survey data as made available by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture Soil Conservation Service indicating soil characteristics and
suitability for development.
      f.   Construction schedule.
      g.   Detailed cost estimate.
      h.   Engineering report of proposed location and size of water, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, and surface drainage systems.
      i.   Identity of all land surveyors, architects, landscape architects,
community planners and engineers participating in the proposal.
      j.   Landscape detailed plan meeting the requirements of section
94-241 of this chapter.
   (3)   Supplemental analysis and information. The designated site plan
approval body may require that supplemental information and analysis be
submitted as part of any application for preliminary site plan review and
approval if such information is deemed necessary by the designated site plan
approval body to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
The costs for such supplemental analysis and information shall be incurred by
the applicant. Supplemental information may include the following:
      a.   Detailed soil survey data including soil boring data from the
subject property and engineering analysis.
      b.   Proof of financial ability.
      c.   Impact on fiscal and economic conditions of the city and surrounding
area.
      d.   Impact on natural features on subject property and adjacent
property.
      e.   Impact on public facilities and services.
      f.   Impact on traffic flow and volume.
      g.   Boundary survey.
      h.   Any other information deemed necessary by the designated site plan
approval body to demonstrate compliance of the proposal with the requirements
of this chapter.
(e)   Time frame.
   (1)   Special use permit. The terms of acceptance and review of an
application for preliminary site plan review and approval submitted as part of
an application for a special use permit shall be as required in section 94-191
(b)(4) of this chapter.
   (2)   Acceptance of application. For any application for preliminary site
plan review and approval separate from an application for a special use permit,
the zoning official shall either issue a receipt of acceptance or return the
application as incomplete within ten business days after submission.
   (3)   Application review. For any application for preliminary site plan
review and approval separate from an application for a special use permit, the
zoning official shall, within 45 days of acceptance, either complete review of
the application or refer the application to the planning commission for review.
(f)   Request for review. The zoning official shall notify the agencies and
individuals identified in section
94-394(d), or other agencies or individuals as deemed appropriate, of receipt
of the site plan application.
(g)   Zoning official review. The zoning official shall have the authority to
approve or deny an application for preliminary site plan review and approval as
allowed by, and in accordance with, the requirements of section
94-223 of this chapter. Site plan review shall be in accordance with the
standards in section
94-227 of this chapter.
(h)   Planning commission review. The planning commission shall have the
authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for
preliminary site plan review and approval in accordance with the requirements
of section
94-224 of this chapter. The following review procedures shall be utilized when
considering an application:
   (1)   The planning commission shall receive from the zoning official a copy
of all material submitted.
   (2)   The planning commission shall receive a review and recommendation from
the zoning official relative to the compliance of the preliminary site plan
with the requirements of this chapter.
   (3)   The planning commission shall receive from the zoning official a
review and/or recommendation from all appropriate local, state, and federal
agencies.
   (4)   The planning commission shall utilize the criteria identified within
section
94-227 of this chapter when reviewing an application.
   (5)   The planning commission may impose conditions when approving a
preliminary site plan application. The conditions must be reasonable, directly
related to the standards of this chapter, or determined to be necessary for the
protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-226. Final site plan review and approval.
(a)   Final site plan application. The owner or designated agent shall file an
application with the zoning official requesting final site plan review and
approval in compliance with section
94-225(a). The application shall be accompanied by the information required in
this section and be accompanied by the appropriate fees as established by
resolution of the city council.
(b)   Final site plan application requirements. All applications for final site
plan review and approval shall comply with the final site plan submittal
standards of subsection
94-226(c).
(c)   Final site plan submittal standards. It is the intent of this section to
establish standards for submittal requirements that are consistent with the
level of complexity of a proposed development. Further, it is the intent of
this section to provide flexibility for the zoning official and planning
commission to require submittal of sufficient information to evaluate the
impact of a proposed development on nearby property and the city at large and
to demonstrate compliance with this chapter.
   (1)   Any application for final site plan review and approval shall include
at minimum all information submitted with the approved preliminary site plan
with all changes incorporated that are necessary to comply with the direction
of the designated site plan approval body during preliminary site plan review.
The applicant may reference or re-use information submitted with the
preliminary plan but shall submit an itemized list of such information.
   (2)   Drawings and other information submitted for final site plan review
and approval shall be sealed or certified by the appropriate professional
engineer, architect, landscape architect or planner.
   (3)   Any application for final site plan review and approval for a proposal
that includes a use specifically listed in subsection
94-225(c) of this chapter shall include detailed construction drawings for
water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and surface drainage plans sealed by a
professional engineer registered in the State of Michigan.
   (4)   Any application for final site plan review and approval shall include
final documents for recording perpetual use of common open space, easements,
rights-of-way, and dedications.
   (5)   Any application for final site plan review and approval shall include
detailed drawings and/or specifications describing road design and construction
plans, pavement and sidewalk design and construction plans, lighting plans, and
all other construction information necessary to ensure that the project is
built as approved and to ensure that the public health, safety, and welfare are
protected.
   (6)   The applicant may be required to submit, at the sole discretion of the
designated site plan approval body, information in a more detailed form for
final site plan review and approval than was required for the preliminary site
plan.
   (7)   Any application for final site plan review and approval shall include
post construction storm water management concept plan pursuant to the
requirements of Chapter 52.
(d)   Zoning official review. The zoning official shall have the authority to
approve or deny an application for final site plan review and approval as
allowed by, and in accordance with, the requirements of section
94-223. Site plan review shall be in accordance with the standards in section
94-227.
(e)   Planning commission review. The planning commission shall have the
authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for final
site plan review and approval. Final site plan review shall follow the
procedures for preliminary site plan review in subsection
94-225 and shall be in accordance with the standards in section
94-227.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 203, 10-17-2016)
Sec. 94-227. Standards for site plan review and approval.
In reviewing an application for site plan review and approval the following
standards shall apply:
   (1)   The site shall be developed so that all elements shall be harmoniously
and efficiently organized in relation to the size, shape, type and topography
of the site and surrounding property.
   (2)   The site shall be developed so as not to impede the normal and orderly
development, improvement, and use of surrounding property for uses permitted in
this chapter.
   (3)   All buildings or groups of buildings shall be arranged to permit
emergency vehicle access by some practical means to all sites.
   (4)   Every structure or dwelling unit shall have direct access to a public
street or indirect access to a public street via an approved dedicated private
street.
   (5)   Appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure that the addition or
removal of surface waters will not adversely affect neighboring properties,
that controls are in place to minimize sedimentation and erosion, and that
topographic alterations are minimized to accommodate storm water management.
   (6)   Provisions shall be made for the construction of storm sewer
facilities including grading, gutters, piping, on-site storage, and treatment
of turf as required to handle stormwater and prevent erosion.
   (7)   Secondary containment for above ground areas where hazardous
substances are stored or used shall be provided as required by the city fire
chief.
   (8)   Exterior lighting shall be designed and located so that the source of
illumination is directed away from adjacent properties, the intensity of
lighting is the minimum necessary, and the direction of lighting is downward as
much as is possible and appropriate for the project.
   (9)   All loading and unloading areas, outside storage areas, and refuse
receptacles shall be screened from casual view from the public rights-of-way
and adjoining land uses.
   (10)   Site plans shall meet the driveway, traffic safety, and parking
standards of the city in such manner as necessary to address the following:
      a.   Safe and efficient vehicular and non-vehicular circulation,
including parking areas, non-motorized linkages to abutting parcels, uses,
sidewalks, and trails.
      b.   Shared driveways and service drives.
      c.   Adequate and properly located utilities.
   (11)   Provisions shall be made for proposed common areas and public
features to be reasonably maintained.
   (12)   The site plan submittal shall demonstrate compliance with all
applicable requirements of this chapter, chapters 58 and 74, the building code,
and county, state, and federal law.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-228. Amendments to an approved site plan.
(a)   Material change. An approved preliminary site plan may be amended only
after review and approval by the original approving authority. The process for
review and approval shall be the same as that used for the original approval of
the preliminary plan. The applicant shall be responsible for paying any
additional costs incurred by the city as a result of a request to amend an
approved preliminary site plan.
(b)   Administrative approval. An approved final site plan may be
administratively amended by the zoning official if it is determined, at the
sole discretion of the zoning official, that no material change is proposed,
including the location of streets and buildings, the location and amount of
open space or off-street parking, the location and type of landscaping
material, the number of dwelling units or structures, or any other requirements
of this chapter. An amendment which, in the opinion of the zoning official,
represents a material change shall be referred to the planning commission for
review and approval if the planning commission exercised original approval
authority, or may be referred to the planning commission at the sole discretion
of the zoning official.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-229. Extension of site plan approval.
Approvals of preliminary site plans are valid for a period of six months. Only
one extension of a preliminary site plan for an additional six months may be
granted at the sole discretion of the approving authority. A preliminary site
plan approval is deemed to have expired if an application for final site plan
review and approval has not been submitted and accepted by the zoning official
within six months of approval of the preliminary site plan. Approvals of a
final site plan are valid for a period of 12 months. Only one extension of a
final site plan may be granted for an additional 12 months at the sole
discretion of the approving authority. A final site plan is deemed to have
expired if a building permit has not been obtained for the development within
12 months of approval of the final site plan. A request to extend preliminary
or final site plan validity shall be submitted prior to the expiration of the
preliminary or final site plan.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-230. Conformance to approved site plan.
A development project shall conform to the approved final site plan. Failure to
conform to the approved final site plan shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-231. Review standards for planning commission decision.
(a)   A decision rejecting, approving, or conditionally approving a site plan
shall be based upon requirements and standards contained in the zoning
ordinance, other statutorily authorized and properly adopted local unit of
government planning documents, other applicable ordinances, and state and
federal statutes.
(b)   A site plan shall be approved if it contains the information required by
the zoning ordinance and is in compliance with the conditions imposed under the
zoning ordinance, other statutorily authorized and properly adopted local unit
of government planning documents, other applicable ordinances, and state and
federal statutes.
(Ord. No. 176, 5-4-2009)
Secs. 94-232—94-240. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
Sec. 94-241. Landscape, screening and buffer requirements.
(a)   Intent. The intent of this section is to require landscape buffers and
screening to reduce negative effects between incompatible land uses, to provide
landscaping within parking areas, and to enhance aesthetic and ecological
qualities, character, privacy, and land values. Landscape plans shall preserve,
to the extent practical, the existing vegetation and ecological systems on the
site.
(b)   Landscape plan submittal standards.
   (1)   Sketch plan. The following information shall be provided:
      a.   Name, address, phone number of the person who prepared the plan.
      b.   All appropriate information required in subsection
94-225(d)(1)h.
      c.   Location of existing significant vegetation to be saved and existing
significant vegetation to be removed.
      d.   Location, size, type, and quantity of proposed planting materials
including botanical and common names.
      e.   Location and description of proposed landscape materials and
elements such as berms, walls, ponds, and tree wells.
      f.   Proposed planting schedule.
      g.   Proposed planting and staking details.
      h.   Location and description of proposed screening and landscape
treatment for refuse facilities.
   (2)   Detailed plan. The following information shall be provided:
      a   All applicable information required in subsection
94-241(b)(1).
      b.   All applicable information required in subsection
94-225(d)(2)d.
      c.   Minimum scale of one inch = 20 feet for sites of 20 acres or less.
      d.   Minimum scale of one inch = 50 feet for sites of more than 20 acres.
      e.   Drawings shall be sealed by a registered landscape architect
licensed in the State of Michigan.
(c)   Landscape plan design standards.
   (1)   All plant materials shall be hardy to the county, free of disease and
insects and conform to the standards of the American Association of Nurserymen.
   (2)   All plant materials shall be installed in such a manner so as not to
alter drainage patterns on-site or adjacent properties or obstruct vision for
reasons of safety, ingress, or egress.
   (3)   All plant material shall be planted in a manner so as not to obstruct,
interfere with, or cause damage to utility lines, public sidewalks and public
roadways.
   (4)   Existing plant material which complies with the standards and intent
of this chapter as determined by the designated site plan approval body may be
credited toward meeting the landscape requirements.
   (5)   All shrub plant material shall be planned to achieve its horizontal
and vertical effect within four years of installation.
   (6)   Clustering of trees and shrubs within the buffer zone is permitted.
   (7)   All plant materials shall comply with the list of preferred trees and
shrubs and dimensional requirements as approved by the planning commission upon
the recommendation of the tree commission of the city. The planning commission
may allow substitutions.
   (8)   In addition to any required buffer area or parking lot landscaping, at
least ten percent of the site area shall be landscaped with grasses and other
live groundcovers, planting beds, and trees, or combinations thereof, and the
site shall include a minimum of one tree per 10,000 square feet of disturbed
land, or fraction thereof.
(d)   Installation, maintenance and completion.
   (1)   All landscaping required by this chapter shall either be planted prior
to obtaining a certificate of occupancy or secured by a performance guarantee
in accordance with section
94-100 of this chapter.
   (2)   All landscaping and landscape elements shall be planted, and earth
moving or grading performed, in accordance with generally accepted planting and
grading procedures.
   (3)   The owner of property required to be landscaped by this chapter shall
maintain such landscaping in a reasonably healthy condition, free from refuse
and debris. All unhealthy and dead material shall be replaced within one year
of damage or death or the next appropriate planting period, whichever comes
first.
(e)   Buffer zone requirements.
   (1)   A buffer zone shall be required on the subject parcel as indicated in
table 100-4 in chapter 100.
   (2)   A parcel requiring a buffer zone shall comply with the buffer zone
development standards set forth in subsection
94-241(f).
   (3)   If parcel dimensions and/or topography are such that a parcel cannot
reasonably comply with the buffer zone standards of section
94-241(f), then the designated site plan approval body shall determine the
character of the buffer based on the following criteria:
      a.   Traffic impact.
      b.   Increased building and parking lot coverage.
      c.   Increased outdoor sales, display, or manufacturing area.
      d.   Physical characteristics of the site and surrounding area including
topography, vegetation, and other natural features.
      e.   Visual, noise, and air pollution.
      f.   Health, safety, and welfare.
      g.   Additional dwelling units and resulting density in a residential
development.
      h.   The location and dimension of the existing easements on the site.
      i.   Any other criteria pertinent to the proposed use or character of the
site.
   (4)   If two zoning districts requiring a buffer zone are separated by a
street, the design of the buffer zone shall be determined by the designated
site plan approval body.
   (5)   There shall be no planting of trees, shrubs, bushes, or other such
permanent plants in the area of any public easement. Only grass or other ground
cover approved by the zoning official shall be permitted.
   (6)   Any of the requirements of this section
94-241 may be waived or otherwise modified through site plan review and
approval provided the approving body determines that specific characteristics
of the site or site vicinity make such requirements unnecessary, inappropriate,
or ineffective, or that such requirements would cause impaired vision at a
driveway or street intersection. In addition, any of the requirements of this
section
94-241 may be increased or otherwise modified through site plan review and
approval provided the approving body determines that specific characteristics
of the site or site vicinity justify additional measures to mitigate the
impacts of a proposed use.
(f)   Buffer zone development standards.
   (1)   Required buffer zones shall comply with the following standards:
      a.   Buffer zone A.
         1.   Minimum width of five feet.
         2.   The buffer zone shall contain a minimum six-foot high screen
comprised of plant material, deciduous or evergreen trees, berms, screen walls
or fences, or any combination of these elements.
         3.   If berms are used for all or part of the buffer zone screen, the
berm shall contain a minimum of one shrub for each ten linear feet of berm
length, or fraction thereof. All required plant material shall be placed on the
top and exterior side slope of the berm.
         4.   If a screen wall or fence is used for all or part of the buffer
zone screen, a minimum of one shrub for each ten linear feet of wall or fence,
or fraction thereof, shall be placed on the exterior of the wall or fence.
         5.   If plant material is used for all or part of the buffer zone
screen, the screen shall consist of a minimum of four shrubs for each 20 linear
feet of screen length or fraction thereof.
         6.   All areas outside of the planting beds shall be covered with
grass or other living ground cover.
      b.   Buffer zone B.
         1.   Minimum width of ten feet.
         2.   The buffer zone shall contain one tree for each 30 linear feet of
buffer zone length or fraction thereof. At least one-half of the total number
of trees required within the buffer zone shall be canopy trees.
         3.   If berming is used for all or part of the buffer zone screen, the
berm shall contain a minimum of one shrub for each ten linear feet of berm
length, or fraction thereof. All required plant material shall be placed on the
top and exterior side slope of the berm.
         4.   If a screen wall or fence is used for all or part of the buffer
zone screen, a minimum of one shrub for each ten linear feet of wall or fence,
or fraction thereof, shall be placed on the exterior side of the wall or fence.
         5.   If plant material is used for all or part of the required buffer
zone screen, the screen shall consist of a minimum of four shrubs for each 20
linear feet of screen length or fraction thereof.
         6.   All areas outside of the planting beds shall be covered with
grass or other living ground cover.
      c.   Buffer zone C.
         1.   Minimum width of 30 feet.
         2.   The buffer zone shall contain one tree for each 30 linear feet of
buffer zone length or fraction thereof. At least one-half of the total number
of trees required within the buffer zone shall be canopy trees.
         3.   The buffer zone shall contain a minimum six-foot high screen
comprised of plant material, berming screen walls or fences, or any combination
of these elements.
         4.   If berming is used for all or part of the buffer zone screen, the
berm shall contain a minimum of one shrub for each ten linear feet of berm
length, or fraction thereof. All required plant material shall be placed on the
top and the exterior side slope of the berm.
         5.   If a screen wall or fence is used for all or part of the buffer
zone screen, a minimum of one shrub for each ten linear feet of wall or fence,
or fraction thereof, shall be placed on the exterior side of the wall or fence.
         6.   If plant material is used for all or part of the required buffer
zone screen, the screen shall consist of a minimum of four shrubs for each 20
linear feet of screen length or fraction thereof. The shrubs shall be a minimum
of 24 inches high at the time of planting.
         7.   All areas outside of the planting beds shall be covered with
grass or other living ground cover.
      d.   Buffer zone D.
         1.   Minimum width of 50 feet.
         2.   The buffer zone shall contain one tree for each 20-linear feet of
buffer zone length or fraction thereof. At least one-half of the total number
of trees required within the buffer zone shall be canopy trees.
         3.   The buffer zone shall contain a minimum six-foot high screen
comprised of plant material, berms, screen walls or fences, or any combination
of these elements.
         4.   If berms are used for all or part of the buffer zone screen, the
berm shall contain a minimum of one shrub for each ten linear feet of berm
length, or fraction thereof. All required plant material shall be placed on the
top and exterior side slope of the berm.
         5.   If a screen wall or fence is used for all or part of the buffer
zone screen, a minimum of one shrub for each ten linear feet of wall or fence,
or fraction thereof, shall be placed on the exterior of the wall or fence.
         6.   If plant material is used for all or part of the buffer zone
screen, the screen shall consist of a minimum of four shrubs for each 20 linear
feet of screen length or fraction thereof. The shrubs shall be a minimum of 24-
inches high at the time of planting.
         7.   All areas outside of the planting beds shall be covered with
grass or other living ground cover.
(g)   Minimum standards for berms.
   (1)   Berms shall be constructed so as to maintain a side slope not to
exceed a one-foot rise to a three-foot run ratio.
   (2)   Berm areas not containing planting beds shall be covered with grass or
living ground cover maintained in a healthy growing condition.
   (3)   Berms shall be constructed in such a manner so as to not alter
drainage on-site or on adjacent properties or obstruct vision for reasons of
safety, ingress or egress.
   (4)   If a berm is constructed with a retaining wall or by terracing, the
earthen slope shall face the exterior of the site. The planning commission may
waive this requirement.
   (5)   Berms shall not encroach into the clear vision area at street
intersections or driveway and property line intersections.
(h)   Minimum standards for screen walls and fences.
   (1)   All screen walls and fences shall be constructed with new or re-
manufactured, durable, weather resistant and easily maintainable materials.
Chain link and barbed wire fences are not permitted.
   (2)   The wall or fence may be constructed with openings that do not exceed
20 percent of the wall surface. The openings shall not reduce the intended
obscuring effect of the wall.
   (3)   Screen walls or fences shall not be constructed so as to alter
drainage on-site or on adjacent properties.
   (4)   All fences, walls, or structural screens shall be a minimum of six
feet in height.
   (5)   Screen walls or fences shall not be constructed or erected in a clear
vision area.
   (6)   Detention/retention areas shall be permitted within the buffer zones
provided they do not hamper the screening intent of the buffer or jeopardize
the survival of plant materials.
   (7)   Solid waste dumpsters and recycling containers may be installed in the
buffer zones provided they are screened in accordance with subsection
94-173(b)(3) of this chapter.
(i)   Off-street parking landscape development standards.
   (1)   Required parking lot landscape areas shall comply with the following
standards:
      a.   Off-street parking areas containing six or more parking spaces shall
be provided with landscaping in accordance with the following:
         1.   Six through 50 spaces: One canopy tree and 50 sq. ft. of
landscaped area per six spaces.
         2.   Fifty-one or more spaces: One canopy tree and 100 sq. ft. of
landscaped area per eight spaces.
      b.   All landscaped areas shall be covered by grass, shredded bark,
mulch, stone, or a living ground cover.
      c.   All landscaped areas shall contain at least one canopy tree.
      d.   The designated site plan approval body shall approve the location of
required off-street parking area landscaping using the following criteria:
         1.   Landscaping shall be installed such that, when mature, it does
not obscure traffic signs, fire hydrants, lighting, drainage patterns on-site
or adjacent properties, or obstruct vision for reason of safety, ingress, or
egress.
         2.   Trees shall be installed in such a manner that parked motor
vehicles are shaded whenever possible.
         3.   Landscaping shall be dispersed throughout the parking lot in
order to breakup large expanses of impervious surfaces.
         4.   At least one-half of the required trees shall be installed in the
interior of the parking area. The interior shall be considered as any point ten
feet or more from the outside boundary of the parking area.
      e.   All landscaped areas shall be protected by a raised standard or
rolled concrete curb.
      f.   The planning commission may require that all parking areas in excess
of 120 percent of the minimum required shall have a non-impervious surface and
be designed to be harmonious with the surrounding landscaping.
   (2)   In no case shall any buffer zone be considered as part of the off-
street parking landscaped area.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Secs. 94-242—94-260. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. SITE CONDOMINIUM REGULATIONS
Sec. 94-261. Intent and purpose.
The intent of this article is to ensure that plans for site condominium
developments within the city, proposed under the provisions of the Condominium
Act (MCL 559.101 et seq.), shall be reviewed in the same manner and with the
intent of achieving the same characteristics as if the development and
improvements therein were being proposed pursuant to the Land Division Act,
(MCL 560.101 et seq.). It is also the intent of this section to ensure that
such development is in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and
other applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-262. General requirements and standards
(a)   Site plan required. No building permit shall be issued for any unit, and
no construction, grading, work, or other development shall be done upon any
land intended to be used for a site condominium until a final site plan has
been approved in accordance with division 1 of article VII of this chapter and
the additional standards of this article.
(b)   Permitted districts. A site condominium development is permissible in all
zoning districts.
(c)   Equivalent of a lot. The condominium unit and the limited common area
reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of the co-owner of that unit
in a site condominium development are considered together as the functional
equivalent of a standard subdivision "lot". (See figure 100-104 in chapter
100).
(d)   Compliance with district regulations. A site condominium development
shall comply with the district regulations and dimensional requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located.
(e)   Condominium lot as basis of measurement. Required yards shall be measured
from the boundaries of a condominium lot. Ground floor coverage and floor area
ratio shall be calculated using the area of the condominium lot.
(f)   Water and sanitary sewer service. Each condominium lot shall be connected
to the water and sanitary sewer facilities of the city.
(g)   Condominium unit boundary relocation. Relocation of boundaries between
adjoining condominium units if permitted in the condominium documents as
provided in Section 48 of the Condominium Act (MCL 559.148), shall comply with
all regulations of the zoning district in which located and shall be approved
by the planning commission. These requirements shall be made a part of the
bylaws and recorded as part of the master deed.
(h)   Condominium lot split. Each condominium lot that results from a
subdivision of another condominium lot, if such subdivision is permitted by the
condominium documents as provided in Section 49 of the Condominium Act (MCL
559.149), shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which
located and shall be approved by the planning commission. These requirements
shall be made a part of the condominium bylaws and recorded as part of the
master deed.
(i)   Compliance with subdivision ordinance. All site condominium projects
shall conform to the applicable standards of article II of chapter 74.
(j)   Amendment to master deed or bylaws. Any amendment to a master deed or
bylaws that affects the approved final site plan, shall be reviewed and
approved by the original approving authority of the city before the issuance of
a building permit or the recording of the revised master deed or bylaws.
(k)   Development agreement. The city may require, as a condition of approval,
that the applicant enter into a development agreement incorporating the terms
and conditions of final site plan approval and record the same in the office of
the county register of deeds.
(l)   Construction located in general common element. Any application for a
building permit for construction to be located in a general common element
shall include written authorization by the condominium association.
(m)   Monuments and lot irons. Monuments shall be set at all boundary corners
and deflection points and at all road right-of-way intersection corners and
deflection points. Lot irons shall be set at all condominium lot corners and
deflection points of condominium lot lines. The city may grant a delay in the
setting of required monuments or irons for a reasonable time, but not to exceed
one year, on condition that the developer deposit with the city clerk a
performance guarantee in accordance with section
94-100 of this chapter in an amount determined by resolution of the city
council. Such deposit shall be returned to the developer upon receipt of a
certificate by a surveyor registered in the state that the monuments and irons
have been set as required and within the time specified. If the developer
defaults, the city council shall promptly require a registered surveyor to set
the monuments and irons in the ground as shown on the condominium site plans at
a cost not to exceed the amount of the performance guarantee.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-263. Approval required.
All proposals to divide property other than according to the Land Division Act
(MCL 560.101 et seq.) or article II of chapter 74, must comply with this
article.
Sec. 94-264. Preliminary site plan requirements.
(a)   Filing. The preliminary site plan shall be filed for review and approval
in accordance with division 1 of article VII of this chapter.
(b)   Information required. In addition to the standards of division 1 of
article VII of this chapter, the following shall be provided with the
preliminary site plan:
   (1)   The boundaries of all condominium units, limited common elements,
general common elements, and building envelopes.
   (2)   Statements regarding the use and occupancy restrictions and
maintenance provisions for all general and limited common elements as will be
contained in the master deed.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-265. Final site plan requirements.
(a)   Filing. The final site plan shall be filed for review and approval in
accordance with division 1 of article VII of this chapter.
(b)   Information required. A final site plan shall include a condominium
subdivision plan including all information required in section 66 of the
Condominium Act (MCL 559.166) and the master deed and by-laws.
(c)   Agency approval. The applicant shall provide proof of approval by all
local, state, and federal agencies having jurisdiction over the improvements in
the site condominium development, including the county drain commissioner,
county road commission, and the county health department.
(d)   Amendments to master deed or bylaws. Any amendment to a master deed or
bylaws that affects the approved preliminary or final site plan, shall be
reviewed and approved by the original approving body before any building permit
may be issued where such permit is required.
(e)   Rights-of-way and utility easements. All rights-of-way and utility
easements shall be described separately from individual condominium lots and
shall be accurately delineated by bearings and distances on the condominium
subdivision plan and the final site plan. The rights-of-way and utility
easements shall be separately designed for their individual purpose, such as
access, roadway, location, installation, maintenance and replacing of public
utilities. The developer shall dedicate to the appropriate agency all easements
for utilities. All roads shall be constructed in accordance with the standards
of the city. Water, sewer and electrical easements may be placed within
streets, subject to the approval of the city and the county road commission as
applicable.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Secs. 94-266--94-290. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
Sec. 94-291. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent of this article that automobile parking spaces shall be
provided and adequately maintained for the off-street storage of motor vehicles
by occupants, employees, and patrons of each building and premise constructed,
altered or enlarged under the provisions of this chapter. The number of off-
street parking spaces prescribed in conjunction with all land or building uses
shall be provided prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-292. General off-street parking and loading requirements. 
(a)   Application of floor area. The term usable floor area (UFA) shall be
applied as defined in chapter 1.
(b)   Fractional space. When units of measurement determining the number of
required parking spaces result in a fractional space, any fraction above one-
half shall require one parking space.
(c)   Requirements for a use not mentioned. In the case of a use not
specifically mentioned in this article, the zoning official shall determine the
requirements of off-street parking based upon a similar listed use.
(d)   Use of parking areas.
   (1)   The storage of merchandise, inoperable motor vehicles, motor vehicles
for sale, and the commercial service or repair of vehicles in parking areas is
prohibited.
   (2)   Parking areas once designated shall not be changed to any other use
unless and until equal space facilities are provided elsewhere subject to
planning commission approval.
   (3)   Parking and storage of certain vehicles. In residential zoning
districts, the storage of commercial vehicles shall be limited to one vehicle
per residential dwelling which shall not exceed a G.V.W.R. of 15,000 pounds.
Further, such commercial vehicles must be owned and operated by a member of the
family residing in said dwelling and shall not be used for hauling garbage or
refuse or other objectionable matter.
(e)   Building additions or other changes in floor area. Whenever a use
requiring off-street parking is increased in floor area, or when interior
building modifications result in an increase in capacity for any such use,
additional parking shall be provided and maintained in the proper ratio to the
increased floor area or capacity.
(f)   Joint use of parking areas. The joint use of parking facilities by two or
more uses may be granted by the zoning official or the planning commission for
uses requiring site plan review by the planning commission whenever such joint
use is practical and satisfactory to each of the uses intended to be served,
and when all requirements for location, design, and construction are met.
   (1)   Computing capacities. The space requirement for jointly used parking
facilities shall be the sum of the individual requirements. If space
requirements for individual uses occur at distinctly different times, the total
of such off-street parking facilities required for joint use may be reduced
below the sum total of the individual space requirements at the sole discretion
of the zoning official, but shall not be reduced below the largest single use
requirement.
   (2)   Record of agreement. An agreement between joint users shall be made a
condition of site plan approval and a copy of such agreement shall be filed
with the application for a building permit and recorded with the Register of
Deeds of Ingham County. The agreement shall include a guarantee for continued
use and maintenance of the parking facility by each party.
(g)   Parking space requirements.
   (1)   Table 100-5 in chapter 100 sets forth the minimum standards for the
number of parking spaces required by type of land use.
   (2)   Parking space deferment. Where the property owner can demonstrate that
the required amount of parking is excessive, the site plan approving body may
waive the parking requirement and approve a parking area smaller than required.
The parking area waived shall be designated as reserved parking area for
possible future use. The site plan approving body may subsequently require the
applicant to construct additional parking spaces upon a determination by said
body that the reduced number of parking spaces is not adequate to meet the
parking needs of the use and public safety and welfare is at risk. Upon such a
determination, the applicant shall convert the reserved parking area into
available parking spaces in compliance with said determination and the
requirements of this article within six months of being so directed in writing
by the zoning official. The approved site plan shall clearly identify the
location of this reserved parking area including dimensions and dotted parking
space layout, and no buildings, structures, or similar improvements shall be
established in the reserved parking area. A notice clearly identifying the
location and number of reserved parking spaces should be recorded with the
Ingham County Register of Deeds by the owner as a condition of final site plan
approval. This discretion shall be guided by the basis of determination set
forth at section 94-191(f). This subsection shall apply only to office,
commercial, and industrial uses that are required to provide more than 50
parking spaces.
(h)   Location of parking areas. All off-street parking areas shall be located
on the same lot, or on the adjacent premises in the same district as the use
they are intended to serve, with the following exceptions:
   (1)   Uses in the C-1 district. There shall be no off-street parking space
requirements in the C-1 district for those uses which require 20 or less off-
street parking spaces. Uses requiring more than 20 off-street parking spaces
shall have their parking requirement determined by the planning commission. In
making such a decision, the planning commission shall consider the availability
of both public and private parking spaces.
   (2)   Uses in C-2 and C-3 districts. Parking on the premises or within 400
feet.
   (3)   Uses in M-1 and M-2 districts. Parking on the premises or within 800
feet.
   (4)   Public and quasi-public buildings, places of assembly, private clubs,
associations and institutions. Parking on the premises or within 400 feet.
(i)   Parking lot plan review. Whenever six or more off-street parking spaces
are required for a given use, plans and specifications for the construction or
alteration of an off-street parking area shall be submitted to the zoning
official before a building permit can be issued. Such plans and specifications
shall indicate, to the satisfaction of the zoning official, the location, basis
of capacity calculation, size, site design, surfacing, marking, lighting,
drainage, curb cuts, entrances, exits, landscaping, and any other detailed
feature essential to the complete design and construction of the parking area.
(j)   Site development standards. All off-street parking areas shall be
designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards
and requirements:
   (1)   Parking in the required front yard is prohibited in the RM, C-1, O-1,
and O-2 districts. For residential uses in the AG, RS-1, RS-2, RS-3, and R2F
districts, that portion of a regularly constructed driveway extending in front
of the required front yard setback line may be used for parking by up to two
passenger vehicles. Front yard parking in the C-2, C-3, M-1, and M-2 districts
is prohibited except upon a finding by the planning commission that such
parking is a critical component of the operation of the particular use and that
adequate provisions are included for the screening and landscaping of such
parking area.
   (2)   Required parking areas including driveways shall be constructed from
materials that provide a durable smooth and dustless surface, shall be drained
properly, and shall be maintained in a safe and usable condition.
   (3)   A minimum area of 200 square feet with a minimum width of ten feet
shall be provided for each vehicle parking space. Each space shall be
definitely designated and reserved for parking purposes exclusive of space
requirements for adequate ingress and egress. The planning commission may allow
up to 20 percent of the spaces to be a minimum of 180 sq. ft. with a minimum
width of nine feet in those cases where more than 40 spaces are required. For
property zoned or used as single-family or two-family residential, the required
minimum width shall be nine feet.
   (4)   Parking areas shall be so designed and marked as to provide for
orderly and safe movement and storage of vehicles.
   (5)   Adequate ingress and egress to the parking area by means of clearly
limited and defined drives shall be provided. Except for parking space provided
for residential uses in the RS-1, RS-2, and RS-3 zones, drives for ingress and
egress to the parking area shall be not less than 20 feet wide. For parking
space provided for residential uses in the R2F zone, the zoning official may
require a specified minimum drive width up to 20 feet for ingress and egress to
the parking area if found necessary to ensure public safety due to the drive
location, configuration, and visibility along the drive.
   (6)   Each parking space, within an off-street parking lot, shall be
provided with adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. Backing directly
onto a street shall be prohibited. The width of required maneuvering lanes may
vary depending upon the proposed parking pattern, as follows:
      a.   For right angle parking patterns 75 to 90 degrees, the maneuvering
lane width shall be a minimum of 20 feet for one-way traffic movement or a
minimum of 24 feet for two-way traffic movement.
      b.   For parking patterns 54 to 74 degrees, the maneuvering lane width
shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
      c.   For parking patterns 30 to 53 degrees, the maneuvering lane width
shall be a minimum of 12 feet.
      d.   All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic movement,
except for the 90-degree pattern which may provide for two-way traffic
movement.
      e.   Except for property used as residential in the RS-1, RS-2, RS-3, and
R2F districts, adequate lighting shall be provided throughout the hours when
the parking area is in operation. All lighting shall be so arranged as to
reflect light away from any residential property adjacent to the parking area
and any adjacent road or street.
      f.   Where a parking area or drive with a capacity of six or more
vehicles adjoins a residential district, a landscaped buffer strip at minimum
equivalent to the requirements of subsection
94-241(f)(1)b. of this chapter shall be provided between the parking area and
the adjoining property.
   (7)   Parking for the disabled shall comply with the State of Michigan
Barrier Free Rules, Public Act No. 1 of 1966, as amended. For uses where there
may be a higher number of persons with disabilities, such as medical uses or
senior housing, the site plan approving body may require a larger proportion of
the parking spaces be barrier-free.
(k)   Signs. Parking area signage shall comply with applicable local, state and
federal regulations.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 230, 9-28-2020)
Sec. 94-293. Loading and unloading space requirements.
(a)   Intent and purpose. Every manufacturing, storage, warehouse, department
store, wholesale store, retail store, hotel, hospital, laundry, dairy,
mortuary, restaurant, tavern and other uses similarly and customarily receiving
or distributing goods by motor vehicle shall provide space on the premises for
that number of delivery vehicles that will be at the premises at the same time
on an average day of full use.
(b)   Additional parking space. Loading space required under this chapter shall
be in addition to off-street parking space required under this chapter.
(c)   Space requirements. Adequate space shall be provided for loading and
unloading services not less than 12 feet in width, 25 feet in length, and 14
feet in height, open or enclosed, for uses listed in table 100-6 in chapter
100, or for similar uses involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles of
materials or merchandise. There shall be no requirement of loading or unloading
space in the C-1 district for property with direct access to an alley.
(d)   Access. Access to loading and unloading space shall be provided directly
from a public street or alley and such space shall provide sufficient off-
street maneuvering space as well as adequate ingress and egress to and from a
street or alley.
(e)   Site requirements. Off-street loading spaces and access drives shall be
paved, drained, lighted, and shall have appropriate bumper or wheel guards
where needed. Any light used for illumination shall be so arranged as to
reflect the light away from adjoining premises and streets. Where any off-
street loading space adjoins or abuts a lot used for residential, educational,
recreational, or religious purposes, or abuts a residential district, a wall or
solid fence not less than four feet in height shall be provided between the
off-street loading space and said residential, educational, recreational, or
religious lot or residential zone.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Secs. 94-294—94-320. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND AND STRUCTURES
Sec. 94-321. Intent and purpose.
The intent of this article is to regulate an existing use, structure, or lot,
or any combination thereof, which does not conform to the terms and conditions
provided in this chapter. Further this article intends to allow the
continuation of lawful nonconforming uses while securing the gradual
elimination of all such uses over time. It is recognized that lots, structures,
and uses of land and structures exist which were lawful before this chapter was
adopted, or amended, and which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted
under the terms of this chapter or future amendments.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-322. Nonconforming lot.
On any lot legally created and recorded prior to the effective date of this
chapter, or an amendment thereof, which is made non-compliant with the
requirements for lot area, lot width, or lot depth-to-width ratio prescribed by
this chapter and chapter 74, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory
structures may be erected, provided that:
   (1)   Single-family dwellings are permitted by right in the applicable
zoning district.
   (2)   All other requirements for the applicable zoning district are met.
   (3)   No adjacent lot or undeveloped land is owned by the owner of the lot
in question.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-323. Nonconforming use of land.
Where a lawful use of land exists on the effective date of this chapter, or an
amendment thereof, that is made no longer permissible under the requirements of
this chapter, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, and provided no such nonconforming use, structure, or lot shall be
enlarged, increased or extended.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-324. Nonconforming structure.
Where a lawful structure exists on the effective date of this chapter, or an
amendment thereof, that is made no longer permissible under the requirements of
this chapter by reason of dimensional restrictions on lot area coverage,
height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or location on the lot,
such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject
to the following provisions:
   (1)   No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases
its nonconformity, but the use of a structure and/or the structure itself may
be changed or altered to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located, provided that all such changes are also in conformance with the
requirements of the district in which it is located.
   (2)   Should such a structure be destroyed by any means to an extent
equivalent to more than 50 percent of twice the state equalized value (SEV) at
the time of destruction, it shall be reconstructed only in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter except that a nonconforming structure used as a
single-family dwelling may be reconstructed as a single-family dwelling
provided the nonconformity is not enlarged or increased.
   (3)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-325. Change in nonconforming use.
In any nonresidential district, notwithstanding other requirements of this
chapter, a nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use of the
same or a lesser intensity of use, provided that no structural alterations are
made and that a special use permit is granted in accordance with article VI of
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-326. Repair and maintenance.
On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may
be done in any period of 12-consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on
repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an
extent not exceeding 50 percent of twice the state equalized value (SEV) of the
building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the
time of passage or amendment of this chapter shall not be increased. Nothing in
this article shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any
official charged with protecting the public safety.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-327. Change of tenancy or ownership.
As long as there is no change in the characteristics or increase in the
intensity of the nonconforming use, a change of tenancy or ownership is
allowed.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-328. District zoning change.
Whenever the boundaries of a zoning district shall be changed, the provisions
of this article shall also apply to any existing uses that become nonconforming
as a result of the boundary changes.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-329. Increase in nonconformity.
Nonconforming buildings or structures may be structurally changed, altered, or
enlarged in a way which increases nonconformity only with the approval of a
variance by the zoning board of appeals in accordance with the provisions of
article XI of this chapter and Section 5 of the City and Village Zoning Act
(MCL 125.585). When considering such a request, the proofs the board shall
accept as proof of practical difficulty, shall include the following:
   (1)   A board finding that failure to grant the relief requested would
unreasonably restrict continued use of the property or would restrict valuable
benefits that the public currently derives from the property as used in its
nonconforming status.
   (2)   A board finding that the subject structure possesses historical
significance and that the requested variance is necessary to maintain or
enhance the utility or safety of the structure.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-330. Illegal use.
Uses of structures or land existing on June 10, 2001 that were established
without approval of zoning compliance or without a valid building permit or
special use permit, and those uses which cannot be proved conclusively as
existing prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be declared illegal
uses and are not entitled to the status and rights accorded legally established
nonconforming uses.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-331. Abandonment of use.
(a)   A nonconforming use, land, or structure which is discontinued for 12-
consecutive months shall lose its nonconformity status, shall not be resumed
and shall thereafter only be used in a manner which meets all the provisions of
the district in which it is located.
(b)   Failure to continue to use any nonconforming land or structure for 12-
consecutive months, shall be prima facie proof of an intention to legally
abandon the nonconformity.
(c)   If a nonconformity is in probate, foreclosure or bankruptcy, and during
the period of probate, foreclosure or bankruptcy the use is abandoned, such
period of abandonment shall not be used to calculate the time described in
subsections
94-331(a) and
94-331(b) hereof, up to a maximum of three years.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-332. Appeal.
Any decision regarding any nonconformity may be appealed to the zoning board of
appeals within the time limits and according to the procedures provided by
article XI of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Secs. 94-333—94-360. Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Sec. 94-361. Creation and membership.
The zoning board of appeals is hereby established in accordance with Public Act
No. 207 of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq.). In the performance of assigned duties
and the exercise of assigned powers, the zoning board of appeals shall function
such that the objectives of this chapter may be equitably achieved.
   (1)   Members. The zoning board of appeals shall consist of seven members
each appointed by the city council for a term of three years, except that the
term of a member serving because of their being a member of the city council
shall be limited to the time they are a member of the council. One regular or
alternate member may be a member of the city council but shall not serve as
chairperson of the zoning board of appeals. The remaining members shall be
selected from the electors of the city. The members selected shall be
representative of the population distribution and of the various interests
present in the city.
   (2)   Alternate members. The city council may appoint not more than two
alternate members for the zoning board of appeals each appointed for a term of
three years. An alternate member shall be called on a rotating basis to sit as
a regular member of the zoning board of appeals in the absence of a regular
member. An alternate member may also be called to serve in the place of a
regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a particular case in
which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest.
Once having been called to serve, an alternate member shall serve as a regular
member in the consideration of that particular case until a final decision has
been made.
   (3)   Removal. A member of the zoning board of appeals may be removed by the
city council for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon
written charges and after public hearing. A member shall disqualify himself or
herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest. Failure of
a member to disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a
conflict of interest constitutes malfeasance in office.
   (4)   Participation by dual members. A member of the zoning board of appeals
who is also a member of the planning commission or the city council shall not
participate in a public hearing on or vote on the same matter that such member
voted on as a member of the planning commission or city council. However, such
member may consider and vote on other unrelated matters involving the same
property.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 157, 11-6-2006; Ord No. 176, 5-4-2009)
Sec. 94-362. Organization and procedure.
(a)   Meetings. Four members of the zoning board of appeals shall comprise a
quorum for the purpose of conducting a meeting. Meetings shall be held at the
call of the chairman or the zoning official in writing delivered to the
addresses of each member of the board. All meetings shall be open to the
public. The city manager or a designee shall act as secretary of the board.
(b)   Records. Minutes of all meetings shall be recorded and made available in
accordance with the Michigan Open Meetings Act (MCL 15.261 et seq.) and shall
contain the grounds of every determination made by the zoning board of appeals
including all evidence and data considered, all findings of fact and
conclusions drawn, the votes of the members and the final disposition of each
case. Such minutes shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be
available to the public. The record of proceedings for the zoning board of
appeals shall contain the following information when applicable:
   (1)   The application for an appeal, variance, or interpretation.
   (2)   Any reports, plans, surveys or photos.
   (3)   Notice of public hearing delivered to affected parties and published
in a newspaper.
   (4)   Affidavit of publication of notice of public hearing.
   (5)   Letter from the zoning official granting or denying the application or
referring it to the zoning board of appeals and all other relevant records
related to the case.
   (6)   Record of testimony heard and evidence presented.
   (7)   A copy of the zoning articles and sections in question.
   (8)   Briefs, correspondence or other communications made to the zoning
board of appeals.
   (9)   Statement of facts found by the zoning board of appeals, of its own
knowledge, regarding the request including any information gained from personal
inspection.
   (10)   Decision of the zoning board of appeals as specifically related to
the findings of fact.
   (11)   A copy of any other correspondence to the appellant regarding the
request.
(c)   Counsel. The city attorney shall provide legal counsel to the zoning
board of appeals when requested. Special legal counsel may be retained for the
zoning board of appeals for any purpose deemed necessary provided that such
appointment or retainer shall be approved in advance by the city council.
(d)   Decisions. The zoning board of appeals shall return a decision on a case
within a reasonable time after the hearing on an application or appeal unless a
reasonable extension of time is deemed necessary by a majority of the members
present. Any decision of the zoning board of appeals shall not become final
until the expiration of five days from the date of the decision unless the
zoning board of appeals shall find the immediate effect of the decision is
necessary for the preservation of property or personal rights and shall so
certify on the record.
(e)   Deferment by applicant. When considering an appeal pursuant to subsection
94-363(a), or a variance pursuant to subsection
94-363(b), the zoning board of appeals shall defer all proceedings upon the
request of the applicant when less than six members of the zoning board of
appeals are present for consideration of and voting on said appeal or variance.
The right of deferment shall be considered waived by the applicant if deferment
is not requested immediately upon the opening of the hearing on the matter.
When deferment is requested as required, the zoning board of appeals shall, at
that time, determine the date of a future regular or special meeting for the
continuation of the hearing and consideration of the matter. Notice previously
given for the original hearing date shall constitute notice of the future
hearing date with no further notice required.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. 222, § 61, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 94-363. Duties and powers.
   (a)   Appeals. Upon direct application, the zoning board of appeals shall
hear and decide appeals from, and review any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by, the zoning official under the requirements of this
chapter and under the requirements of chapter 58 and chapter 80 of this code in
accordance with section
94-364 of this chapter.
   (b)   Variances. A variance shall be granted only in accordance with section
94-365 of this chapter.
      (1)   Zoning. Upon direct application, the zoning board of appeals shall
have original jurisdiction to grant a variance from such dimensional
requirements as lot area and width regulations, building height and bulk
regulations, yard width and depth regulations, and off-street parking and
loading space requirements.
      (2)   Signs. Upon direct application, the zoning board of appeals shall
have original jurisdiction to grant a variance from the requirements of chapter
58 of this code.
   (c)   Interpretation. The zoning board of appeals shall have the power to:
      (1)   Interpret the provisions of this chapter so as to carry out the
intent and purpose of this chapter.
      (2)   Determine the precise location of the boundary lines between zoning
districts.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 241, 3-6-2023; Ord. No. 265, 7-7-2025)
Sec. 94-364. Appeals.
(a)   Letter of appeal. Except as otherwise provided by rule of the board of
appeals, a letter of appeal shall be filed with the zoning official within ten
days after the action causing the complaint. The appeal shall state the order
or interpretation appealed from, specify the grounds for the appeal and specify
the basis for standing to appeal.
   (1)   Standing to appeal. An appeal may be taken by a person aggrieved or by
an officer, department, board, or bureau of the city.
   (2)   Record of action. Upon receipt of a letter of appeal, the zoning
official shall immediately transmit to the secretary of the zoning board of
appeals the letter of appeal and all documents constituting the record of the
action upon which the appeal is based.
   (3)   Fee. A fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be
paid before an appeal shall be considered filed.
   (4)   Acceptance. The secretary of the zoning board of appeals shall
determine, pursuant to this chapter, if a letter of appeal is accepted as being
filed in proper form, including the required data and fee. If the letter of
appeal is not accepted as being in proper form, the letter of appeal and fee
shall be returned by first class mail or hand delivery to the appellant within
seven days of filing with the zoning official along with a written explanation
of the insufficiency of the letter of appeal.
(b)   Public hearing.
   (1)   When a letter of appeal has been accepted by the secretary of the
zoning board of appeals, a public hearing shall be scheduled at the next
regularly scheduled meeting or, at the discretion of the secretary, at a
special meeting of the zoning board of appeals. Unless otherwise provided by
rule of the board of appeals, the scheduled date of the hearing shall be no
more than 45 days from acceptance of the appeal.
   (2)   Notice of the hearing shall be given pursuant to section
94-101 of this chapter except that a matter involving signs under chapter 58
shall not require notice under section
94-101(1).
(c)   Action on appeal. The zoning board of appeals may affirm, reverse wholly
or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination
appealed. When action is taken to modify said order or interpretation, the
board shall, to that end, have all of the powers of the zoning official.
(d)   Majority vote. The concurring vote of a majority of the members appointed
to and serving on the zoning board of appeals shall be necessary to reverse any
order, decision, or determination of the zoning official.
(e)   Stay of proceedings. An appeal accepted pursuant to subsection
94-364(a) stays all proceedings relative to the order, requirement, decision,
or determination appealed unless the zoning official certifies to the zoning
board of appeals that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property.
Said certificate of imminent peril shall state by reasons of fact why
proceedings shall not be stayed. Upon certification by the zoning official,
proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order issued by the
board or by the circuit court.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 241, 3-6-2023)
Sec. 94-365. Variances.
(a)   Variance application and fee. An application for variance shall be filed
with the zoning official along with a fee as established by resolution of the
city council. The application shall specifically state the requirement(s) of
this chapter or chapter 58 from which the variance is requested. The zoning
official shall immediately forward the application for variance to the
secretary of the zoning board of appeals. The secretary of the zoning board of
appeals shall determine, pursuant to this chapter, if the application is
accepted as being filed in proper form, including the required data and fee. If
the application is not accepted as being in proper form, the application and
fee shall be returned to the appellant within seven days of filing with the
zoning official along with a written explanation of the insufficiency of the
letter of appeal.
(b)   Public hearing.
   (1)   When an application for variance has been accepted by the secretary of
the zoning board of appeals, a public hearing shall be scheduled at the next
regularly scheduled meeting or, at the discretion of the secretary, at a
special meeting of the zoning board of appeals. The scheduled date of the
hearing shall be no more than 45 days from acceptance of the application for
variance.
   (2)   Notice of the hearing shall be given pursuant to section
94-101 of this chapter except that a matter involving signs under chapter 58
shall not require notice under section
94-101(1).
(c)   Basic conditions, zoning variance from requirements of this chapter. A
variance may be granted only when the variance application and other factual
evidence demonstrate all of the following:
   (1)   The variance must be granted in order to avoid practical difficulties
not created by the applicant that would result from strict application of the
letter of this chapter.
   (2)   A variance will not permit the establishment within a zoning district
of any use not permitted within the district.
   (3)   A variance will not cause a substantial adverse effect to property or
improvements in the zoning district and the immediately surrounding
neighborhood.
   (4)   A variance will not be contrary to the public interest and will insure
that the spirit and intent of this chapter will be observed, public safety
secured, and substantial justice done.
   (5)   There is no lesser variance than that applied for which would give
substantial relief to the applicant.
(d)   Basic conditions, sign variance from requirements of chapter 58. A
variance may be granted only when the variance application and other factual
evidence demonstrate all of the following:
   (1)   That the alleged practical difficulties are exceptional and peculiar
to the property of the person requesting the variance and result from
conditions which do not exist generally throughout the city.
   (2)   That the alleged practical difficulties which will result from a
failure to grant the variance include substantially more than mere
inconvenience or mere inability to attain a higher financial return.
   (3)   That allowing the variance will result in substantial justice being
done, considering the public benefits intended to be secured by this chapter,
the individual difficulties that will be suffered by a failure of the board to
grant a variance, and the rights of others whose property would be affected by
the allowance of the variance.
(e)   Additional conditions.
   (1)   The zoning board of appeals may specify reasonable conditions on the
approval of a variance which will substantially secure the objectives of the
regulations to which the variance applies, be related to the standards
established in the chapter for the land use or activity under consideration,
and be necessary to ensure compliance with those standards. The conditions may
include those necessary to ensure the public services and facilities affected
by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased
service and facility loads caused by user activity, to protect the natural
environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to ensure compatibility
with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and
economically desirable manner. The breach of any condition shall invalidate the
variance.
   (2)   The zoning board of appeals may require that a performance guarantee
be provided as a condition of approval in granting any variance as allowed in
this article. The performance guarantee shall be provided in accordance with
section
94-100 of this chapter.
(f)   Majority vote. The concurring vote of a majority of the members appointed
to and serving on the zoning board of appeals shall be necessary to grant a
variance.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 241, 3-6-2023)
Secs. 94-366—94-390. Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. AMENDMENTS
Sec. 94-391. Intent and purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the amendment of this chapter
when provisions become obsolete, when identifiable conditions change in
relation to the provisions of this chapter, when errors in this chapter are
discovered, when changes are made in the master plan, or when the city council
has determined a public interest exists.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-392. Amendment initiation.
 An amendment to this chapter may be initiated by the city council, by the
planning commission, or by petition of one or more persons having an interest
in property located within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-393. Filing fee.
The city council shall establish by resolution a fee to be paid in full at the
time of receipt of any petition to amend this chapter. Said fee shall be
collected by the city clerk and no part shall be refundable to the applicant.
No fee shall be charged when the petitioner is a governmental body.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-394. Amendment procedures.
(a)   The planning commission shall adopt an application form to be completed
and filed with the city clerk by the person or persons petitioning for the
change. An application shall be submitted for each parcel of land which is not
contiguous to any adjacent parcel of land being proposed for amendment.
(b)   The petitioner shall submit to the city clerk a complete application, not
less than 45 days before any regular meeting of the planning commission.
(c)   The zoning official shall review the application for completeness. Any
application not properly filed or complete shall be returned to the applicant.
Complete applications shall be transmitted to the planning commission.
(d)   The zoning official shall notify the following agencies within five days
of receipt of a proper application from a petitioner or introduction of an
ordinance by the city council to amend this chapter, requesting their comments
and recommendations:
   (1)   Each electric, gas and pipeline public utility company, each
telecommunication service provider, and each railroad within the district or
zone that registers the name and address of such entity with the city clerk for
the purpose of receiving notice of public hearings.
   (2)   City manager and city department directors.
   (3)   City engineer
   (4)   Superintendent of Mason Public Schools.
   (5)   County drain commissioner.
   (6)   County health department.
   (7)   County road commission.
   (8)   The airport manager of each airport that registers its name and
mailing address of such entity with the city clerk for the purpose of receiving
notice of public hearings.
   (9)   Other governmental units and agencies deemed appropriate by the zoning
official.
(e)   The above mentioned review agencies may submit comments and
recommendations on the proposed amendment within 35 days of receipt of notice.
If no written correspondence is received by the zoning official within said 35
calendar days, the planning commission shall presume that the review agency has
no objections to the proposed rezoning.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 157, 11-6-2006; Ord. 222, § 62, 12-3-2018)
Sec. 94-395. Public hearing.
(a)   The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
amendment, not less than 45 days or more than 60, after receipt of an
application or introduction of an amendatory ordinance.
(b)   The city clerk shall give notice of time and place of the public hearing
pursuant to section
94-101 of this chapter and the further requirements of MCL 125.3103.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 157, 11-6-2006; Ord. No. 176, 5-4-2009)
Sec. 94-396. Planning commission recommendations.
(a)   In reviewing any application for an amendment to this chapter, the
planning commission shall identify and evaluate all factors relevant to the
application, and shall report its finding in full along with its
recommendations for disposition of the application, to the city council within
60 days of receipt of an application or proposed amendment. The matters to be
considered by the planning commission shall include the following findings of
fact:
   (1)   Compliance with the master plan of the city.
   (2)   What, if any, identifiable conditions related to the proposed
amendment have changed which justify the proposed amendment?
   (3)   What, if any, error in judgment, procedure or administration was made
in the original chapter which justifies the petitioner's change in zoning?
   (4)   What are the precedents and the possible effects of such precedent
which might result from the approval or denial of the petition?
   (5)   What is the impact of the amendment on the ability of the city and
other governmental agencies to provide adequate public services and facilities,
and/or programs that might reasonably be required in the future if the petition
is approved?
   (6)   Does the proposed amendment adversely affect the value of the
surrounding property?
   (7)   Are there any significant negative environmental impacts which would
reasonably occur if the petitioned zoning change and resulting allowed
structures were built? Examples include:
      a.   Surface water drainage problems.
      b.   Wastewater disposal problems.
      c.   Adverse effect on surface or subsurface water quality.
      d.   The loss of valuable natural resources, such as forest, wetlands,
historic sites, wildlife, mineral deposits or valuable agricultural land.
   (8)   The ability of the property in question to be put to a reasonable
economic use in the zoning district in which it is presently located.
(b)   All findings of fact shall be made a part of the public records of the
meetings of the planning commission. The planning commission shall transmit its
findings of fact, a summary received at the public hearing and its recommended
action to the city council.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-397. Consideration by the city council.
Upon receipt of a report and summary of hearing comments from the planning
commission, the city council may hold an additional public hearing, if it
considers it necessary or, if otherwise required by law. The city council shall
grant a hearing on a proposed ordinance amendment to an interested property
owner who requests a hearing by certified mail addressed to the city clerk, and
may proceed to adopt the amendment in accordance with the Charter provisions.
The hearing at the request of an interested property owner is not subject to
the requirements of section
94-101, except that notice of the hearing shall be given to the interested
property owner in the manner required by subsection
94-101(2)a and (3). If the city council considers further changes desirable,
which are in addition to, or departures from the proposed amendment, it may
first refer the matter back to the planning commission for a further report.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 157, 11-6-2006; Ord. No. 176, 5-4-2009)
Sec. 94-398. Protested amendment.
Upon presentation of a protest petition which meets the requirements of this
section, an amendment to the zoning chapter which is the object of the petition
shall be passed only by a two-thirds vote of the city council. The protest
petition shall be presented to the city council before final legislative action
on the amendment, and shall be signed by one of the following:
   (1)   The owners of at least 20 percent of the area of land included in the
proposed change.
   (2)   The owners of at least 20 percent of the area of land included within
an area extending outward 100 feet from any point on the boundary of the land
included in the proposed change.
   (3)   For purposes of this section, publicly owned land shall be excluded in
calculating the 20 percent land area requirement.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-399. Notice of adoption.
Following adoption of a new zoning ordinance or an amendment to the existing
zoning ordinance by the city council, one notice of adoption shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city within 15 days after
adoption. The notice shall include the following information:
   (1)   In the case of a newly adopted zoning ordinance, the following
statement: "A zoning ordinance regulating the development and use of land has
been adopted by the city council of the city of Mason".
   (2)   In the case of an amendment to an existing ordinance, either a summary
of the regulatory effect of the amendment, including the geographic area
affected, or the text of the amendment.
   (3)   The effective date of the new ordinance or ordinance amendment.
   (4)   A copy of the notice of adoption shall be mailed to the airport
manager of an airport entitled to notice under section
94-394(d)(8).
   (5)   The place and time where a copy of the ordinance may be purchased or
inspected.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 157, 11-6-2006)
Sec. 94-400. Effective date.
The amendment shall become effective immediately upon publication of the notice
of adoption in a newspaper of general circulation within the city unless an
effective date subsequent to publication is specifically provided in the
amendatory ordinance.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Secs. 94-401—94-430. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII. CONFLICTING ORDINANCES AND INTERPRETATION
Sec. 94-431. Conflicting ordinances.
This chapter is not intended to abrogate or annul any ordinance, rule,
regulation, permit, easement, covenant, or other private agreement previously
adopted, issued, or entered into and not in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Sec. 94-432. Interpretation.
In the interpretation, application, and enforcement of this chapter, whenever
any of the provisions or limitations imposed or required herein are more
stringent than any other law, ordinance, rule, or regulation, then the
provisions of this chapter shall govern, provided that whenever the provisions
of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are
imposed or required by this chapter, then the provisions of such other law or
ordinance shall govern.
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Chapter 100
REFERENCE TABLES AND FIGURES*
*Cross References: General provisions, Ch. 1; zoning, Ch. 94.
Article I. Tables
Table
100-1. Lot Dimensional Regulations.
Table
100-2. Building Dimensional Regulations.
Table
100-3. Separation Requirements for Towers.
Table
100-4. Landscape Buffer Classification Matrix.
Table
100-5. Parking Space Requirements.
Table
100-6. Loading and Unlaoding Space Requirements.
Tables 100-7--100-100. Reserved.
Article II. Figures
Figure
100-101. Yard Definition.
Figure
100-102. Lot Depth, Width, and Frontage Measurement.
Figure
100-103. Clear Vision Area.
Figure
100-104. Site Condominium Illustration.
ARTICLE I. TABLES
TABLE 100-1. Lot Dimensional Regulations.
Refer to
footnotes listed after table 100-2 of this chapter.
                             Minimum
Zoning    Minimum            Lot Area  Minimum  Minimum   Minimum   Maximum %
District  Lot Size Minimum   Per       Front    Side Yard Rear Yard of Lot
and       (sq.     Lot Width Principal Yard     Setback   Setback   Coverage
Ordinance feet)    (feet)    Structure Setback  (feet)    (feet)    by all
Section                      (sq.      (feet)                       Structures
                             feet)
AG
Sec. 94-  30,000   225       30,000    30       15        40        15
122
RS-1
Sec. 94-  12,000   90        12,000    30       15        40        30
123
RS-2
Sec. 94-  9,600    75        9,600     25       10        35        30
123
RS-3
Sec. 94-  8,500    65        8,500     25       (1)       35        35
123
R2F
Sec. 94-  8,500    65        8,500     25       (1)       35        35
124
RM
Sec. 94-  8,500    65        8,500(2)  25       15        35        35
125
MH
Sec. 94-  20 acres -         5,500(10) 15       10        15        35
126
O-1
Sec. 94-  8,500    60        -         25       10(3)     35        35
131
O-2
Sec. 94-  12,000   90        -         60(11)   15        40        30
132
C-1
Sec. 94-  -        20        -         -        -         -         -
141
C-2
Sec. 94-  20,000   100       -         50(11)   10(3)     10(3)     50
142
C-3
Sec. 94-  20,000   100       -         50(11)   10(3)     10(3)     50
143
M—1     60,000
Sec. 94-  (13)     200(13)   -         50(11)   10(3)     20        50(12)
151
M—2     60,000
Sec. 94-  (13)     200(13)   -         60(11)   20        20        50(12)
152
PUD
Sec. 94-  -        -         -         -        -         -         -
161
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
TABLE 100-2. Building Dimensional Regulations.
Refer to footnotes listed after this table.
             Maximum                                               Minimum
Zoning       Height     Maximum Height Minimum Floor Minimum Width Internal
District and Principal  Accessory      Area Per      Principal     Height
Ordinance    Structure  Structure      Dwelling Unit Structure     Principal
Section      (feet)     (feet)         (sq. feet)    (feet)        Structure
                                                                   (feet)
             Maximum                                               Minimum
Zoning       Height     Maximum Height Minimum Floor Minimum Width Internal
District and Principal  Accessory      Area Per      Principal     Height
Ordinance    Structure  Structure      Dwelling Unit Structure     Principal
Section      (feet)     (feet)         (sq. feet)    (feet)        Structure
                                                                   (feet)
AG           35(4)      25(5)          1,200(6)      24            7.5
Sec. 94-122
RS-1         35         25(5)          1,200(6)      24            7.5
Sec. 94-123
RS-2         35         25(5)          1,000(6)      24            7.5
Sec. 94-123
RS-3         35         25(5)          800(6)        24            7.5
Sec. 94-123
R2F          35         25(5)          800(6), (7)   24            7.5
Sec. 94-124
RM           35         15             (7)           -             -
Sec. 94-125
MH           -          15             -             -             -
Sec. 94-126
O-1          45         15             -             -             -
Sec. 94-131
O-2          15         15             -             -             -
Sec. 94-132
C-1          45(14)     15             -             -             -
Sec. 94-141
C-2          45         15             -             -             -
Sec. 94-142
C-3          45         15             -             -             -
Sec. 94-143
M-1          40(8)      40             -             -             -
Sec. 94-151
M-2          45(8)      45             -             -             -
Sec. 94-152
PUD          35         (9)            (7)           -             -
Sec. 94-161
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. 221, 11-12-2018; Ord. No. 230, 9-28-2020)
Footnotes to table 100-1 and table 100-2.
   1   Ten percent of the actual lot width or ten feet, whichever is smaller.
   2   Up to three dwelling units allowed per building on an 8,500 sq. ft. lot.
Increase the required lot area per building by 4,000 sq. ft. per dwelling unit
in excess of three dwelling units, or by 3,000 sq. ft. per dwelling unit in
excess of three dwelling units located within a planned residential development
or a planned unit development.
   3   20 feet when adjacent to residentially used or zoned land.
   4   Structures for agricultural operations, such as barns or silos, may be
permitted up to a building height of 75 feet.
   5   Accessory structures with a roof pitch flatter than one to two rise to
run shall have a maximum height of 15 feet.
   6   Exclusive of basement areas, attics, attached garages, breezeways,
enclosed or unenclosed porches, and accessory structures.
   7   For two-family and multiple-family uses, minimum gross floor area per
dwelling unit shall be as follows:
       (a)   Efficiency unit: 300 sq. ft.
       (b)   One bedroom unit: 400 sq. ft.
       (c)   Two bedroom unit: 600 sq. ft.
       (d)   Three or more bedroom unit: 800 sq. ft.
   8   May be increased if front, side, and rear yard setbacks are increased an
equal amount.
    9   The maximum height of an accessory structure in the PUD district shall
be determined by the principal use associated with the accessory structure as
follows:
       (a)   For single-family or two-family residential uses, the RS-1 maximum
height shall apply.
       (b)   For manufacturing uses, the M-1 maximum height shall apply.
       (c)   For all other uses the maximum shall be 15 feet.
   10   Lot area may be decreased up to 20% to a minimum of 4,400 square feet
provided that for each square foot decrease an equal or greater amount of land
shall be dedicated as open space. Said open space shall be in addition to any
other required open space.
   11   The site plan approving body may reduce the required front yard setback
by a maximum of 50% upon finding that the reduced setback is in keeping with
predominant development patterns in the immediate area and such reduction would
encourage a more uniform, unified and orderly development pattern.
   12   In addition to the required maximum lot coverage regulations, a minimum
of 10% of hte lot or parcel shall be dedicated to vegetated open space such as
lawns, shrubs and tree plantings, and similar open space. This minimum 10%
standard shall be met without the reliance on required setbacks, buffers, and
landscaping.
   13   In industrial parks in the M-1 and M-2 districts, the required minimum
lot area shall be 20,000 square feet and the minimum lot width shall be 100
feet.
   14   An additional 5 feet 0 inches maximum height may be added for
residential occupancy, with a minimum 10 feet 0 inches setback from all sides
of the building face and a maximum square footage equal to 25% of the grade
floor gross area.
(Ord. No. 135, § 2(5.1), 5-21-2001; Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. 221, 11-12-
2018; Ord. No. 230, 9-28-2020)
TABLE 100-3. Separation Requirements for Towers.
 
Use on Adjacent Property                Separation Distance
Single or two-family residential        greater of 200 feet or 300% of the
buildings (includes modular homes and   tower height (measured from the base of
mobile home used for living purposes)   the tower to closest building setback
                                        line)
Vacant single or two-family residential greater of 200 feet or 300% of the
zoned land which is either platted or   tower height (measured from the base of
has preliminary subdivision plan        the tower to closest building setback
approval which is not expired           line)
                                        greater of 100 feet or 100% of the
Existing multiple family residential    tower height (measured from the base of
units greater than duplex units         the tower to closest building setback
                                        line)
All residential zoning and uses when    greater of 100 feet or 100% of the
adjacent to a tower proposed on         tower height (measured from the base of
publicly owned property                 the tower to closest building setback
                                        line)
Non-residential zoned properties or     none, only setbacks apply
uses
 
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 161, 9-4-2007)
Table 100-4. Landscape Buffer Classification Matrix.
Subject Property Zoning AG RS (all) R2F RM MH O-1 O-2 C-1 C-2 C-3 M-1 M-2 PUD
AG                      na na       na  na na na  na  na  na  na  na  na  na
RS (all)                na na       na  na na na  na  na  na  na  na  na  na
R2F                     na na       na  na na na  na  na  na  na  na  na  na
RM                      B  B        B   A  B  B   B   B   B   B   B   B   B
MH                      C  C        C   C  A  C   C   C   C   C   C   C   C
O-1                     B  B        B   B  B  A   A   A   A   A   A   A   B
O-2                     B  B        B   B  B  A   A   A   A   A   A   A   B
C-1                     na na       na  na na na  na  na  na  na  na  na  na
C-2                     B  B        B   B  B  A   A   A   A   A   A   A   B
C-3                     B  B        B   B  B  A   A   A   A   A   A   A   B
M-1                     D  D        D   D  D  C   C   C   C   C   B   B   C
M-2                     D  D        D   D  D  C   C   C   C   C   B   B   C
PUD                     B  B        B   B  B  B   B   B   B   B   B   B   B
 
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Table 100-5. Parking Space Requirements.
Land Use                                Required Parking Spaces
Single Family Dwelling                  2 per dwelling unit
                                        1.4 per dwelling unit for efficiency
Two-Family Dwelling                     and one-bedroom units
                                       2 per dwelling unit for two or more
                                        bedroom units
                                        1.4 per dwelling unit for efficiency
Multiple Family Dwelling                and one-bedroom units
                                        2 per dwelling unit for two or more
                                        bedroom units
Rooming house                           2 per dwelling unit, plus 1 per rooming
                                        unit
Hotel, Motel                            1 per bedroom
Convalescent Home                       0.33 per bed
Hospital                                0.33 per bed
Medical Clinic                          2 per treatment room
Auditorium, Church, Stadium             0.33 per seat based upon total seating
                                        capacity
                                        0.33 per seat based upon total seating
Elementary and Middle Schools           capacity of auditorium or gym,
                                        whichever is largest
High School and College                 1 per 100 sq. ft. UFA
Library, Museum, Post Office            1 per 100 sq. ft. UFA
Golf course                             4 per golf hole
Tennis club                             4 per court
Dance Hall, Pool Hall, Video Arcade,    1 per 100 sq. ft. UFA in main meeting
Lodge, Private Club                     room or club room
Bowling Alley                           5 per bowling lane
Professional Offices, Banks             1 per 200 sq. ft. UFA
Doctor, Dentist, other medical office   1 per 100 sq. ft. of waiting area, plus
                                        1 per exam room or dentist chair
General Offices                         1 per 200 sq. ft. UFA
General Retail, General Services, Super 1 per 150 sq. ft. UFA
Markets, Food Stores
Barber Shop. Hair Salon                 2 per barber chair
Automobile Service Station              2 per service stall
Drive-in Restaurant                     6 per 100 sq. ft. UFA
Restaurant, Tavern                      1 per 50 sq. ft. UFA
Funeral Home, Mortuary                  4 per 100 sq. ft. UFA
Industrial, Warehouse, Wholesale        0.33 per 100 sq. ft. UFA
Self-serve Laundry                      1 per 2 washing machines
Auto Repair, Auto Collision Repair      1 per 200 sq. ft. UFA
Day Care Facilities                     1 per 10 children
Foster Care Facilities                  1 per 3 residents
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 230, 9-28-2020)
Table 100-6. Loading and Unloading Space Requirements.
Use                   Floor Area (sq. ft.)                      Required Spaces
Commercial uses          First 1500 or fraction thereof:
(retail stores,          Next 20,000 or fraction thereof:    None
personal services,       Each additional 20,000 or fraction  1
amusement, automotive thereof                                   1
service)
                         First 1500 or fraction thereof:     None
Hotels, Motels,          Next 50,000 or fraction thereof:    1
Offices                  Each additional 90,000 or fraction  1
                      thereof
Wholesale and storage    First 20,000 or fraction thereof:   1
including building       Each additional 20,000 or fraction  1
and contractor yards  thereof:
                         First 20,000 or fraction thereof:   1
Manufacturing uses       Each additional 20,000 or fraction  1
                      thereof:
Funeral Homes and        First 5000 or fraction thereof:     1
Mortuaries               Each additional 9000 or fraction    1
                      thereof:
Hospitals (excluding     First 9000 or fraction thereof:     None
emergency vehicle        Next 90,000 or fraction thereof:    1
platforms)               Each additional 200,000 or fraction 1
                      thereof:
Schools, Public          Each building:                      1
Assembly Buildings
                         First 20,000 or fraction thereof:   None
Uses not listed          Each additional 20,000 or fraction  1
                      thereof:
 
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006)
Tables 100-7--100-100. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. FIGURES
Figure 100-101. Yard Definition.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2a7faa890ca1edc4f46419642c0312a979908d67/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2871.bmp]
 
Figure 100-102. Lot Depth and Width Measurement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2a7faa890ca1edc4f46419642c0312a979908d67/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2874.bmp]
Figure 100-103. Clear Vision Area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2a7faa890ca1edc4f46419642c0312a979908d67/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3152.gif]
 
(Ord. No. 152, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 159, 9-17-2007)
Figure 100-104. Site Condominium Illustration.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/2a7faa890ca1edc4f46419642c0312a979908d67/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2880.bmp]
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the city used in this
Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any
omitted materials are not reflected in this table.
Ordinance Number Date Section Section this Code~
Ordinance Number Date       Section          Section this Code~
17               12-12-1924 4                14-62
37               9-17-1951  1--18            66-1--
                                             66-18
66               11-18-1963 1--4             86-72--
                                             86-75
68               6-10-1964  1                86-76
69               7-20-1964  1--3             42-6
72               6-5-1967   1--7 Added       22-81--
                                             22-86
73               3-4-1968   2, 3             74-33,
                                             74-34
                            5                74-31
                            6--10            74-76--
                                             74-80
                            11--14           74-101--
                                             74-104
                            15               74-156
                            15(1)--15(6)     74-157--
                                             74-162
                            16               74-163
                            17               74-126
                            17(1)--17(7)     74-127--
                                             74-133
                            19               74-36
                            21               74-61
                            22               74-32
                            23               74-35
76               12-16-1968 1--6             78-51--
                                             78-56
85               4-19-1971  1(A), 1(B)       38-32,
                                             38-33
                            2--7             38-35--
                                             38-40
                            8(A), (B)        38-34
                            8(C)             38-31
86               7- 6-1971  1                18-1
                            2                18-3
                            3                18-2
82               7-10-1972  3                62-31,
                                             62-32
                            4                62-34
                            5(1), (2)        62-35
                            5(3)             62-36
                            5(4)             62-35
                            6, 7             62-37,
                                             62-38
83               10-21-1972 1, 2             26-91,
                                             26-92
                            3--5             26-126--
                                             26-128
                            6                26-93
84               11-20-1972 1--4             2-226--
                                             2-229
87               3- 4-1974  2                70-76
                            3--11            70-101--
                                             70-109
                            12               70-77
                            13               70-110
88               3-18-1974  2                42-1
                            3                42-2--
                                             42-5
                                             42-42,
                                             42-43
                                             42-76--
                                             42-83
                                             42-80 
                            4                42-82,
                                             42-83
92               10-21-1974 1, 2             6-51,
                                             6-52
                            2(c)             6-31
                            3                6-31
82-A-75          6-16-1975  1                62-35
97               2- 7-1977  1--4             54-31--
                                             54-34
73-A-77          2- 7-1977  1                74-157
100              10- 3-1977 1                90-31
                            2--9             90-56--
                                             90-63
                            10--18           90-86--
                                             90-94
                            19--21           90-116--
                                             90-118
                            22--32           90-141--
                                             90-151
                            33               90-32
91-A             11-21-1977 1--3             2-141--
                                             2-143
101              11-21-1977 1, 2             58-2,
                                             58-3
                            3                58-5
                            4, 5             58-37,
                                             58-38
                            7                58-40
                            9                58-1
                            10(a), 10(b)     58-61,
                                             58-62
                            15               58-126
                            28               58-36
103              6-19-1978  1--8             26-161--
                                             26-164
104              9-18-1978  1--6             46-32--
                                             46-37
82-A-78          10-16-1978 1                62-34
104-A-78         12-18-1978 1                46-34
107              5- 5-1980  1--4             22-31--
                                             22-34
                            5--8             22-61--
                                             22-64
                            9                22-36
                            11               22-35
82-A-81          6- 1-1981  1                62-35
85-A-82          1-18-1982  1                38-35
72-A-82          4-19-1982  1                22-81
112              8-16-1982  1, 2             30-32,
                                             30-33
                            3                30-31
                            4--8             30-34--
                                             30-38
                            9--12            30-61--
                                             30-64
                            14, 15           30-86,
                                             30-87
92-A-82          12-20-1982 2                6-31
                                             6-52
113              5-16-1983  1--6             26-51--
                                             26-56
114              9-19-1983  1--4             14-31--
                                             14-34
                            5                14-61
                            6                14-37
                            7                14-36
76-A-85          4-15-1985  1(1)             78-51
                            1(3)--1(6)       78-53--
                                             78-56
120              8- 1-1988  1--5             78-1
123              12-17-1990 1                86-71
                            7--14            86-131--
                                             86-138
                            16               86-139
88-A-91          8- 5-1991  2(3(a))          42-5
                            2(3(b))          42-42
                            2(3(c))--2(3(f)) 42-76--
                                             42-79
                            2(3(g))          42-2
                            2(3(h))          42-80
                            2(3(i))          42-4
                            2(3(j)), 2(3(k)) 42-81,
                                             42-82
                            2(3(l))          42-3
                            2(3(m))          42-83
                            2(3(n))          42-43
76-A-9           12- 2-1991 1                78-56
73-A-92          1-21-1992  2(16)            74-163
124              12- 7-1992 1--6             42-171--
                                             42-176
127              9- 5-1995  1--6             26-201--
                                             26-206
33-A-95          10-16-1995 1--4             18-4
                            5                18-5
16-A-95          12-18-1995 2                70-1
32-A-95          12-18-1995 2--11            2-81--
                                             2-90
37-A-95          12-18-1995 1, 2             66-3,
                                             66-4
                            3                66-10
38-A-95          12-18-1995 2, 3             50-31
                            4--7             50-32--
                                             50-35
47-A-95          12-18-1995 2--7             70-36--
                                             70-41
52-A-95          12-18-1995 2                42-116
                            3                42-136
                            4                42-41
                            5                42-137
                            6                42-41
                                             42-116
                                             42-138
82-A-95          12-18-1995 1                62-31
83-A-95          12-18-1995 1                26-128
86-A-95          12-18-1995 2                18-3
87-A-95          12-18-1995 2                70-109
103-A-95         12-18-1995 2                26-162
51-A-96          2- 5-1996  2                10-31
                            3--5             10-56--
                                             10-58
                            6, 7             10-32,
                                             10-33
75-A-96          2- 5-1996  1, 2             78-91,
                                             78-92
                            6                78-93
95-A-96          2- 5-1996  1--5             34-51--
                                             34-55
112-A-96         5- 6-1996  2                30-64
                                             30-87
104-A-97         6-16-1997  1                46-34
114-A-97         7- 7-1997  1                14-37
131              2- 2-1998  2                74-197
                            3                74-196
                            4--10            74-198--
                                             74-204
38-A-98          2- 2-1998  1                50-32
21-A-98          5- 4-1998  2, 3             70-2
38-B-98          9- 8-1998  1                50-32
                                             2-101,
132              9- 7-1999  2--8    Added 2-102,
                                             2-104,
                                             2-105
76-A-00          2- 7-2000  1                78-56
133              4- 3-2000  2--15 Added      6-71--
                                             6-84
138              12- 2-02   1--8             Adopting Ord.,
                                             page xi
140              4-7-03     Added            2-121--
                                             2-125
141              4-21-03    Added            76-1 –
                                             76-3
                            Added            76-11 –
                                             76-14
                            Added            76-26
                            Added            76-36,
                                             76-37
142              5-19-03                     32-5(g)
143              5-3-04                      2-105
                                             2-206,
                            Added            2-208–
                                             2-211
                                             2-226–
                                             2-231
                                             2-251–
                                             2-253
                                             2-271–
                                             2-275
                            Added            2-311–
                                             2-315
                            Added            2-331–
                                             2-334
                            Added            2-401–
                                             2-407
                                             6-51,
                                             6-52
                                             32-3
                                             50-32,
                                             50-33
                                             78-6
                                             94-362
144              5-16-05                     82-1–
                                             82-7,
                                             82-10–
                                             82-15,
                                             82-31–
                                             82-35,
                                             82-60–
                                             82-90,
                                             82-101–
                                             82-105,
                                             82-110–
                                             82-127,
                                             82-151–
                                             82-165,
                                             82-187–
                                             82-193,
                                             82-215–
                                             82-222,
                                             82-241–
                                             82-248,
                                             82-251,
                                             82-261–
                                             82-266,
                                             82-271,
                                             82-272
145              9-7-04                      1-2
                                             94-122
                                             94-132
                                             94-192
147              6-6-05                      1-2
148              3-20-06                     1-2
                                             2-142
                            Added            6-100–
                                             6-102,
                            Added            6-121–
                                             6-123,
                            Added            6-141–
                                             6-155,
                            Added            6-161–
                                             6-163,
                            Added            6-181–
                                             6-185,
                            Added            6-191
                                             1-2,
152              5-1-06                      1-4,
                                             74-201,
                            Added            94-1–
                                             94-4,
                            Added            94-61–
                                             94-66,
                            Added            94-91–
                                             94-101,
                            Added            94-121–
                                             94-126,
                            Added            94-131,
                                             94-132,
                            Added            94-141–
                                             94-143,
                            Added            94-151,
                                             94-152,
                            Added            94-161,
                                             94-171–
                            Added            94-177,
                                             94-191–
                            Added            94-193,
                                             94-221–
                            Added            94-230,
                                             94-241,
                            Added            94-261–
                                             94-265,
                            Added            94-291–
                                             94-293,
                            Added            94-321–
                                             94-332,
                            Added            94-361–
                                             94-365,
                            Added            94-391–
                                             94-400,
                            Added            94-431,
                                             904-432
                                             chapter 100: Tables
                                             100-1—
                                             100-6;
                                             chapter 100 Figures~
                                             100-101—
                                             100-104
                                             10-31,
153              5-7-07                      42-82,
                                             42-137,
                                             42-176,
                                             46-33
                            Added            42-94
154              5-7-07                      1-2,
                                             42-79
                                             1-13,
                            Added            2-1 –
                                             2-8,
                                             42-44
                                             –
                                             42-47,
                                             42-85 –
                                             42-93
                                             1-2,
156              9-5-06                      94-141 –
                                             94-143,
                                             94-192
                                             1-2,
157              11-6-06                     50-35,
                                             94-100,
                                             94-101,
                                             94-122 –
                                             94-125,
                                             94-161,
                                             94-361,
                                             94-394,
                                             94-395,
                                             94-397,
                                             94-399
158              2-5-07                      1-2,
                                             82-1
                            Added            82-271 –
                                             82-287,
                                             82-291 –
                                             82-294
                                             1-2,
                                             54-32,
                                             58-1 –
                                             58-3,
                                             58-36 –
                                             58-39,
159              9-17-07                     58-61 –
                                             58-64,
                                             58-86,
                                             58-126 –
                                             58-132,
                                             94-172,
                                             94-173, chapter 100: Figure
                                             100-103
                            Added            2-408
160              5-21-07                     46-34
                                             94-141,
161              9-4-07                      94-173, chapter 100: Table
                                             100-3
163              12-4-07    Added            42-95
165              6-1-09     Added            60-1 – 60-18
                                             94-141 –
166              8-4-08                     94-143,
                                             94-173,
                                             94-223
                                             42-2,
168              9-2-08                     78-5 –
                                             78-7
                                             86-75,
170              12-1-08                    86-131 –
                                             86-133
171              5-4-09                     50-31 –
                                             50-35
                          Added            50-36 –
                                             50-40
                                             74-76,
172              5-4-09                     74-78,
                                             74-104
175              8-17-09                    14-36,
                                             46-34
                                             94-101,
176              5-4-09                     94-361,
                                             94-395,
                                             94-397
                          Added            94-231
177              10-5-09    Added            42-201 –
                                             42-208
                                             2-8,
178              12-21-09                   62-31 –
                                             62-38
179              2-15-10                    2-8
180              10-20-10   Added            10-70 —
                                             10-75
181              4-4-2011   Added            34.60 -
                                             34.62
182              5-2-2011                   78-56
183              7-18-2011  Added            42-97
184              7-18-2011  Added            42-98
                                             30-34,
185              8-1-2011                   30-61 –
                                             30-64
186              10-17-11                   2-84
187              2-6-12                     94-173
188              4-2-12                     94-121
189              5-7-12                     78-4
                                             1-2,
190              7-2-12                     26-161 –
                                             26-164
190-A-2013       7-1-13                     26-161,
                                             26-163
195              11-18-13                   94-151
196              3-17-14    Added            10-70 –
                                             10-75
200              7-20-15    Added            43-301 –
                                             42-303
201              8-17-15    Added            6-210,
                                             6-211
203              10-17-16   Added            52-1 –
                                             52-37
                                          94-226
206              12-19-16                   86-31 –
                                             86-37
208              3-20-17                    26-126 –
                                             26-128
209              6-5-17                     94-143
210              7-3-17                     62-35
211              9-5-17                     94-131
212              10-16-17                   42-93
213              1-8-18                     82-274
216              4-9-18                     100-1
217              5-21-18                    94-173
218              5-21-18                    94-131,
                                             94-132
221              11-12-18                   100-2
222              12-3-2018  1                2-81–
                                             2-90 
                          2                1-13
                          3                2-2
                          4, 5             2-102
                          6                2-105
                          7, 8             2-121,
                                             2-122
                          9                2-124
                          10, 11           2-141,
                                             2-142
                          12               2-253
                          14               6-71
                          15               14-32
                          16               22-36
                          17, 18           22-62,
                                             22-63
                          19               26-202
                          20, 21           42-206,
                                             42-207
                          22, 23           46-33,
                                             46-34
                          24               52-8
                          25               52-29
                          26               58-3
                          27               62-34
                          28               66-19
                          29 – 32        70-101 –
                                             70-104
                          33 – 35        70-106 –
                                             70-108
                          36               70-110
                          37               74-78
                          38               74-163
                          39               74-201
                          40, 41           76-11,
                                             76-12
                          42               76-14
                          43               76-37
                          44-46            82-5--
                                             82-7
                          47               82-32
                          48               82-35
                          49               82-64
                          50               82-71
                          51               82-101
                          52               82-111
                          53               82-161
                          54               82-262
                          55               82-271
                          56               86-34
                          57               90-59
                          58, 59           90-89,
                                             90-90
                          60               94-62
                          61               94-362
                          62               94-394
223              12-17-18   Added            10-80
224              2-4-19                     2-311
225              2-18-19                    26-161 -
                                             26-164
                                             1-2,
                                             2-104,
                                             94-124,
230              9-28-20                    94-222,
                                             94-292, chapter 100: Tables
                                             100-2,
                                             100-5
                                             2-101,
233              3-1-21                     2-102,
                                             2-104,
                                             2-105
                                             2-208,
235              6-7-21                     2-331 -
                                             2-334
                                             2-8,
236              6-21-21                    14-36,
                                             78-7
                                             2-8,
238              7-18-22                    14-36,
                                             78-7
                                             1-2,
239              11-9-22                    94-141,
                                             94-192
240              11-9-22                    31-1 –
                                             31-4
                                             58-86,
241              3-6-23                     94-363 –
                                             94-365
242              4-3-23                     78-5,
                                             78-6
                                             82-1,
                                             82-251,
243              5-1-23                     82-261,
                                             82-264,
                                             82-266
244              8-21-23                    2-101 –
                                             2-106
                                             2-151,
                                             2-152,
                                             52-5 –
                                             52-13,
                                             52-16,
                                             52-18,
                                             52-19,
                                             52-21 –
                                             52-24,
                                             52-26,
                                             52-29,
                                             82-1,
                                             82-2,
                                             82-101,
                                             82-104,
245              11-20-23                   82-123,
                                             82-153,
                                             82-158,
                                             82-160,
                                             82-165,
                                             82-187,
                                             82-188,
                                             82-216,
                                             82-220,
                                             82-221,
                                             82-245 –
                                             82-247,
                                             82-261,
                                             82-262,
                                             82-264,
                                             82-266,
                                             82-275
246              11-20-23                   78-56
247              11-20-23                   18-4,
                                             18-5
248              5-20-24                    2-101 –
                                             2-106
250              8-19-24                    94-223
                                             75-11 –
                                             75-21,
                                             75-31 –
                                             75-41,
                                             76-1 –
252              9-3-24                     76-3,
                                             76-11 –
                                             76-14,
                                             76-26,
                                             76-36,
                                             76-37
253              9-3-24                     75-51 –
                                             75-60
254              9-3-24                     2-206 –
                                             2-211
                                             1-2,
255              11-18-24                   94-141,
                                             94-192
256              11-18-24                   94-142
257              12-16-24                   31-1 –
                                             31-4
                                             1-2,
259              4-21-25                    2-206 –
                                             2-211
                                             2-31,
                          Added            2-32,
                                             2-212
260              2-17-25                    50-31 –
                                             50-40
262              3-17-25                    75-51 –
                                             75-60
                                             86-71 –
264              6-16-25                    86-75,
                                             86-131 –
                                             86-139
265              7-7-25                     94-363
                                             80-1,
                          Added            80-21,
                                             80-22
                                           
 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE
MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes
following the text, of references to Michigan Compiled Laws.
MCL Section this Code
MCL                    Section this Code
8.3 et seq.            1-2
8.3u                   1-9
8.4                    1-4
8.4b                   1-3
8.5                    1-8
15.26 et seq,          2-106
                      2-401
                      6-52
                      32-3
15.231--15.246         76-11,
                       76-36
15.231 et seq.         2-103
                      2-231
                      50-33
15.261 et seq.         2-103
                      2-105
                      2-230
                      50-33
                      94-362
15.321 et seq.         2-103
15.341 et seq.         ch. 2, art. III
28.451 et seq.         26-164
28.601 et seq.         ch. 34, art. II
29.1 et seq.           ch. 26
30.410                 2-123
35.441 et seq.         10-56
35.442                 10-56
41.806a                ch. 26, art. II
54.211 et seq.         74-199
117.1 et seq.          ch. 2
117.4i(k)              1-7
117.4l                 1-7
117.5b                 1-1
117.5c                 ch. 2, art. VI, div. 2
117.5c(a)-- 117.5c(e)  2-227--
                       2-231
117.5j                 82.1
123.165                82-244
123.362                ch. 62, art. II
123.1104               42-116
                      42-136
124.21 et seq.         94-66
                       75-11,
125.1401 et seq.       75-31,
                       75-51
125.1501 et seq.       ch. 6, art. II
125.1504               2-142
                       94-95,
                      94-96,
                       94-192
125.1504b              94-192
125.1509               2-142
125.1514 et seq.       ch. 6, art. II, div. 2
125.2301 et seq.       94-126
125.31 et seq.         ch. 50
125.3101, et seq.      1-2
125.3811               50-31
                      50-37
125.3815               50-32
125.3819               50-40
125.3821               50-33
125.3823               50-34
125.3831 et seq.       50-35
                      50-36
125.3861 et seq.       50-38
                      50-39
125.51 et seq.         94-172
125.526(3)             6-73
125.539                6-71
125.54                 94-172
125.581 et seq.        94-361
125.585                94-329
125.3103               94-395
125.4401 et seq.       2-331
128.1 et seq.          ch. 14, art. II
128.11 et seq.         ch. 14, art. II
131.1 et seq.          ch. 2, art. V
141.101 et seq.        82-4
141.103                82-1
141.121                82-244
                      82-246
141.2101 et seq.       ch. 2, art. v
168.1 et seq.          ch. 18
168.321 et seq.        ch. 18
168.644b               18-2
168.644l               18-1
168.656 et seq.        18-4
168.662                18-5
211.741 et seq.        66-10
211.761 et seq.        66-19
247.61 et seq.         ch. 86, art. II
                      86-32
252.301 et seq.        ch. 58
257.1 et seq.          46-37
                      78-2
257.324(1)(h)          42-7
257.605, 257.606       ch. 78
257.624a               42-93
257.624b               42-93
257.625                42-93
257.682                78-93
257.707a-- 257.707e    22-34
257.741(4)             78-56
257.742(7)             78-55
257.742(9)             78-53
257.75                 78-6,
                       78-93
257.907                78-93
257.951                78-5,
                       78-91
259.151                1-2
324.11101 et seq.      ch. 62
324.11143              26-201
324.11501 et seq.      ch. 62
324.11508              ch. 62
324.1701 et seq.       ch. 22
324.312a               82-3
324.4301               ch. 62, art. II
324.61501 et seq.      ch. 38, art. II
324.80176              42-93
324.81134              42-93
324.82127              42-93
324.8901 et seq.       62-35
324.9101 et seq.       82-32,
                       94-177
324.9119               60-6
325.1001 et seq.       82-1
                       82-61
333.12753              82-3
333.20106              42-93
333.20904              42-93
333.230                42-93
333.6230               42-93
333.6523               42-79
333.7106               10-70,
                       42-89
339.101 – 339.2721   42-88
339.2501-- 339.2515    6-71
380.1312               42-98
400.271 et seq.        10-56
400.7012 to 400.7137   1-2
418.101 et seq.        34-54
430.301 et seq.        1-2
432.201                1-2
432.202(g)             1-2
436.1703(5)            42-93
436.1703(8)            42-93
436.1703(12)           42-93
436.701                42-93
436.703                42-93
436.707                42-93
445.371 et seq.        ch. 10, art. II
                      10-56
460.701 et seq.        70-37
484.2102               76-3
484.2251               76-11
559.101 et seq.        94-261
559.148                94-262
559.149                94-262
559.166                94-265
560.101 et seq.        ch. 74
                      74-31
                      74-35
                       74-102
                      74-104
                      74-197--
                       74-202
                      94-261,
                       94-263
560.102                74-31
560.102 et seq.        1-2
560.102(d), 560.102(e) 74-196
560.102(h), 560.102(i) 74-196
560.102(l)             74-196
560.105                50-39
                       ch. 74, art. II, div. 2, subdiv. II
560.105 (Cont'd)       ch. 74, art. II, div. 2, subdiv. III
560.108                74-31
                      74-196
560.108 et seq.        ch. 74, art. III
560.109                74-31
                      74-201
560.111                74-77
560.111 et seq.        ch. 74, art. II, div. 2, subdiv. II
560.112                50-39
                       74-78
560.112(1)             74-76
560.112(2)             74-79
560.112(4)             74-79
560.112--560.119       74-80
560.120                74-80
560.131 et seq.        ch. 74, art. II, div. 2, subdiv. III
560.132 et seq.        74-102
560.172                74-104
560.241                74-101
565.951 et seq.        82-15
600.113                6-72
600.8395               ch. 78, art. II, div. 2
600.8396               1-2,
                       2-1
600.8705               1-13,
                       2-7
600.8707               1-2,
                       2-143
                      32-8
                      82-219
600.8709               2-7
                       31-8
600.8727               82-215,
                       82-294
600.8727(3)            94-98
722.1 to 722.6         42-93
722.111                94-122 —
                       94-125
722.111 to 722.128     1-2
722.751 et seq.        42-6
750.81(2)              42-98
750.167(1)(e)          42-79
750.167a               42-93
750.222 et seq.        ch. 42, art. IV, div. 2
750.234e               42-136
750.237                42-93
750.222 et seq.        ch. 42, art. IV, div. 2
750.234e               42-136
750.243a et seq.       ch. 26, art. IV
750.243a(1)            26-163 
750.243a(2)            26-162
750.243a(3)            26-162
750.377 et seq.        42-41,
                       42-42
                      42-171
750.479                42-2
750.479a               42-3
750.520b to 750.520g   42-93
750.546 et seq.        14-36
                      42-43
                      42-175
764.9                  82-293
764.9c(2)              2-143
                      58-39
764.9f                 94-93
764.16(c)              34-55
769.1j                 42-96
771.3                  42-96
                       
 
