NEGAUNEE, MICHIGAN
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Contains 2025 S-6, current through:
Ordinance passed 10-9-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
CITY CHARTER
Editor’s note:
   The Charter of the City of Negaunee, Michigan, was adopted by the voters on
April 3, 1950. Dates appearing in parentheses following a section heading in
the Table of Contents, or following a section in the text, indicate that the
section was amended, enacted or repealed on the date given.
Preamble
Article I: Powers of Government
   
Section 1.1   Council-Manager Form of Government.
   
Section 1.2   Boundaries.
   
Section 1.3   Powers of City.
   
Section 1.4   Exercise of Powers.
Article II: Elections
   
Section 2.1   Wards and Precincts.
   
Section 2.2   Qualifications of Electors.
   
Section 2.3   Non-Partisan Elections.
   
Section 2.4   Procedure.
   
Section 2.5   Election Commission.
   
Section 2.6   Date of Regular Elections. (Dec. 4, 1961)
   
Section 2.7   Special Elections.
   
Section 2.8   Notices.
   
Section 2.9   Voting Hours.
   
Section 2.10   Nomination Petitions.
   
Section 2.11   Qualifications of Candidates. (Nov. 6, 1990)
   
Section 2.12   Affidavits of Eligibility.
   
Section 2.13   Time Limit for Filing of Nomination Petitions. (Dec. 4, 1961)
   
Section 2.14   Certification of Names of Candidates by City Clerk.
   
Section 2.15   Board of Canvassers.
   
Section 2.16   Registration of Voters.
   
Section 2.17   Tie Votes.
Article III: Removals and Vacancies
   
Section 3.1   Vacancies in General.
   
Section 3.2   Appointments by Council.
   
Section 3.3   Appointment of Temporary Justice of the Peace.
   
Section 3.4   Removals in General; Recalls.
Article IV: Council
   
Section 4.1   Number, Selection and Term.
   
Section 4.2   Powers.
   
Section 4.3   Mayor as Presiding Officer; Mayor Pro Tem. (Nov. 5, 1991)
   
Section 4.4   Compensation.
   
Section 4.5   Term Limits. (Nov. 5, 1991)
Article V: Legislation
   
Section 5.1   Organization of City Council. (Nov. 5, 1985; Nov. 5, 1991)
   
Section 5.2   Regular Meetings of City Council. (Nov. 6, 1985)
   
Section 5.3   Special Meetings of City Council.
   
Section 5.4   Quorums; Conflicts of Interest.
   
Section 5.5   Limitations on Power of the City Council.
   
Section 5.6   Rules of Procedure; Journal; Minutes. (Nov. 2, 1982)
   
Section 5.7   Publishing of Notices and Proceedings.
   
Section 5.8   Action by Ordinance or Resolution; Definition of Resolution.
   
Section 5.9   Ordinance Enactment.
   
Section 5.10   Record of Ordinances.
   
Section 5.11   Compilation of Ordinances. (Nov. 3, 1970)
   
Section 5.12   Adoption of Technical Codes.
   
Section 5.13   Penalties.
   
Section 5.14   Prior Legislation and Contracts.
   
Section 5.15   Establishment of Special Zones or Districts by Ordinance.
   
Section 5.16   Occupancy of Trailer Homes.
   
Section 5.17   Initiative and Referendum.
Article VI: Administrative Service
   
Section 6.1   Administrative Officers in General.
   
Section 6.2   City Manager; Appointment; Residency Requirement.
   
Section 6.3   Removal of City Manager.
   
Section 6.4   Duties of City Manager.
   
Section 6.5   Appointment of Administrative Officers by City Manager.
   
Section 6.6   Interference by Council in Appointments or Removals.
   
Section 6.7   City Attorney.
   
Section 6.8   City Clerk.
   
Section 6.9   City Treasurer.
   
Section 6.10   City Assessor.
   
Section 6.11   City Engineer.
   
Section 6.12   Health Officer. (Nov. 6, 1990)
Article VII: City Officers and Employees in General
   
Section 7.1   Bonds (Surety) Required.
   
Section 7.2   Oath of Office.
   
Section 7.3   Private Use of Public Property.
   
Section 7.4   Restrictions Concerning Acceptance of Gifts, Etc.
   
Section 7.5   Official Interest in Contracts.
   
Section 7.6   City Property to be Delivered to Successor.
   
Section 7.7   Civil Service and Pensions.
   
Section 7.8   Removal of City Employees.
   
Section 7.9   Employee Welfare Benefits. (Dec. 1, 1952)
Article VIII: Budget
   
Section 8.1   Fiscal Year.
   
Section 8.2   Preparation and Submission of Budget by City Manager. (Nov. 2,
1982)
   
Section 8.3   Budget Message.
   
Section 8.4   Contents.
   
Section 8.5   Proposed Expenditures; Comparison With Other Years.
   
Section 8.6   Anticipated Surplus From Public Utility Services.
   
Section 8.7   Public Hearings.
   
Section 8.8   Adoption. (Nov. 2, 1982)
   
Section 8.9   Establishment of Amount to be Raised by Property Taxes; Filing of
Certified Copy With County.
   
Section 8.10   Establishment of Appropriations; Transfers.
   
Section 8.11   Effective Date of Budget; Certification; Copies.
   
Section 8.12   Budget Control.
Article IX: Taxation
   
Section 9.1   Assessment of Property Subject to Taxation.
   
Section 9.2   Procedure.
   
Section 9.3   Board of Review. (Nov. 4, 1980)
   
Section 9.4   Notice of Meetings of Board of Review.
   
Section 9.5   Meetings of Board of Review.
   
Section 9.6   Limitations on Amount to be Levied.
   
Section 9.7   Certification of Tax Levy to City Assessor.
   
Section 9.8   Due Date; Interest on Late Payments. (July 27, 1967)
   
Section 9.9   Collection of Penalties by City Treasurer.
   
Section 9.10   No Limitations of Tax Debt.
   
Section 9.11   Representation of City at State Tax Meeting.
   
Section 9.12   Collection of Taxes and Assessments Levied Prior to Adoption of
Charter.
Article X: Special Assessments
   
Section 10.1   Council Resolution.
   
Section 10.2   Procedure.
Article XI: Finance
   
Section 11.1   Accounting.
   
Section 11.2   Disbursements.
   
Section 11.3   Depositories.
   
Section 11.4   Annual Audit. (Nov. 3, 1970)
   
Section 11.5   Purchasing Procedure. (Dec. 4, 1961; Nov. 2, 1982; Nov. 3, 1992)
   
Section 11.6   Inventory Program.
Article XII: Borrowing
   
Section 12.1   In General.
   
Section 12.2   Amounts. (Nov. 3, 1970)
   
Section 12.3   Contents and Use of Bonds; Records.
   
Section 12.4   Special Assessment Bonds.
   
Section 12.5   Mortgage Bonds.
   
Section 12.6   Issuance of Bonds or Other Evidence of Indebtedness Required;
Certification.
   
Section 12.7   Sinking Fund.
   
Section 12.8   Issuance and Delivery of Bonds.
Article XIII: Municipally Owned Utilities
   
Section 13.1   Operation for Benefit of City.
   
Section 13.2   Administration.
   
Section 13.3   Rules and Regulations.
   
Section 13.4   Accounts and Reports.
   
Section 13.5   Separation of Utility Funds.
   
Section 13.6   Emergency Reserve Funds. (Nov. 5, 1985)
   
Section 13.7   Use of Utility Revenues. (Nov. 3, 1987)
   
Section 13.8   Analytical Report.
Article XIV: Public Property
   
Section 14.1   Acquisitions.
   
Section 14.2   Acquisition by Condemnation.
   
Section 14.3   Maintenance.
   
Section 14.4   Vacations.
   
Section 14.5   Donations.
Article XV: Public Utility Franchises
   
Section 15.1   Continuation of Existing Franchises; Granting by Ordinance;
Duration; Transfers.
   
Section 15.2   Temporary Permits.
   
Section 15.3   Regulation by City.
   
Section 15.4   Regulation of Rates.
   
Section 15.5   Joint Use of Property With City.
Article XVI: Supervisors (Repealed)
   Editor’s note:
      This article was repealed by implication by state statute, which
superseded local authority.
   
Section 16.1   Election.
   
Section 16.2   Attendance at Council Meetings.
Article XVII: Municipal Court (Repealed)
   Editor’s note:
      This article was repealed by implication by state statute, which
superseded local authority.
   
Section 17.1   Election.
   
Section 17.2   Qualifications.
   
Section 17.3   Powers.
   
Section 17.4   Proceedings.
   
Section 17.5   Docket.
   
Section 17.6   Jurisdiction.
   
Section 17.7   Salary.
   
Section 17.8   Office.
Article XVIII: Miscellaneous
   
Section 18.1   Public Records.
   
Section 18.2   Chapter and Section Headings.
   
Section 18.3   Amendments; Conflicts.
   
Section 18.4   Severability.
   
Section 18.5   Person Defined; Gender References.
   
Section 18.6   Planning Commission.
   
Section 18.7   Recreation Department.
   
Section 18.8   Copies of Charter.
Article XIX: City Liability
   
Section 19.1   Damage Claims.
Article XX: Schedule
   
Section 20.1   Submission of Charter.
   
Section 20.2   First Election.
   
Section 20.3   Terms of Office.
   
Section 20.4   Organization of First Council.
   
Section 20.5   Hold-Over Offices.
   
Section 20.6   Vested Rights Continued.
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF NEGAUNEE, MICHIGAN
ADOPTED APRIL 3, 1950
PREAMBLE
We, the People of the City of Negaunee, in the County of Marquette and State of
Michigan, in accordance with the authority granted unto us by the Constitution
of the State of the laws thereof, in order that the benefits of efficient self-
government maybe guaranteed to our citizens and to provide for the necessary
and proper administration of Municipal affairs, do hereby adopt and establish
this Charter.
ARTICLE I: POWERS OF GOVERNMENT
SECTION 1.1 COUNCIL-MANAGER FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The government provided by this Charter shall be known as the Council-
Manager form of municipal government. Subject only to the limitations imposed
by the State Constitution, the general laws of the State, and this Charter, all
powers of the City shall be vested in an elected Council, hereinafter referred
to as the “Council.”
SECTION 1.2 BOUNDARIES.
   All the following described territory situated in the Townships of Negaunee
and Ishpeming, in the County of Marquette, State of Michigan, to-wit: All of
Sections four (4), five (5), six (6), seven (7), eight (8) and nine (9) and the
north half (N 1/2) of Sections sixteen (16), seventeen (17) and eighteen (18)
in township forty-seven (47) north, range twenty-six (26) west; all of sections
thirty-one (31), thirty-two (32) and thirty-three (33) in township forty-eight
(48) north, range twenty-six (26) west; all of sections one (1) and twelve (12)
and the north half (N 1/2) of Section thirteen (13) in township forty^seven
(47) north, range twenty-seven (27) west; and all of sections thirty-five (35)
and thirty-six (36) in township forty-eight (48) north, range twenty-seven (27)
west; shall be and is hereby declared to be the territorial boundaries and
limits of the City of Negaunee, a municipal corporation.
SECTION 1.3 POWERS OF CITY.
   The City of Negaunee shall possess all powers, both public and private,
necessary and incident to its corporate and Municipal character, vested in it
by this Charter and by Act 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended, of the
State of Michigan, and shall possess such other and additional powers as are
vested in it by the Constitution of the State of Michigan, the general and
special laws of the State of Michigan, the judicial interpretations of the
Courts and the common law of the land. The City of Negaunee, in its Municipal
and corporate character, shall have the power to sue and be sued, plead and be
impleaded, defend and be defended, in all courts of law and equity and in all
actions whatsoever, except as limited in this Charter.
   The City of Negaunee shall possess such further powers as are necessary and
incident in the management and control of Municipal property and in the
administration of the Municipal government, whether such powers are expressly
enumerated or not, and shall have the power to perform any act to advance the
interests of the City and the good government and prosperity of the City and
its inhabitants, and, through its regularly constituted authority, to pass all
laws and ordinances relating to its Municipal concerns, subject to the
limitations of the Constitution and general laws of the State of Michigan,
provided, however, that it is the purpose of this Charter to repeal all
provisions of prior Charters of the City of Negaunee which are not expressly
retained herein.
SECTION 1.4 EXERCISE OF POWERS.
   When no procedure is set forth in this Charter for the exercise of any power
granted to or possessed by the City, resort may be had to the procedure set
forth in any statute of the State of Michigan. If alternative procedures are to
be found in different statutes, then the Council shall select that procedure
which it deems to be most expeditious and to the best advantage of the City and
its inhabitants. Where no procedure for the exercise of any power of the City
is set forth, either in this Charter or in any statute of the State of
Michigan, the Council shall prescribe a reasonable procedure for the exercise
thereof by ordinance.
ARTICLE II: ELECTIONS
SECTION 2.1 WARDS AND PRECINCTS.
   The City of Negaunee shall consist of one ward, which shall be divided into
such number of election precincts as may be established by ordinance in
accordance with State law. All election precincts established at the time of
the adoption of this Charter shall be retained until such time, as the Council
shall by ordinance otherwise provide.
SECTION 2.2 QUALIFICATIONS OF ELECTORS.
   Qualifications of electors for any City election, except as otherwise
provided in this Charter, shall be the same as are prescribed by the
Constitution and general laws of the State.
SECTION 2.3 NON-PARTISAN ELECTIONS.
   All Municipal elections shall be on a non-partisan basis.
SECTION 2.4 PROCEDURE.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, the general election laws of the State
shall govern all procedure relating to City elections and to the registration
of electors.
SECTION 2.5 ELECTION COMMISSION.
   The Election Commission shall consist of those officials designated by State
law and shall have such authority and power as are vested in it thereunder.
SECTION 2.6 DATE OF REGULAR ELECTIONS.
   A general City election shall be held annually on the first Tuesday after
the first Monday in November. (Amended December 4, 1961)
SECTION 2.7 SPECIAL ELECTIONS.
   Special elections shall be held upon adoption of a resolution by the Council
or when required by this Charter or the general laws of the State. Resolutions
for special elections shall clearly set forth the purpose of the election and
no special election called by the Council shall be held within thirty (30) days
of the date of the adoption of the resolution. All provisions contained herein
for holding regular elections shall apply to special elections. However, no
special election shall be held within ninety (90) days prior to any regular
City election or any general or primary State election.
SECTION 2.8 NOTICES.
   The City Clerk shall give such public notices of the times and places at
which elections are to be held, of the offices to be filled and of the
proposals submitted to the electorate, as are required of him or her in State
elections. The City Clerk shall, at least sixty (60) days prior to any
election, give notice, by posting in every election precinct and by publication
at least once in a newspaper published or having general circulation in the
City of Negaunee, of the offices to be filled, of the final date for filing
nominating petitions and of the minimum and maximum number of signatures
required and permitted on any nominating petition.
SECTION 2.9 VOTING HOURS.
   On the day of any election the polls shall be open from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., except that when any City election is held on the same day as a State
election, the State law shall govern in that respect. All elections shall be
governed by local time.
SECTION 2.10 NOMINATION PETITIONS.
   Persons desiring to qualify as candidates for any elective office under this
Charter shall file with the City Clerk nomination petitions signed by not less
than fifteen (15) nor more than one hundred twenty (120) registered and
qualified voters of the City of Negaunee. The City Clerk shall prepare and make
available in his or her office official blank petitions in substantially the
same form as that required by State law for State and County officers, except
that references to political parties shall be omitted. To each petition there
shall be attached an affidavit by the circulator thereof stating that each
signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports
to be and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. No elector shall
sign more petitions than there are offices to be filled, and should an elector
do so, his or her signature shall be void except as to the petitions first
filed for that office. Whenever it shall be necessary at any City election to
elect an officer to fill a vacancy for an unexpired term such fact shall be
stated in the petitions filed for the purpose of nominating candidates to fill
each vacancy.
(Amended Nov. 6, 2001)
SECTION 2.11 QUALIFICATIONS OF CANDIDATES.
   No person shall be qualified to hold, nor be eligible for election to, any
elective City office unless he or she shall be a registered and qualified
elector. Any votes cast for any person not possessing the qualifications
provided herein shall be void.
(Amended November 6, 1990)
SECTION 2.12 AFFIDAVITS OF ELIGIBILITY.
   No nomination petition shall be received for filing by the City Clerk unless
the candidate named therein also files with the City Clerk prior thereto his or
her affidavit stating that he or she possesses all of the qualifications
specified by this Charter.
SECTION 2.13 TIME LIMIT FOR FILING OF NOMINATION PETITIONS.
   Nomination petitions shall be filed at such times and before such dates as
shall be in compliance with the provisions of the election laws of the State of
Michigan for filing such petitions.
(Amended December 4, 1961)
SECTION 2.14 CERTIFICATION OF NAMES OF CANDIDATES BY CITY CLERK.
   The City Clerk shall forthwith, after the last day named herein for
receiving and filing nomination petitions, certify to the Election Commission
the name and post office addresses of all candidates whose petitions meet the
requirements of this Charter, together with the name of the office for which
they are candidates.
SECTION 2.15 BOARD OF CANVASSERS.
   The Council shall be the Board of City Canvassers, and the City Clerk shall
be the Clerk of the Board of City Canvassers. Duties enjoined upon the Boards
of County Canvassers by the laws of the State are hereby enjoined upon the
Board of City Canvassers as near as they may be applicable.
SECTION 2.16 REGISTRATION OF VOTERS.
   The registration and re-registration of voters shall be made by the City
Clerk in accordance with the provisions therefor in the general laws of the
State.
SECTION 2.17 TIE VOTES.
   If at any Municipal election there shall be no choice between candidates by
reason of two (2) or more having received an equal number of votes, then the
Council shall proceed to determine the election of such candidates by lot in
the same manner, as near as may be, as shall be provided by the general laws of
the State.
ARTICLE III: REMOVALS AND VACANCIES
SECTION 3.1 VACANCIES IN GENERAL.
   Every elective office shall become vacant on the happening of any of the
following events before the expiration of the term of such office: the death of
the incumbent, his or her resignation, his or her removal from office, his or
her recall by the electorate, his or her ceasing to be an inhabitant of the
City, his or her absence continuously from the City for more than sixty (60)
days without the permission of the Council, his or her conviction of any
offense in violation of his or her oath of office or his or her refusal or
neglect to take his or her oath of office or to give or render any official
bond.
SECTION 3.2 APPOINTMENTS BY COUNCIL.
   In case any vacancy shall occur in any of the offices in this Charter
declared to be elective, the Council shall fill such vacancy by the appointment
of a qualified person, and any person. appointed to fill a vacancy shall hold
office, by virtue of such appointment, until his or her successor is elected at
the next general City election and has duly qualified, provided that if the
Council shall deem it expedient it may call a special election to fill any
vacancy occurring in any elective office, according to the provisions of this
Charter. The Council shall not fill any vacancy by appointment, except in the
office, of the Justice of the Peace, within ninety (90) days prior to any
general City election.
SECTION 3.3 APPOINTMENT OF TEMPORARY JUSTICE OF THE PEACE.
   In the event that the Justice of the Peace is unable because of illness or
other cause to perform his or her duties for a period of more than fifteen (15)
days, the Council may appoint a person to act as Justice of the Peace during
the temporary disability of the regular Justice of the Peace.
SECTION 3.4 REMOVALS IN GENERAL; RECALLS.
   Any officer elected under this Charter may be removed in accordance with the
general laws of the State of Michigan or by his or her recall in accordance
with the provisions of this Charter.
ARTICLE IV: COUNCIL
SECTION 4.1 NUMBER, SELECTION AND TERM.
   The Council shall consist of seven (7) members elected from the City at
large in the manner provided in Article II, for a term of three (3) years,
except as provided in
Section 20.2 hereof, or until their successors have been elected and qualified
as provided in this Charter.
SECTION 4.2 POWERS.
   The Council shall constitute the legislative and governing body of the City,
possessing all the powers herein provided for, with power and authority to pass
such ordinances and adopt such resolutions as it shall deem necessary and
proper in order to exercise any or all of the powers possessed by the City, and
for the public peace, health and safety of persons and property.
SECTION 4.3 MAYOR AS PRESIDING OFFICER; MAYOR PRO-TEM.
   The Mayor of the City of Negaunee shall be elected from the City at large.
He or she shall preside at meetings of the Council and shall be the head of the
City government for all ceremonial purposes and for purposes of military law,
but shall have no regular administrative duties. The Mayor Pro-Tern shall be
elected from the City at large. The Mayor Pro-Tern shall act as Mayor during
the absence or disability of the Mayor and if a vacancy occurs shall become
Mayor for the completion of the unexpired term. The Mayor and Mayor Pro-Tern
may speak and vote in meetings the same as any other member of the Council, but
shall not have the power of veto. At each general City election commencing with
the November, 1992, election, only those Councilmembers whose terms do not
expire immediately following this election, and no other persons, may be
candidates for the office of Mayor. The candidate receiving the most votes
shall become Mayor for a term not to exceed two years. The candidate receiving
the next highest number of votes for Mayor shall be the Mayor Pro-Tern for a
term not to exceed two years.
(Amended November 5, 1991)
SECTION 4.4 COMPENSATION.
   Each member of the Council shall be compensated quarterly at the rate of six
dollars ($6.00) per meeting attended of which minutes are kept and duly entered
in the Journal, but not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year.
The Mayor shall be compensated quarterly at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00)
per year over and above his or her compensation as a Councilmember.
SECTION 4.5 TERM LIMITS.
   Councilmembers are hereby limited to serve two (2) consecutive terms upon
the Council.
(Adopted November 5, 1991)
ARTICLE V: LEGISLATION
SECTION 5.1 ORGANIZATION OF CITY COUNCIL.
   The members of the Council shall take office on th6 first day of December
following their election and the Council shall annually hold its organizational
meeting at 7:30 p.m. at the first regular meeting following the first day of
December, as provided in Section 5.2.
(Amended November 5, 1985; November 5, 1991)
SECTION 5.2 REGULAR MEETINGS OF CITY COUNCIL.
   Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held at least once per month
at the usual place of holding meetings of the City Council, at such times as
the City Council shall by resolution prescribe.
(Amended November 5, 1985)
SECTION 5.3 SPECIAL MEETINGS OF CITY COUNCIL.
   Special meetings shall be called by the City Clerk on written request of the
Mayor, the City Manager or any three (3) Councilmembers. At least six (6) hours
written notice shall be given to each Councilmember. Such notice shall contain
a statement of the purpose of such meeting, such notice shall be delivered to
each Councilmember personally. If this is not possible, then it shall be
delivered to some responsible person at his or her residence. If this is not
possible, then it must be left at his or her residence in some conspicuous
place. Any special meeting shall be a legal meeting for all purposes without
such notice, provided that all Councilmembers are present thereat or have
waived notice thereof in writing, as to the purpose of said meeting not
included in the notice thereof.
SECTION 5.4 QUORUMS; CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   A majority of the Council shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.
The Council may, by a majority vote of those present, compel the attendance of
its members and other officers of the City at its meetings and enforce orderly
conduct therein. No Councilmember shall vote on any question in which he or she
has any financial interest other than the common public interest, but on all
other questions every Councilmember present shall be entitled to vote. On all
votes which are not unanimous, the yea or nay vote of each member shall be
recorded by roll call, but where the vote is unanimous, it shall be necessary
to so state. However, all members of the Council who are absent shall be so
listed in the minutes of the meeting.
SECTION 5.5 LIMITATIONS ON POWER OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   No office shall be created or abolished, expenditures authorized, taxes or
assessments imposed, contract approved, franchise granted, street, alley or
public grounds vacated, real estate or interest therein acquired, sold or
disposed of, nor any private property taken for public use, unless a majority
of the Council-elect shall vote in favor of the same, except as herein provided
by the use of initiative and referendum. No action of the Council shall be
rescinded or reconsidered at a special meeting, unless there be present as many
members as were present when such action was taken.
SECTION 5.6 RULES OF PROCEDURE; JOURNAL; MINUTES.
   The Council shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall
keep a journal of its proceedings in the English language, which journal shall
he signed by the City Clerk. It is required that the minutes of the preceding
regular meeting and any special meetings held in the interim shall be reviewed,
corrected, if necessary, and approved at the next succeeding regular meeting.
All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public.
There shall be no standing committees of the Council.
(Amended November 2, 1982)
SECTION 5.7 PUBLISHING OF NOTICES AND PROCEEDINGS.
   A summary of the proceedings of every meeting of the Council shall be
prepared by the City Clerk and published in a newspaper to be designated by the
Council. Any special publication of ordinances or notices requiring City-wide
attention shall be published in such manner as the Council shall arrange.
SECTION 5.8 ADOPTION BY ORDINANCE OR RESOLUTION; DEFINITION OF RESOLUTION.
   The Council shall act only by ordinance or resolution. The word
“resolution,” as used in this Charter, shall be an official action in the form
of a motion, and such action shall be limited to matters required or permitted
to be done by resolution by this Charter or by State law and to matters
pertaining to the internal affairs or concerns of the City government. All
other acts of the Council, and all acts carrying a penalty for the violation
thereof, shall be by ordinance.
SECTION 5.9 ORDINANCE ENACTMENT.
   Legislation shall be by ordinance. Each ordinance shall be identified by a
number and a short title. The style of all ordinances shall be “The City of
Negaunee ordains.” The effective date of an ordinance shall be prescribed
therein. At least two (2) weeks shall elapse between the introduction and
enactment of an ordinance or an amendment to an ordinance. Enactment shall
require the affirmative vote of a majority of the Council-elect and the
effective date shall not be earlier than ten (10) days after enactment, except
that ordinances immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace,
health or safety may be enacted on the date of introduction and given immediate
effect by the affirmative vote of not less than five (5) Councilmembers. No
ordinance shall be amended or repealed in part by reference to its title only,
but the section or sections amended or repealed shall be enacted in full or
specifically designated, except that an ordinance may be repealed in its
entirety with reference to its number and title only. No ordinance shall be
repealed in part or in whole or shall be amended except by the affirmative vote
of a majority of the Council elect.
SECTION 5.10 RECORD OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances, the dates of introduction and enactment thereof and the vote
thereon shall be recorded by the City Clerk in a book to be called “the
Ordinance Book”, and it shall be the duty of the Mayor and the City Clerk to
authenticate such record by their official signatures. Except as otherwise
provided by this Charter, all ordinances when enacted shall be forthwith
published by the City Clerk at least twice in a newspaper having general
circulation in the City of Negaunee and he or she shall enter his or her
certificate as to the manner and date of publication under each ordinance in
the Ordinance Book.
SECTION 5.11 COMPILATION OF ORDINANCES.
   The Council shall order a general compilation of ordinances within two (2)
years from the date this Charter is adopted by the electors and every two (2)
years thereafter. In addition to the copies needed for official use there shall
be printed such additional copies as shall be deemed necessary in the
discretion of the Council for public distribution. Such compilation, when
completed, shall be approved by appropriate resolution of the Council. It shall
be the duty of the Council, prior to any general compilation, to revise, amend
or repeal any ordinance or part of any ordinance that may have become obsolete,
impractical, inadequate or unenforceable for any reason whatsoever.
(Amended November 3, 1970)
SECTION 5.12 ADOPTION OF TECHNICAL CODES.
   The Council may adopt by ordinance any provision of State law or any
detailed technical regulations as a City ordinance or code by citation of such
provision of State law or by reference to any recognized standard code,
official or unofficial, provided that any such provision of State law or
recognized official or unofficial standard code shall be clearly identified in
the ordinance to he adopted. When any such provision of State law or code is so
adopted, publication of the ordinance shall be made as provided by this
Charter. The Council may publish such provisions of State law or code in
booklet form, available to the public at cost. Any amendment to or revision of
such adopted code or detailed technical ordinance may be published in the same
manner.
SECTION 5.13 PENALTIES.
   In the enactment of any ordinance the Council may provide for the punishment
of any person or persons violating the same, provided, however, that the
violation of any ordinance shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than ninety (90)
days or by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or by both
such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
SECTION 5.14 PRIOR LEGISLATION AND CONTRACTS.
   All by-laws, ordinances, contracts, franchises, resolutions, rules and
regulations of the City, not inconsistent with this Charter, in force at the
time this Charter becomes effective, shall continue in full force until
repealed or amended by action of the proper authorities.
SECTION 5.15 ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL ZONES OR DISTRICTS BY ORDINANCE.
   The Council may, by ordinance, provide for the establishment of districts or
zones within which the use of land and structures, the height, area, size and
location of buildings and required open spaces for light and ventilation of
such buildings, and the density of population, may be regulated by ordinance,
provided that such regulations in one (1) or more districts may differ from
those in other districts.
SECTION 5.16 OCCUPANCY OF TRAILER HOMES.
   The use or occupancy of trailers as homes or living quarters within the
corporate limits of the City is hereby expressly prohibited unless the Council
in its discretion shall adopt an ordinance permitting and regulating the use or
occupancy of trailers as temporary or permanent homes or living quarters.
SECTION 5.17 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.
   All powers herein vested in the City of Negaunee under this Charter may be
exercised by the use of the initiative and referendum, and any official elected
under this Charter maybe recalled by the use of the initiative as hereinafter
provided, except that only elective officials may be recalled.
   (a)   All initiatory and referendary proceedings shall originate by a
petition and an initiatory or a referendary petition shall be signed by
registered qualified electors of the City in number equal to twenty-five
percent (25%) of the highest vote cast for any Councilmember at the last
regular City election prior to the filing of the petition. No such petition
need be on one sheet of paper, but may be the aggregate of two or more sheets
of paper. Each signer of a petition shall sign his or her name in ink or pencil
and shall place thereon, after his or her name, the date and his or her place
of residence by street and number, or by other customary designation. To each
sheet of such petition there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the
circulator thereof, stating the number of signers thereto and that each
signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports
to be,.and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. Any such petition
shall be filed with the City Clerk who shall, within ten (10) days, determine
the sufficiency thereof and so certify. If found to contain an insufficient
number of qualified electors of the City, or to be improper as to form or
compliance with the provisions of this section, then ten (10) days shall be
allowed for the filing of supplemental petition papers. When found sufficient
and proper, the City Clerk shall present the petition to the Council, at its
next regular meeting.
   (b)   Upon receiving a certified initiatory or referendary petition from the
City Clerk, the Council shall, within thirty (30) days, either:
      (1)   If it be an initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance or resolution;
      (2)   If it be a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance or
resolution; or
      (3)   In either case, determine to submit the proposal to the electors.
However, upon the certification of an initiatory petition providing for the
recall of any elective official, it shall be the duty of the Council to submit
such proposal to the electors, as herein provided. The result of the submission
to the electors of any proposal herein provided for shall be determined by a
majority vote of the electors voting thereon, except in cases otherwise
required by law or this Charter.
   (c)   Should the Council decide to submit1 the proposal to the electors, it
shall be submitted at the next election held in the City for any other purpose
or, in the discretion of the Council, at a special election.
   (d)   Any ordinance or resolution adopted by the electorate through
initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed by the Council for a
period of two (2) years thereafter, and any ordinance or resolution repealed by
the electorate through referendary proceedings may not be readopted in
substance by the Council for a period of two (2) years thereafter. Any elective
official recalled by the procedure herein provided for shall be ineligible to
be a candidate for any Municipal office for at least a year after the date of
the election resulting in his or her recall.
   (e)   The use of the initiative and referendum as herein provided shall not
alter, affect or impair contractual rights of persons or parties dealing with
the City, vested at the time of the filing of any initiatory or referendary
petition. However, any ordinance or resolution, including those purporting to
vest any contractual rights in any persons or parties dealing with the City,
shall be automatically suspended by the filing with the City Clerk, within
twenty (20) days after the enactment of such ordinance or resolution, of a
referendary petition relating to such ordinance or resolution as herein
provided, and such ordinance or resolution shall continue suspended until
repealed by the Council or final determination by the electors, as the case may
be.
ARTICLE VI: ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE
SECTION 6.1 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS IN GENERAL.
   The administrative officers of the City shall be the City Manager, City
Clerk, City Treasurer, City Assessor, City Attorney, City Engineer, Chief of
Police, Chief of the Fire Department, Librarian and Health Officer.
SECTION 6.2 CITY MANAGER; APPOINTMENT; RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.
   The Council shall appoint a City Manager for an indefinite term. He or she
shall be appointed by the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the
Council-elect. Such City Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of
the City and shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council. He or she shall
be selected on the basis of fitness and ability without regard to his or her
political or religious preferences and shall have had training and experience
in municipal administration and will be hired based on candidate’s executive
and administrative qualifications. He or she need not be a resident of the City
or the State at the time of his or her appointment, but he or she must be a
citizen of the United States and shall reside in the City of Negaunee during
his or her term of office as City Manager. During the absence or disability of
the City Manager, or in the event of a vacancy in that office, the Council
shall designate some properly qualified person to execute the functions of that
office during the period of absence or disability or until the vacancy has been
filled. The first City Manager under this Charter shall be appointed by the
Council on or before December 1, 1950. Upon the resignation or removal of the
City Manager the vacancy in such office shall be filled by the Council within
six (6) months of the effective date of such resignation or removal. No member
of the Council shall be eligible for appointment as City Manager or Acting City
Manager until two (2) years subsequent to the termination of his or her service
on the Council.
SECTION 6.3 REMOVAL OF CITY MANAGER.
   The City Manager may be removed by a majority vote of the Council-elect,
except that no Manager who has been in the service of the City for one (1) year
or more prior to a regular City election shall be removed within four (4)
months subsequent to such election, except for gross misconduct amounting to a
criminal offense punishable by statute. At least thirty (30) days before
removal of the Manager the Council shall adopt a resolution stating its
intention to remove him or her. Upon passage of the resolution stating the
Council’s intention to remove the Manager, the Council may suspend him or her
from duty but his or her pay shall continue until his or her removal. The
action of the Council in removing the Manager shall be final.
SECTION 6.4 DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER.
   The Manager shall supervise the administrative affairs of the City and shall
carry out the policies formulated by the Council. He or she shall be charged
with the preservation of the public peace and the health and safety of persons
and property and shall see to the enforcement of the ordinances of the City,
this Charter and the laws of the State. He or she shall attend all Council
meetings and keep the Council informed of the condition and needs of the City
and shall make such reports and recommendations as he or she may deem advisable
and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required
of him or her by ordinance or resolution of the Council not inconsistent with
this Charter. He or she shall have the right to take part in the discussion of
all matters coming before the Council.
SECTION 6.5 APPOINTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS BY CITY MANAGER.
   The City Manager shall appoint, and may remove with the approval of the
Council, a City Clerk and a City Treasurer. The City Manager shall appoint and
remove for cause a City Assessor, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Health Officer and
Librarian, and he or she may appoint and remove for cause a City Engineer and
such other officers and heads of departments as are herein provided for or as
may be created by the Council. The powers and duties of these officers and
heads of departments shall be those prescribed by State law, by this Charter
and by ordinances and such additional duties as may be required by the City
Manager.
   The compensation of officers and employees, except that of the City Manager
and City Attorney, shall be fixed by the City Manager, with the approval of the
Council, in accordance with the budget appropriations. The compensation of the
City Manager and City Attorney shall be fixed by the Council.
SECTION 6.6 INTERFERENCE BY COUNCIL IN APPOINTMENTS OR REMOVALS.
   Neither the Council nor any of its members shall direct or request of the
City Manager or any of his or her subordinates the appointment of any person
to, or the removal of any person from, office or employment. Except for the
purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the
administrative service solely through the Manager and neither the Council, nor
any member thereof, shall give orders to any subordinate of the Manager, either
publicly or privately.
   Any violation of the provisions of this section by a Councilmember shall be
a misdemeanor, conviction of which shall result in immediate forfeiture of his
or her office.
SECTION 6.7 CITY ATTORNEY.
   The Council shall appoint a City Attorney who shall hold office at the
pleasure of the Council. He or she shall act as the advisor to and as attorney
and counsel for the Municipality and all its officers in matters relating to
their official duties. He or she shall prepare or approve in writing all
contracts, bonds and other instruments in which the Municipality is concerned.
He or she may appoint an assistant who, during his or her absence or
disability, shall perform all the duties of the office but without compensation
from the City.
   He or she shall represent the City in all courts in any litigation in which
the City-may be interested and shall perform such other duties as the Council
may authorize.
   The City Attorney shall receive such salary or compensation as may be fixed
by the Council.
SECTION 6.8 CITY CLERK.
   The City Clerk shall perform all such duties as are or may be imposed upon
him or her by the general laws of the State or by the provisions of this
Charter and such other duties as the Council may prescribe. The City Clerk will
act as Secretary of the Council, shall attend all meetings thereof and shall
record the proceedings in the journal.
   He or she shall be custodian of the City Seal and shall affix it to all
documents and instruments requiring the seal. He or she shall also be custodian
of all papers, documents and records pertaining to the City of Negaunee, the
custody of which is not otherwise provided for. He or she shall give to the
proper department or officials notice of the expiration or termination of any
franchises, contracts or agreements. He or she shall administer all oaths
required by this Charter or by the Council. He or she shall attest all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council and instruments of the City.
SECTION 6.9 CITY TREASURER.
   (a)   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the City
Treasurer shall, In addition to all other bonds required by law, give corporate
surety bonds in such sum or sums, with such surety or sureties, and to be
conditioned and approved, as the Council shall provide. The cost of such bonds
shall be paid by the City.
   (b)   The City Treasurer shall have the custody of all monies of the City,
the City Clerk’s bond, and all evidences of value belonging to the City, or
held in trust by the City. He or she shall receive all monies belonging to and
receivable by the City, including license fees, taxes, assessments and all
other charges belonging to and payable to the City, and shall in all cases give
a receipt therefor. He or she shall keep and deposit all monies or funds in
such manner and only in such places as the Council may determine. He or she
shall report the same in detail to the City Clerk. He or she shall have such
powers and duties in regard to the collection and custody of State, County,
school district and City taxes and monies as may be conferred upon him or her
by this Charter or by State law.
   (c)   The City Treasurer shall, on the seventh (7th) day of each month,
furnish a detailed statement of the City’s finances in all of its departments
as of the last day of the previous month, or at any time when so required by
the Council or the City Manager.
   (d)   He or she shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this
Charter or by the City Manager.
SECTION 6.10 CITY ASSESSOR.
   (a)   The City Assessor shall possess all the powers vested in assessing
officers by the general laws of the State and shall be charged with all the
duties imposed upon the same.
   (b)   He or she shall annually assess the value of all taxable property in
the City and make an assessment roll in the same manner as required by law of
supervisors of townships.
   (c)   He or she shall spread upon said roll any and all taxes duly certified
by the Board of Supervisors of the County or by other proper authority.
   (d)   He or she shall make all special assessments authorized by the Charter
of the City, and for the purpose of such special assessments that portion of
the annual assessment roll applicable thereto shall be taken as the value of
the property to be assessed.
   (e)   He or she shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him
or her in this Charter or by the City Manager.
   (f)   He or she shall act as Clerk of the Board of Review, and, at the
pleasure of the Board, in an advisory capacity.
   (g)   The City Manager may, in his or her discretion, appoint any appointive
City official as City Assessor, and such official, when so appointed, shall
discharge the duties of City Assessor as herein provided in addition to his or
her other duties.
SECTION 6.11 CITY ENGINEER.
   The City Engineer shall be the official surveyor of the City and shall
perform such duties as are imposed upon him or her by the provisions of this
Charter and the ordinances of the City, and such other duties as may be
required of him or her by the City Manager. He or she shall act in an advisory
capacity to the Board of Review at the pleasure of the Board. The Council may,
in its discretion, assign the duties of the City Engineer to the City Manager.
SECTION 6.12 HEALTH OFFICER.
Editor’s note:
   This section was repealed November 6, 1990.
ARTICLE VII: CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES IN GENERAL
SECTION 7.1 BONDS (SURETY) REQUIRED.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the Council may require any
officer or employee to give a bond, to be approved by the Council, conditioned
upon the faithful and proper performance of the duties of his or her office or
employment, in such sum as the Council may determine. All such officers or
employees receiving, disbursing or responsible for City funds or responsible
for City property shall be bonded. The resignation or removal of any
administrative officer or employee shall not, nor shall the appointment of
another to the office or employment, exonerate such officer or employee or his
or her sureties from any liability incurred. All official bonds shall be
corporate surety bonds and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the City,
except as otherwise provided in this Charter. All bonds of administrative
officers or employees shall be filed with the City Clerk, except that of the
City Clerk, which shall be filed with the City Treasurer.
SECTION 7.2 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Every officer, elected or appointed, to any City office, before entering
upon the duties of his or her office, shall take the oath of office prescribed
by the Constitution of the State and shall file the same with the City Clerk.
In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this section within twenty
(20) days from the date of his or her election or appointment, such officer
shall be deemed to have declined the office and such office shall be declared
vacant. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to notify every officer elected
or appointed to any City office of the requirements of this section. Such
notice must be given within at least seven (7) days after such election or
appointment, and must he served by a police officer, who shall take a receipt
for the same, to be filed with the City Clerk.
SECTION 7.3 PRIVATE USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No City officer or employee shall appropriate, convert, loan, borrow or
devote any City property, funds or labor to his or her own personal use or to
the use of any other person or persons in violation of his or her public trust
and oath of office.
SECTION 7.4 RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS, ETC.
   No City official, either elective or appointive, shall accept, receive or
take a greater salary or compensation, or fees or prerequisites, than are
prescribed and limited in this Charter or which are prescribed and limited
under the lawful exercise of any power or authority delegated under this
Charter in any manner whatever, either directly or indirectly, from the said
City.
   No City official, either elective or appointive, shall accept, receive, take
or solicit any gratuities, gifts, emoluments or money from any person or
persons with the intent and purpose of influencing such City official to omit
or to perform some act in violation of his or her oath of office and his or her
duties as such City official. Any City official, either elective or appointive,
violating these provisions or violating any other provisions of this Charter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished, upon conviction,
by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than ninety (90) days or by a
fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or by both such fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court, and shall be removed from office.
SECTION 7.5 OFFICIAL INTEREST IN CONTRACTS.
   No elective or appointive officer shall take any official action on any
contract or other matter in which he or she has any financial interest other
than the common public interest, or be a bondsman or surety on any contract or
bond given to the City.
SECTION 7.6 CITY PROPERTY TO BE DELIVERED TO SUCCESSOR.
   Whenever any officer shall resign or be removed from office, or the term for
which he or she shall have been elected or appointed shall expire, he or she
shall deliver to his or her successor in office, or to the City Clerk, all the
books, papers, money and effects in his or her custody as such officer, which
in any way appertain to his or her office. Every person willfully violating
this provision shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and may be proceeded
against in the same manner as are public officers generally for like offenses
under the general laws of this State, now or hereafter in force and applicable
thereto. Every officer, whether elected or appointed, shall be deemed to be an
officer within the meaning of the provisions of said general laws of the State,
SECTION 7.7 CIVIL SERVICE AND PENSIONS.
   The Council shall provide by ordinance, on or before July 1, 1946, for a
merit system of personnel management for all City employees. Such ordinance
shall-provide for such merit system and its administration as will guarantee to
all citizens of the City a fair and equal opportunity for public service; as
will establish conditions of service which will attract officers and employees
of character and ability; and as will increase the efficiency of governmental
departments and agencies by the improvement of methods of personnel management.
The Council, in the enactment of such ordinance, shall give due consideration
to tenure, seniority, service in the Armed Forces of this country and
qualifications of officers and employees.
   The Council may establish by ordinance a pension and retirement system for
any or all groups of employees in the service of the City, provided that the
cost, either to the employees or the City, or both, of any such pension and
retirement system shall be determined by actuarially sound mortality and
service tables.
SECTION 7.8 REMOVAL OF CITY EMPLOYEES.
   Any officer or employee of the City whose appointment is under the sole
jurisdiction of the City Manager, including all subordinate employees, may be
removed by the City Manager, subject to any statutory limitations and any civil
service system adopted in accordance with the provisions of this Charter.
   The adoption of this Charter shall not of itself deprive any employee of the
City of the position held at the time of the adoption.
SECTION 7.9 EMPLOYEE WELFARE BENEFITS.
   The Council shall have the power to make available to the administrative
officers and employees of the City and its departments, any recognized plan of
group life, hospital, health or accident insurance, either independently of or
as a supplement to any retirement plan provided for the employees and officers,
with the City contributing, in whole or in part, to the payment of the premium
of said plan. The Council shall also have the power to provide for a retirement
system for its employees independent of any other employee’s welfare benefit.
(Amended December 1, 1952)
ARTICLE VIII: BUDGET
SECTION 8.1 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the City government shall begin on the first day of
January and shall end on the last day of December of each calendar year. Such
fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year.
SECTION 8.2 PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION OF BUDGET BY CITY MANAGER.
   The City Manager at the regular Council meeting of September of each year,
shall submit to the Council a budget and an explanatory budget message. The
budget shall be detailed by organization units and by the character and object
of expenditures, together with an estimate of all capital projects pending or
which the City Manager believes should be undertaken:
   (a)   Within the budget year; and
   (b)   Within the five next succeeding years.
(Amended November 2, 1982)
SECTION 8.3 BUDGET MESSAGE.
   The budget message submitted by the City Manager to the Council shall be
explanatory of the budget, shall contain an outline of the proposed financial
policies of the City for the budget year and shall describe in connection
therewith the important features of the budget plan. It shall set forth the
reasons for salient changes from the previous year in cost and revenue items
and shall explain any major changes in financial policy.
   Attached to the budget message shall be such supporting schedules, exhibits
and other explanatory material, with respect to both current operations and
capital improvements, as the City Manager shall believe useful to the Council.
SECTION 8.4 CONTENTS.
   The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the budget year and
it shall contain in tabular form;
   (a)   A general summary.
   (b)   Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenue which shall include all
unallocated surpluses and sales of bonds, if any.
   (c)   All proposed expenditures.
   The total of such anticipated revenues shall be not less than the total of
such proposed expenditures.
SECTION 8.5 PROPOSED EXPENDITURES; COMPARISON WITH OTHER YEARS.
   The budget shall show the several items of anticipated revenue and proposed
expenditures, the amount of such items in the budget of the last completed
fiscal year, the amount of such items actually received and expended during at
least each of the previous four years, the amount of such items in the budget
of the current year and the amount actually received and expended to the time
of preparing the budget, plus revenue and the expenditures for the remainder of
the current fiscal year, established as accurately as may be.
SECTION 8.6 ANTICIPATED SURPLUS FROM PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICES.
   The anticipated revenue and proposed expenditures of each utility or other
public service enterprise owned or operated by the City shall be stated in a
separate section of the budget (each bearing the name of the utility), and as
to each such utility, an anticipated surplus, if available under the provisions
of this Charter for general purposes, shall be stated as a specific item of
revenue in the budget.
SECTION 8.7 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   At the meeting of the Council at which the budget and budget message are
submitted, the Council shall determine the place and time of a public hearing
on the budget, and shall cause to be published, at least once, in a newspaper
published or having general circulation in the City, a notice of such place and
time, not less than seven days before the date of such hearing. It shall be
mandatory upon the Council to provide for and to hold such public hearing.
SECTION 8.8 ADOPTION.
   The Council may add, increase, decrease or eliminate any item or items in
the budget, as submitted by the City Manager. Subject to the provisions of
Section 8.4, the final budget shall be adopted by resolution passed by the
affirmative votes of at least a majority of all members of the Council present
at the regular Council meeting in November.
(Amended November 2, 1982)
SECTION 8.9 ESTABLISHMENT OF AMOUNT TO BE RAISED BY PROPERTY TAXES; FILING OF
CERTIFIED COPY WITH COUNTY.
   From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein to be
raised by property tax shall constitute a determination of the amount of the
levy for the purposes of the City. Two copies of the budget as finally adopted
and certified as hereinafter provided shall be filed with the City Assessor,
who shall file one copy with the Board of Supervisors of Marquette County.
SECTION 8.10 ESTABLISHMENT OF APPROPRIATIONS; TRANSFERS.
   From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as
proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects
and purposes therein named. After the budget has been adopted, no money shall
be drawn from the Treasury of the City during the fiscal year to which such
budget applies, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be
incurred during such year except pursuant to the budget appropriation, provided
that the Council may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or any
portion thereof from one department, fund or agency to another. The balance in
any appropriation which has not been , encumbered or transferred at the end of
the fiscal year shall revert to the General Fund,
SECTION 8.11 EFFECTIVE DATE OF BUDGET; CERTIFICATION; COPIES.
   Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget year. A
copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be certified by the Mayor and the
City Clerk and filed in the office of the City Treasurer. The budget so
certified shall be printed, mimeographed or otherwise reproduced and sufficient
copies thereof shall be made available for the use of all offices, departments
and agencies and for the use of the general public.
SECTION 8.12 BUDGET CONTROL.
   At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more
often if required by the Council, the City Manager shall submit to the Council
data showing the relation between the estimated and actual revenue and
expenditures to date, and if it shall appear that the revenue is less than
anticipated, the Council may reduce appropriations for any item or items,
except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may
be necessary to keep expenditures within the actual revenue. If the revenue
exceeds the amounts estimated in the budget, the Council may make supplemental
appropriations. The City Manager may provide for monthly or quarterly
allotments of appropriations to departments, funds or agencies under such rules
as may be prescribed.
ARTICLE IX: TAXATION
SECTION 9.1 ASSESSMENT OF PROPERTY SUBJECT TO TAXATION.
   An assessment of all property in the City which is subject to taxation shall
be made annually by the Assessor and shall be completed by him or her on or
before May 31st. The subjects of taxation for Municipal purposes shall be the
same as for State, county and school purposes under the general law, and the
City shall have all the rights, liens, powers and remedies accorded by State
law to all political subdivisions of the State in connection with the
collection of taxes.
SECTION 9.2 PROCEDURE.
   All assessment and tax procedures herein not specifically provided for shall
be in accordance with the general assessment and tax laws of the State. All
taxable property shall be assessed to the owner thereof as of the first day of
April of the year in which the assessment is made, except as otherwise provided
by State law.
SECTION 9.3 BOARD OF REVIEW.
   The Board of Review shall consist of five (5) citizens, who are property
owners assessed for taxes, elected from the City at large in the manner
provided in Article II for a term of three (3) years, except as provided below
for the first election of said Board, or until their successors have been
elected and qualified as provided in this Charter. A member of the Council
shall not serve on the Board of Review unless specifically elected to the Board
of Review as hereinabove provided. Compensation for members of the Board of
Review shall be fixed by the Council, provided that compensation shall only be
paid for the actual time in attendance. The first election of a Board of Review
under this Charter shall be held November 3,1981, at which time there shall be
elected seven (7) members of the Board of Review. The seven (7) candidates for
the Board of Review receiving the highest votes shall be deemed elected and
shall take office as soon as they shall qualify and shall hold office for the
following terms: The three (3) members receiving the highest number of votes
shall hold office until the first day of January, 1985; the two (2) members
receiving the fourth and fifth highest number of votes shall hold office until
the first day January, 1984; the two (2) members receiving the sixth and
seventh highest number of votes shall hold office until the first day of
January, 1983; thereafter, such number of members shall be elected for three
(3)-year terms at the annual City election as shall be necessary upon the
expiration of the terms herein provided for. In the event that less than seven
(7) candidates receive votes in the first election for the Board of Review, the
unfilled seats for membership on the Board of Review shall be deemed vacant and
filled in the same manner as provided for in this Charter for the filling of
vacant elected offices.
(Amended November 4, 1980)
SECTION 9.4 NOTICE OF MEETINGS OF BOARD OF REVIEW.
   The City Clerk shall give notice to the public of the time and place of
meetings of the Board of Review, by publication at least twice in a newspaper
having general circulation in the City, at least six (6) days immediately
preceding such meeting, and also by posting three (3) copies of such notice in
each voting precinct in the City.
SECTION 9.5 MEETINGS OF BOARD OF REVIEW.
   The meetings of the Board of Review shall be held at the times and in
accordance with the procedure provided by State law for townships, except that
the time for each statutory meeting may be extended, if necessary, to not more
than a total of six (6) days, and except that it shall be mandatory for the
Board of Review, during its second statutory meeting, to hold at least one
public evening session. At the first meeting of the Board of Review it shall
choose one of its members as Chairperson, and the City Assessor shall be its
Clerk. No City business, other than that which can properly he considered by
the Board of Review, shall be transacted between the opening and the closing of
any daily session of the Board of Review.
SECTION 9.6 LIMITATIONS ON AMOUNT TO BE LEVIED.
   The aggregate amount which the Council may raise by a general tax upon the
taxable real and personal property in the City, for the purpose of defraying
the general City expenses and liabilities of the corporation, inclusive of debt
service, shall not exceed, in any one year, two and one-quarter per centum of
the assessed value of all real and personal property in the City, as fixed by
the assessment roll of the year in which the tax is levied. There is hereby
expressly retained the maximum Municipal tax limitation provided by the Charter
in force at the time of the adoption of this Charter.
SECTION 9.7 CERTIFICATION OF TAX LEVY TO CITY ASSESSOR.
   Within three (3) days after the adoption by the Council of the budget for
the next fiscal year, the City Clerk shall certify to the City Assessor the
amount of the tax levy fixed by the Council, which the Assessor shall proceed
to ratably assess to each person and piece of property on the assessment roll,
together with all special assessments as well as any other amounts which the
Council may require or determine to be assessed or reassessed against any
property or person under authority of State law or this Charter.
SECTION 9.8 DUE DATE; INTEREST ON LATE PAYMENTS.
   Taxes for local school purposes shall be due and payable on the first day of
July of each year. Payments for such taxes may be made up to and including
August 1st without penalties. There shall be a penalty imposed thereafter in
the amount of one percent (1%) per month commencing the 2nd of August, until
such time as the taxes are turned over to the County for collection. All other
property taxes shall be due and payable on the first day of December of each
year.
(Amended July 27, 1967)
SECTION 9.9 COLLECTION OF PENALTIES BY CITY TREASURER.
   The City Treasurer shall collect, for the benefit of the City, such
collection charges, fees and penalties upon all taxes paid as are provided for
in the general property tax laws for the State of Michigan.
SECTION 9.10 NO LIMITATIONS OF TAX DEBT.
   No tax levied upon personal property shall cease to be a debt to the City
from the person owing such tax because of the tolling of any statute of
limitations.
SECTION 9.11 REPRESENTATION OF CITY AT STATE TAX MEETING.
   It shall be the duty of the Council to be represented at any public meeting
held in Marquette County of the Michigan State Tax Commission or any similar
body having to do with taxes or with valuations of any property within the
corporate limits.
SECTION 9.12 COLLECTION OF TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS LEVIED PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF
CHARTER.
   All taxes and assessments levied or assessed, all charges thereon and all
fines and penalties imposed, which remain uncollected at the time this Charter
becomes effective, shall be collected as if such change had not been made. If a
different remedy is provided by this Charter, or any ordinance adopted pursuant
thereto, which can be made applicable to any rights existing when this Charter
becomes effective, such remedy shall be deemed to be additional to the remedies
previously existing.
ARTICLE X: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
SECTION 10.1 COUNCIL RESOLUTION.
   The Council shall have power to determine by resolution that the whole or
any part of the expense of any public improvement shall be defrayed by special
assessments upon the property especially benefitted. Such resolution shall
state the estimated cost of the improvement, what proportion of the cost
thereof, if any, shall be paid by special assessment, and what part, if any,
shall be a general obligation of the City, and the number of installments in
which assessments may be paid, and shall designate the districts or land and
premises upon which special assessments shall be levied.
SECTION 10.2 PROCEDURE.
   All special assessments and all procedures relating thereto shall be in
conformity with Sections 2030 to 2059, inclusive, of the Compiled Laws of 1929
for the State of Michigan, as amended, except that all acts required therein to
be performed by a board of special assessors shall be performed by the City
Assessor.
ARTICLE XI: FINANCE
SECTION 11.1 ACCOUNTING.
   The Council shall provide by resolution for a system of accounting, the same
to be in conformity with applicable State laws and regulations. The same shall
include the following provisions:
   (a)   The accounting system referred to above shall, when installed, be
under the jurisdiction of the City Manager.
   (b)   The City Clerk shall be the Chief Accounting, Disbursing and Auditing
Officer.
   (c)   The accounting system, as herein provided, shall include, when
installed:
      (1)   A record of all collections made by the City Treasurer of every
name and nature, and of all taxes of every kind and description.
      (2)   A record of all payments received in settlement of utilities
charges and services.
      (3)   A record of all disbursements with an analysis of accounts to which
they are chargeable.
   (d)   All bills against the City and all accounts due from the City shall be
examined and audited by the City Clerk before being presented for payment. He
or she shall neither issue nor sign any disbursement order unless there is a
sufficient credit balance in the fund upon which it is drawn.
   (e)   The City Clerk shall examine and audit all accounts kept by other
officers and departments of the City at regular intervals and the accounts of
the City Treasurer and the Municipal Court, at least monthly.
   (f)   All accounting records of the City shall be balanced at the end of
each calendar month and a report thereof made to the City Manager by the City
Clerk.
   (g)   The City Clerk shall be required to perform such other duties in
relation to the said accounting system as may be required of him or her by this
Charter or the City Manager.
SECTION 11.2 DISBURSEMENTS.
   No funds of the City shall be disbursed except by written order. The Council
shall provide by resolution the proper procedure for approving, entering and
making all disbursements.
SECTION 11.3 DEPOSITORIES.
   The Council shall designate the depository or depositories for City funds
and shall provide for daily deposits of all City money. The Council shall
provide for such security for City funds as may be authorized and permitted
under the general laws of the State of Michigan, with the proviso that personal
surety bonds shall at no time be accepted. The City Treasurer shall not be
permitted to make any disbursements whatever in cash, but may maintain in his
or her office a cash fund for change-making purposes in such amount as shall be
prescribed by the City Manager from time to time.
SECTION 11.4 ANNUAL AUDIT.
   At least sixty (60) days before the end of each fiscal year, the Council
shall designate qualified public accountants, who shall, within one hundred
twenty (120) days after the end of the fiscal year, make an independent audit
of all accounts and financial transactions of the City during the fiscal year.
The accountants’ report shall be submitted to the Council. Such accountants
shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of
the City government or of any of its officers. They shall not maintain any
accounts or records of the City business, but within specifications approved by
the Council shall act as auditors with full power and authority to examine all
of the records of the City and interview any and all of its officers relative
thereto. (Amended November 3, 1970)
SECTION 11.5 PURCHASING PROCEDURE.
   Subject to the authority of the Council, the City Manager shall have
supervision and control over all purchases of supplies, materials and equipment
for City purposes, and the purchasing of the same shall be in all cases by
requisition. Neither the Council nor any City official shall have the right to
purchase any supplies, materials or equipment, or enter into any contract,
involving the expenditure of five thousand dollars ($5,000) or more, without
first submitting the same to competitive bidding, except in cases of dire
emergency in which competitive bidding is precluded and except in cases in
which, because of unusual circumstances, competitive bidding is not possible or
feasible. It shall be the duty of the Council to award every such purchase and
contract to the lowest bidder, except in cases where the welfare and interest
of the City require that the lowest bid or bids or all bids shall be rejected.
If in any specific case a bid which is not the lowest submitted is accepted,
the reason for rejecting lower bids shall be stated in the public minutes and
journal of the Council.
   Any Councilmember or official who violates the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and any person or persons who transact any
business with the City in violation of the provisions of this section shall do
so at their risk, and every purchase or contract made in violation of the
provisions of this section shall be void. Any person or persons who wilfully
and knowingly transact business with the City in violation of the provisions of
this section shall not be entitled to recover from the City for the value of
any materials, supplies and equipment delivered or services rendered in
violation of the provisions of this section.
   It shall be the duty of the City Manager to set up such purchasing and
contracting procedure as is provided by this Charter and as is consistent with
sound business practices. The Council may, in its discretion, require that
every bidder submit a bond to indemnify the City in the event that any bidder
whose bid has been accepted refuses or neglects to carry out the provisions or
terms of his or her bid.
(Amended December 4, 1961; November 2, 1982; November 3, 1992)
SECTION 11.6 INVENTORY PROGRAM.
   Under the direction and supervision of the City Manager there shall be made
annually, as soon after the first of January as possible, a full and complete
inventory of all City supplies, materials and equipment. Every such annual
inventory shall be kept up to date until superseded by the next annual
inventory so as to show at all times the amount and number of supplies,
materials and equipment on hand. The equipment inventory shall be kept separate
from that of supplies and materials, and such equipment inventory shall include
a department transfer record of all equipment.
ARTICLE XII: BORROWING
SECTION 12.1 IN GENERAL.
   Subject to the applicable provisions of State law, the Constitution of the
State of Michigan and the provisions of this Charter, the Council may authorize
the borrowing of money for any purpose within the scope of the powers vested in
the City and the issuance of bonds of the City or other evidences of
indebtedness therefor, and may pledge the full faith, credit and resources of
the City for the payment of the obligation created thereby, provided, however,
that the total indebtedness of the City shall not exceed five percent (5%) of
the assessed valuation of all real and personal property.
SECTION 12.2 AMOUNTS.
   The Council shall not borrow money or issue bonds in excess of one-half of
one percent (1/2%) of the State equalized valuation, but not to exceed sixty
thousand dollars ($60,000), unless authorized by the electors of the City at an
election wherein the question is lawfully submitted. Before any borrowing is
authorized by the Council, it shall, by an affirmative vote of at least five
members, declare by resolution the necessity for such borrowing, the amount
proposed to be borrowed and the purpose thereof.
(Amended November 3, 1970)
SECTION 12.3 CONTENTS AND USE OF BONDS; RECORDS.
   Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a
statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued and it shall be
unlawful for any officer of the City to use the proceeds thereof for any other
purpose. Any officer violating this provision shall be deemed guilty of
misdemeanor. All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the City
shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the City Clerk, under the
Seal of the City. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile
signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk. A complete and detailed record of
all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the City shall be kept
by the City Clerk. Upon payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness,
the same shall be marked “Canceled.”
SECTION 12.4 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT BONDS.
   The Council shall, subject to the applicable provisions of the general laws
of the State, have authority to borrow money in anticipation of the payment of
special assessments made for the purpose of defraying the cost of any public
improvement, or in anticipation of the payment of any combination of such
special assessments, and to issue bonds or other legal obligations therefor.
Such special assessment bonds may be an obligation of the special assessment
district or districts or may be both an obligation of the special assessment
district or districts and a general obligation of the City. All collections on
each special assessment roll or combination of rolls shall be set apart in a
separate fund and in a separate bank account for the payment of the principal
and interest of the bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of such special
assessments, and shall be used for no other purposes.
SECTION 12.5 MORTGAGE BONDS.
   The Council may borrow money to acquire or operate any public utility when
authorized to do so by the Michigan Constitution or by State law and when
authorized by the electors of the City at an election wherein the question is
lawfully submitted. Before the question is submitted to the electors by the
Council, Council shall, by an affirmative vote of at least five (5) members,
declare, by resolution, the necessity for such borrowing, the amount proposed
to be borrowed and the purpose thereof. It may issue mortgage bonds therefor
beyond the general limit of bonded indebtedness prescribed by this Charter,
provided that the indebtedness created by such mortgage bonds shall not impose
any liability upon the City, but shall be secured only by the property and
revenues of such public utility, including a franchise stating the conditions
under which, in case of foreclosure, the purchaser may operate the same. Such
franchise shall in no case extend for a longer period than twenty (20) years
from the date of the sale of such utility and franchise on foreclosure.
SECTION 12.6 ISSUANCE OF BONDS OR OTHER EVIDENCE OF INDEBTEDNESS REQUIRED;
CERTIFICATION.
   Whenever any money is borrowed by the City, bonds or other evidence of
indebtedness shall be issued therefor and shall be signed by the Mayor and the
City Clerk.
SECTION 12.7 SINKING FUND.
   The Council shall make provision for a sinking fund with which to pay at
maturity all bonds issued by the City.
SECTION 12.8 ISSUANCE AND DELIVERY OF BONDS.
   All bonds authorized by the electors of the City must be issued and
delivered to the purchasers thereof within three (3) years after the date of
the election at which said bonds were authorized, and if any bond is not sold
and delivered within three (3) years after the date of issue, it shall be
canceled and so marked.
ARTICLE XIII: MUNICIPALLY OWNED UTILITIES
SECTION 13.1 OPERATION FOR BENEFIT OF CITY.
   The several Municipally owned utilities, together with any utilities
hereafter acquired, shall be operated for the benefit of the City of Negaunee
and its inhabitants, subject to the right of the City to extend its service
beyond the corporate limits of the City.
SECTION 13.2 ADMINISTRATION.
   The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of each City-
owned or operated utility or utility department and shall have power to appoint
and remove a superintendent for each or any of them and all officers and
employees thereof. The appointments made by the City Manager shall be on the
basis of the fitness, training and experience of such appointees for the work
they are to perform, and shall be subject to any civil service regulations.
SECTION 13.3 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Insofar as they are consistent with the provisions of this Charter, the
present regulations of the various utilities and utility departments shall
continue in full force and effect under this Charter until changed by proper
ordinance or resolution of the Council. In addition to the powers, privileges
and rights possessed by the several utilities and utility departments of the
City under the State Constitution, the general laws of the State, this Charter
and City ordinances, such utilities and utility departments of the City shall
have the power to render all such services to their customers as are rendered
by public utilities of a similar type.
SECTION 13.4 ACCOUNTS AND REPORTS.
   Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the
City, distinct from other City accounts, and in such manner as to show the true
and complete financial result of such City ownership, or ownership and
operation, including all assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These
accounts shall show the actual cost to the City for each public utility owned,
the cost of all extensions, additions and improvements, all expenses of
maintenance, the amounts set aside for sinking fund purposes and all operating
expenses of every description. They shall show, as nearly as possible, the
value of any service furnished to or rendered by any such public utility by or
to any other City departments.
   It shall be the duty of the superintendent of each utility or utility
department to make an annual report to the City Manager on or before the first
day of February of each year for the previous fiscal year with reference to the
utility or utility department under his or her supervision.
   The City Manager shall annually cause to be made and published for public
distribution, a report showing the financial results of such ownership or
ownership and operation, which report shall give the information specified in
this section, and such further information as the City Manager shall deem
expedient or the Council shall require.
SECTION 13.5 SEPARATION OF UTILITY FUNDS.
   The funds of each of the utilities or utility departments shall be kept
separate from the General Fund of the City of Negaunee.
SECTION 13.6 EMERGENCY RESERVE FUNDS.
   An emergency reserve fund shall be created for each utility or utility
department to meet any emergencies which may occur in connection with such
utility or utility department. The net profits of each such utility or utility
department (computed yearly), after meeting principal, interest and any other
requirements upon outstanding bonds of the particular utility or utility
department, shall be placed in its emergency fund.
(Amended November 5, 1985)
SECTION 13.7 USE OF UTILITY REVENUES.
   Each year, the City Council shall each year review the emergency reserve
fund to determine its adequacy relative to anticipated future needs of the
utility or utility department. If, in the judgment of the City Council, the
emergency reserve fund exceeds all needs of the utility or utility department
that can be reasonably anticipated and all requirements have been satisfied on
any outstanding bonds, the Council may transfer such excess funds to the
General Fund of the City of Negaunee.
(Amended November 3, 1987)
SECTION 13.8 ANALYTICAL REPORT.
   It shall be the duty of the City Manager, when required by the Council, and
at least once in every five (5) years, to prepare or have prepared, with
respect to any City-owned utility, an analysis of the plant investment,
depreciation, obsolescence, reasonable return and operational costs, so that
there can be determined therefrom the efficiency of the plant management and
the reasonableness of the rates charged. Such analysis, when so prepared, shall
be a public report and shall be incorporated and made a part of the minutes or
journal of the Council.
ARTICLE XIV: PUBLIC PROPERTY
SECTION 14.1 ACQUISITIONS.
   The City of Negaunee may acquire, by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease,
construction or otherwise, either within or without its corporate limits and
either within or without the corporate limits of the County in which it is
located, the following improvements, including the necessary lands therefor,
viz: City halls, police stations, fire stations, boulevards, streets, alleys,
public parks, recreation grounds, Municipal camp grounds, public grounds,
libraries, airports, cemeteries, bathing beaches, City prisons and workhouses,
hospitals, quarantine grounds, electric light and power plants and systems, gas
plants and systems, water works plants and systems, sewage disposal plants and
systems, office buildings for City officers and employees, public works and
public buildings for any use or purpose within the scope of its powers, whether
herein specifically mentioned or not, and shall provide for the cost and
expenses thereof.
SECTION 14.2 ACQUISITION BY CONDEMNATION.
   Should condemnation proceedings be resorted to for the acquisition of
private property, including public utilities, such condemnation proceedings may
be brought under the provisions of Act 124 of the Public Acts of 1883 of the
State of Michigan, being Sections 3784 to 3810, inclusive, of the Compiled Laws
of 1929 of the State of Michigan, as amended, except that if condemnation
proceedings are resorted to for the acquisition of private property, including
public utilities outside the corporate limits of the City of Negaunee, such
condemnation proceedings may be brought under the provisions of Act 149 of the
Public Acts of 1911 of the State of Michigan, being Sections 3763 to 3783,
inclusive, of the Compiled Laws of 1929 of the State of Michigan, as amended.
The City of Negaunee may, in the condemnation of any private property, resort
to such other appropriate provisions therefor as exist or shall be made by law.
SECTION 14.3 MAINTENANCE.
   The City of Negaunee may, with respect to any of its property, have the
power to maintain, develop, operate, lease and dispose of the same, subject to
any restrictions placed thereupon by law.
SECTION 14.4 VACATIONS.
   When the Council shall deem it advisable to vacate, discontinue or abolish
any street, alley or public ground, or any part thereof, it shall by resolution
so declare, and in the same resolution appoint a time, not less than four weeks
thereafter, when it shall meet and hear objections thereto. Notice of such
meeting, with a copy of such resolution, shall be published not less than once
a week for four weeks prior to the time appointed for such meeting in one of
the newspapers published or having general circulation in the City of Negaunee.
Objections to such proposed action of the Council may be filed with the City
Clerk in writing, and if any such objections shall be filed, the street, alley
or public ground, or any part thereof, shall not be vacated or discontinued
except by a concurring affirmative vote of five members of the Council.
SECTION 14.5 DONATIONS.
   The City shall be authorized to accept any gift of property, or cash, by
trust or otherwise, for the furtherance of any Municipal purpose or object, and
the City may, by ordinance, provide for the establishment and administration of
any trust fund in the furtherance of any Municipal purpose or object.
ARTICLE XV: PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISES
SECTION 15.1 CONTINUATION OF EXISTING FRANCHISES; GRANTING BY ORDINANCE;
DURATION; TRANSFERS.
   All franchises heretofore granted by the City of Negaunee and now in
operation , shall continue until the expiration of such franchises. All
irrevocable public utility franchises and all renewals, extensions and
amendments thereof shall be granted only by ordinance. No such ordinance shall
be adopted within thirty (30) days after application for the franchise has been
filed with the Council, nor until a full public hearing has been held thereon.
No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted and no franchise shall be granted
for a longer term than thirty (30) years. No franchise shall be transferable,
directly or indirectly, except with the approval of the Council expressed by
ordinance.
SECTION 15.2 TEMPORARY PERMITS.
   Temporary permits for public utilities, revocable at any time at the will of
the Council, may be granted by the Council by resolution on such terms and
conditions as it shall determine, provided that such permits shall in no event
be construed to be franchises or amendments to franchises.
SECTION 15.3 REGULATION BY CITY.
   All public utility franchises, whether it is provided in the ordinance or
not, shall be subject to the right of the City:
   (a)   To repeal the same for misuse or nonuse, or for failure to comply
therewith;
   (b)   To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the
maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency;
   (c)   To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products,
and to prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates;
   (d)   To make independent audit and examination of accounts at any time, and
to require reports annually;
   (e)   To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in
accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period
thereof;
   (f)   To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council
to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public.
SECTION 15.4 REGULATION OF RATES.
   All public utility franchises shall make provision for fixing rates, fares
and charges, and for readjustments thereof at periodic intervals of not more
than five (5) years, either by arbitration upon terms to be specifically set
forth in the franchise, or by any State agency, at the election of the Council.
The value of the property of the utility used as a basis for fixing such rates,
fares and charges shall in no event include a value predicated upon the
franchise, good will or prospective profits.
SECTION 15.5 JOINT USE OF PROPERTY WITH CITY.
   Every public utility may be required by the City to permit joint use of its
property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys and public places of
the City by the City of Negaunee or by other public utilities, insofar as such
joint use may be reasonably practicable, upon payment of reasonable rental
therefor, provided that in the absence of agreement upon application of any
public utility, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and
conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor, which
award shall be final.
ARTICLE XVI: SUPERVISORS (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   This article was repealed by implication by state statute, which superseded
local authority.
SECTION 16.1 ELECTION.
   The City shall be entitled to five (5) supervisors who shall be members of
the Marquette County Board of Supervisors. Such supervisors shall be elected
from the City at large in the manner provided in Article II for terms of three
(3) years, except as provided in Sec. 20.2 hereof, or until their successors
have been elected and have qualified.
SECTION 16.2 ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   Upon such notice as is provided for in this Charter for special meetings of
the Council, the Council may request the presence of the City Supervisors at
any meeting of the Council and it shall be the duty of the Supervisors to
attend said meetings and they shall be paid for attendance thereat as is
provided in this Charter for attendance of Councilmembers. It is further
provided that these joint meetings shall be held at least quarterly.
ARTICLE XVII: MUNICIPAL COURT (REPEALED)
Editor’s note:
   This article was repealed by implication by state statute, which superseded
local authority.
SECTION 17.1 ELECTION.
   At the annual City Election held in the year one thousand nine hundred and
forty-six, and at the annual City Election held in each fourth year thereafter,
there shall be elected by the qualified electors of the City, in the same
manner as other elective officers and upon the same election ballot, one
Justice of the Peace, who may be referred to in all processes, pleadings and
proceedings as Judge of the Municipal Court; and the Justice Court over which
said Justice shall preside may be referred to in all processes, pleadings and
proceedings as The Municipal Court of the City of Negaunee.
   Said Justice shall enter upon the duties of his or her office on the first
day of January next succeeding his or her election, and his or her term of
office shall be four years and until his or her successor is elected and
qualified. It is provided, however, that the incumbent Justice of the Peace
shall continue to hold office until there shall be elected and qualified a
Justice of the Peace in accordance with the provisions of this Charter.
SECTION 17.2 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The qualifications for said Justice of the Peace shall be the same as are
prescribed for justices of the peace in townships, under the general laws of
the State, except that no person can be elected to the office of Justice of the
Peace who has not been a resident of the City of Negaunee for at least five (5)
years immediately preceding the date of his or her election.
SECTION 17.3 POWERS.
   The said Justice of the Peace shall have and exercise the same jurisdiction
and powers in all civil and criminal matters, causes, suits and proceedings,
and shall perform the same duties in all respects, so far as occasion may
require, as are or may be conferred upon or required of justices of the peace
in townships under the general laws of the State. He or she shall also have
authority to hear, try and determine all suits and prosecutions for the
recovery and enforcing of fines, penalties and forfeitures imposed by the
Charter and ordinances of the City, and to punish offenders for the violation
of such Charter and ordinances, as in such Charter or ordinances prescribed and
directed.
SECTION 17.4 PROCEEDINGS.
   The proceedings in all suits and actions before said Justice, and in the
exercise of the powers and duties conferred upon and required of him or her,
shall be according to and be governed by the general laws applicable to
Justices’ Courts and to the proceedings before such Courts, and in all suits
and prosecutions arising under the Charter and ordinances of the City the right
of appeal or certiorari from said Courts to the Circuit Court of the County, or
to any court having jurisdiction, shall be allowed to the parties, or any or
either of them, and the same recognizance or bond shall be given as is or may
be required by law in case of appeal or certiorari from Justices’ Courts in
analogous cases.
SECTION 17.5 DOCKET.
   Such Justice of the Peace shall enter in the docket kept by him or her the
title of all suits and prosecutions commenced or prosecuted before him or her,
including all violations of the Charter and ordinances of the City, and all
proceedings and judgments rendered in such causes and the items of all costs
taxed or allowed therein and also the amounts and dates of payment of all
fines, penalties and forfeitures, moneys and costs received by him or her on
account of such suits or proceedings. Such docket shall be submitted by the
Justice at all reasonable times for the examination of any persons desiring to
examine the same and shall be produced by the Justice for the Council whenever
required. All fines, penalties, forfeitures and moneys collected or received by
such Justice for or on account of violations of any provisions of the Charter
or ordinances of the City, shall be paid over by such Justice to the City
Treasurer on or before the first day of the next month after the collection or
receipt thereof, and the Justice shall take the receipt of the City Treasurer
therefor and file the same with the City Clerk.
SECTION 17.6 JURISDICTION.
   The said Justice shall have jurisdiction in civil causes in all townships
throughout the County up to the amount of the jurisdiction of said Justice, as
herein provided.
SECTION 17.7 SALARY.
   The said Justice shall be paid such annual salary for the term for which he
or she is elected as may be determined by the Council, by resolution adopted
not later than thirty (30) days prior to any election at which a Justice of the
Peace is to be elected, and in the event that no such resolution is adopted,
then such Justice shall receive such salary for the term for which he or she is
elected as was paid during the preceding term. Such salary, as herein provided
for, shall be in full compensation for all services performed by said Justice
in the discharge of his or her duties, and he or she shall make no charge to
any person for any services required of him or her by this Charter or by any
statute of the State of Michigan.
SECTION 17.8 OFFICE.
   The Council shall provide and furnish a suitable office and maintain heat,
light and telephone service for said Justice, shall furnish all docket and
legal blanks and stationery and shall allow all expenses necessary to properly
conduct said office.
ARTICLE XVIII: MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION 18.1 PUBLIC RECORDS.
   All records of the City shall be public.
SECTION 18.2 CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS.
   Chapter and section headings are for convenience only and shall not be
considered to be part of this Charter.
SECTION 18.3 AMENDMENTS; CONFLICTS.
   This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by the
general laws of the State. Should two (2) or more amendments, adopted at the
same election, have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the highest vote
shall prevail as to those provisions.
SECTION 18.4 SEVERABILITY.
   The sections of this Charter and the parts thereof are severable, and in the
event that any provisions are declared unconstitutional or contrary to State
law, it is hereby declared to be the intent of the Charter Commission and the
electors voting thereon that such unconstitutionality or illegality shall not
affect the validity of any other provision of this Charter.
SECTION 18.5 PERSON DEFINED; GENDER REFERENCES.
   Where the terms “person” and “persons” are used in this Charter, the same
shall be deemed to include any individual, individuals, firm, partnership,
association or corporation. Where the masculine gender is used in this charter,
it shall be deemed to include the feminine gender also.
SECTION 18.6 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   The Council may by ordinance establish and maintain a City Planning
Commission having the powers and duties prescribed by State law.
SECTION 18.7 RECREATION DEPARTMENT.
   The Council may by ordinance establish and maintain a Department of
Recreation.
SECTION 18.8 COPIES OF CHARTER.
   It shall be the duty of the City Manager to maintain in the office of the
City Clerk at all times an adequate number of copies of this Charter, It shall
be the duty of the Mayor or presiding officer to present to each newly elected
Councilmember a copy of this Charter at the first meeting attended by such
newly elected Councilmember.
ARTICLE XIX: CITY LIABILITY
SECTION 19.1 DAMAGE CLAIMS.
   The City shall not be liable for any injury to a person or persons or for
damage to property by reason of neglect to keep any public highways or streets,
and all bridges, sidewalks, crosswalks and culverts on the same, in reasonable
repair and in condition reasonably safe and fit for travel, unless there shall
be a full compliance by any person or persons making such a claim for injury or
damage with the provisions of Sections 4223 to 4230 of the Compiled Laws of
1929 for the State of Michigan, as amended, and the presentment and enforcement
of any such claim shall be in accordance with the procedure and limitations set
forth in said statutory provisions.
ARTICLE XX: SCHEDULE
SECTION 20.1 SUBMISSION OF CHARTER.
   This Charter shall be submitted to a vote of the electors of the City of
Negaunee at an election to be held on the 3rd day of April, A.D., 1950.
SECTION 20.2 FIRST ELECTION.
   The first election under this Charter shall be held on Monday, June 5, 1950,
at which time there shall be elected seven (7) Councilmembers and rive (5)
Supervisors as herein provided for.
SECTION 20.3 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The seven (7) candidates for the Council receiving the highest vote shall be
deemed elected and shall take office as soon as they shall qualify and shall
hold office for the following terms: the three (3) Councilmembers receiving the
highest number of votes shall hold office until the first day of January, 1953;
the two (2) Councilmembers receiving the fourth and fifth highest number of
votes shall hold office until the first day of January, 1952; and the two (2)
Councilmembers receiving the sixth and seventh highest number of votes shall
hold office until the first day of January, 1951; thereafter such number of
Councilmembers shall be elected for three (3)-year terms at the annual City
election as shall be necessary upon the expiration of the terms herein
provided.
   The five (5) candidates for Supervisor receiving the highest number of votes
shall be deemed elected and take office as soon as they shall qualify and shall
hold office for the following terms: the Supervisor receiving the highest
number of votes shall hold office until the first day of January, 1953; the two
(2) Supervisors receiving the second and third highest number of votes shall
hold office until the first day of January, 1952; and the two (2) Supervisors
receiving the fourth and fifth highest number of votes shall hold office until
the first day of January, 1951; thereafter such number of Supervisors shall be
elected for three (3)-year terms at the annual City election as shall be
necessary upon the expiration of the terms herein provided.
SECTION 20.4 ORGANIZATION OF FIRST COUNCIL.
   The first meeting of the Council under this Charter shall be the
organization meeting and shall be held on or before June 15, 1950.
SECTION 20.5 HOLD-OVER OFFICES.
   All officers holding office under the previous Charter, except the members
of the Common Council and School Inspectors holding office under and by virtue
of such previous Charter, shall continue in office until their successors shall
be chosen and shall qualify, or until the office is abolished in accordance
with the provisions of this Charter. Where questions arise concerning the
responsibility and authority of officers, pending the appointment of a City
Manager, the Council shall temporarily fix such responsibility and grant such
authority as is necessary to maintain the services of the City.
SECTION 20.6 VESTED RIGHTS CONTINUED.
   After the adoption of this Charter, the City shall continue to be vested
with all property, monies, contracts, rights, credits, effects, records, files,
books and papers belonging to it under and by virtue of the previous Charter
and with any additional property and rights as herein prescribed. No right or
liability, in favor of or against the City, existing at the time this Charter
becomes effective, and no suit or prosecution of any character, shall in any
manner be affected by any change, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no
change had been made. All debts and liabilities of the City shall continue to
be its debts and liabilities, and all fines and penalties imposed at the time
of such change shall be collected, and all licenses issued by the City shall be
and remain the same as if such change had not been made.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   How code designated and cited
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section catchlines and other headings
   
10.04   Certain ordinances not affected by code
   
10.05   Continuation of ordinances
   
10.06   Prior rights, offenses and the like
   
10.07   Ordinances repealed not reenacted
   
10.08   Amendments to code
   
10.09   Supplementation of code
   
10.10   Appearance tickets
   
10.11   Separability of provisions
   
10.12   Notice
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   This code, by and for Negaunee, Michigan, shall constitute and be designated
as the Negaunee Code.
Statutory reference:
   Codification authority, see M.C.L.A. § 117.5b
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Terms used in this code, unless otherwise specifically defined, have
the meanings prescribed by the statutes of the state for the same terms.
   (B)   All words used in this code indicating the present tense shall not be
limited to the time of adoption of this code but shall extend to and include
the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is
made herein.
   (C)   The singular number shall include the plural, the plural number shall
include the singular, and the masculine gender shall extend to the feminine
gender and the neuter.
   (D)   All references to section numbers shall refer to section numbers of
this code.
   (E)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ADOPTING ORDINANCE. The ordinance of the municipality adopting the
codified ordinances of the city, pursuant to law.
      AUTHORITY. Whenever in these codified ordinances authority is given to an
officer or an act is required to be performed, such authority may be exercised
and such act may be performed, at the instance of such officer, by a deputy or
subordinate, unless contrary to law or to the clear intent of any such
particular provision.
      CITY. The City of Negaunee, Michigan.
      CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Negaunee.
      CLERK. The Clerk of the City of Negaunee.
      CODE. The Negaunee Code, as designated in §
10.01.
      COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done, as
provided in this code or in any order issued pursuant to this code, when
expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last, except that if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be
excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a
legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.
      CORPORATE LIMITS. Wherever in these codified ordinances an act is
prohibited, declared unlawful or required to be performed, directly or by
implication, such references shall imply “within the corporate limits of the
city.”
      COUNTY. Marquette County, Michigan.
      GENERAL RULE. Except as otherwise provided in this section, words and
phrases shall be construed according to the common usage of the language,
provided, however, that technical words and phrases and such others as may have
acquired a special meaning in the law shall be construed according to such
technical or special meaning.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. Words giving authority to a board, council, authority or
three or more officers or employees or other persons shall be construed as
giving authority to a majority thereof, unless otherwise specifically provided.
      JUVENILE. Any person under 17 years of age.
      KEEPER and PROPRIETOR. Persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs
and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or
employee.
      LAND AND REAL ESTATE. Include rights and easements of an incorporeal
nature.
      LAW or GENERAL LAWS OF THE STATE. The Constitution and Public Acts of
Michigan in effect at the time the provision of the code containing the
reference is to be applied.
      MINOR. A person under 21 years of age.
      MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION. An act or omission that is prohibited by this
code or any ordinance of the city, but which is not a crime under this code or
any other ordinance of the city, and for which civil sanctions, including
without limitation, fines, damages, expenses and costs may be ordered, as
authorized by Public Act 236 of 1961, Ch. 87, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8701 et
seq., as amended. A MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION is not a lesser included offense
of any criminal offense in this code.
      OFFICER, DEPARTMENT, BOARD AND THE LIKE. Whenever any officer,
department, board or other public agency is referred to by title only, the
reference shall be construed as if followed by the words “of the City of
Negaunee, Michigan.” Whenever, by the provisions of this code, any officer of
the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty,
reference to the officer shall mean and include the officer or his or her
deputy or authorized subordinate.
      ORDINANCES. The ordinances of the City of Negaunee and all amendments
thereto.
      PERSON.
         (a)   Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation.
         (b)   Whenever the word PERSON is used in any section of this code
prescribing a penalty or fine, as applied to partnerships or associations, the
word includes the partners, or members thereof, and as applied to corporations
the word includes officers, agents or employees thereof who are responsible for
any violations of the section. The singular includes the plural. The masculine
gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
      PREMISES. When used as applicable to property, extends to and includes
land and buildings.
      PROPERTY. Real and personal property and any mixed and lesser estates or
interests therein. “Personal property” includes every kind of property except
real property; “real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
      PUBLIC ACTS. Acts of the state legislature of the State of Michigan.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, alley, park, canal, waterway, beach, public
building or any place of business or assembly open to the public or frequented
by the public.
      STATE. The terms THE STATE or THIS STATE shall be construed to mean the
State of Michigan.
      STATUTE. The Public Acts of Michigan in effect at the time the provisions
of the code containing the reference is to be applied. All references to
specific Public Acts shall be to the acts as are in effect at the time the
reference to the act is to be applied.
      TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall
mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the
city.
      WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes any representation of words, letters or
figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 202.03)
§ 10.03 SECTION CATCHLINES AND OTHER HEADINGS.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and
shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of the sections, nor as any part
of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed
when any of the sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
No provision of this code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any
such catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, subchapter, section
or division.
§ 10.04 CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.
   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any
ordinance not in conflict with or inconsistent with this code:
   (A)   Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or
authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city’s
indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city;
   (B)   Containing any administrative provisions of the City Council;
   (C)   Granting any right or franchise;
   (D)   Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening,
paving, widening, vacating and the like, any street or public way in the city;
   (E)   Making any appropriation;
   (F)   Levying or imposing taxes;
   (G)   Establishing or prescribing grades in the city;
   (H)   Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor;
   (I)   Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city;
   (J)   Extending or contracting the boundaries of the city;
   (K)   Prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city
officers or employees;
   (L)   Prescribing specific parking restrictions, no-parking zones; specific
speed zones; parking meter zones; and specific stop or yield intersections or
other traffic ordinances pertaining to specific streets;
   (M)   Pertaining to rezoning; and
   (N)   Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and
permanent nature; and all the ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in
full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code.
The ordinances are on file in the City Clerk’s office.
§ 10.05 CONTINUATION OF ORDINANCES.
   The provisions of this code, so far as they are the same in substance as
those of heretofore existing ordinances, shall be construed as a continuation
of the ordinances and not as new enactments.
§ 10.06 PRIOR RIGHTS, OFFENSES AND THE LIKE.
   Any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired, or
liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time of
adoption of this code shall not be affected by the adoption, but may be
enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same
extent as if the adoption had not been effected.
§ 10.07 ORDINANCES REPEALED NOT REENACTED.
   No ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore repealed shall be
considered reordained or reenacted by virtue of this code, unless specifically
reenacted. The repeal of any curative or validating ordinances shall not impair
or affect any cure or validation already effected thereby.
§ 10.08 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   (A)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made by
amending the provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in the following language: “That section _____ of the Negaunee Code, is
hereby amended to read as follows:...” The new provisions shall then be set out
in full as desired.
   (B)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added,
the following language shall be used: “That the Negaunee Code is hereby amended
by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as
follows:...” The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
§ 10.09 SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.
   (A)   (1)   By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall
be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City Council.
      (2)   A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent
and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the
supplement and all changes made thereby in the code.
      (3)   The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit
properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have
become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared
that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through the date
of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages.
   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make
formal, non-substantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included
in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a
unified code. For example, the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement, and make changes
in the catchlines, headings and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be
inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subdivision numbers;
      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to
“this chapter,” “this subchapter,” “this division” and the like, as the case
may be, or to “sections _____ to _____” (inserting section numbers to indicate
the sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance
incorporated into the code); and
      (5)   Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code; but in no case
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
§ 10.10 APPEARANCE TICKETS.
   The following public servants are hereby authorized to issue and serve
appearance tickets with respect to ordinances of the city, as provided by
M.C.L.A. § 764.9c, as amended, when the public servant has reasonable cause to
believe that a person has committed an offense in violation of a city
ordinance:
   (A)   Health Officer;
   (B)   Building Inspector;
   (C)   Fire Marshal; and
   (D)   Fire Chief.
§ 10.11 SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   Each section, division, sentence, clause and provision of this code is
separable and, if any provision shall be held unconstitutional or invalid for
any reason, the decision shall not affect the remainder of this code, or any
part thereof, other than that part affected by the decision.
§ 10.12 NOTICE.
   (A)   Any notice due any person or required to be served by this code shall
be served:
      (1)   By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the
same at his or her residence, office, or place of business with some person of
suitable age and discretion;
      (2)   By mailing the notice by registered mail to the owner at his or her
last known address; or
      (3)   If the owner is unknown, by posting the notice in some conspicuous
place on the premises five days prior to the date set therein for compliance.
   (B)   No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear
down any official notice or placard posted by the city unless permission is
given to remove the notice.
   (C)   The Clerk shall maintain a separate file of notices given hereunder,
including a record of the date upon which the notice was delivered, mailed or
posted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty. Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the City
any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or
whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such
provision of this code or ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$500 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, except whenever
a specific penalty is herein otherwise provided and except as provided for
civil infractions.
   (B)   Continuing violations. In addition to the penalty provided in division
(A) of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of
the provisions of this code, or any ordinance, shall be deemed a new and
separate offense for each day that such condition continues to exist.
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
31.   PUBLIC SAFETY AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
      
32.   EMPLOYEES
      
33.   VOTING PRECINCTS AND POLLING PLACES
      
34.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
      
35.   MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
      
36.   ETHICAL STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
CHAPTER 30: OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
30.01   Commission on Aging
   
30.02   Housing Commission
   
30.03   Local Officers Compensation Commission
   
30.04   Recreation and Parks Commission
   
30.05   Downtown Development Authority
   
30.06   Library Board
Statutory reference:
   Acquisition and maintenance of housing projects, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.731 et
seq.
   Adoption, promulgation, and publication of rules, see M.C.L.A. § 125.694b
   Bingo conducted by senior citizens organizations, see M.C.L.A. §§ 432.101 et
seq.
   Business area redevelopment projects, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.981 et seq.
   Cables improperly located; insurance, see M.C.L.A. § 500.3123
   City library reports, see M.C.L.A. § 397.207
   Civil service, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i
   Commission on services to the aging, see M.C.L.A. §§ 400.583, 400.584
   Compensation and salaries in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.3, 117.5,
117.17, 117.19, 117.20, 117.28, 117.32, 117.33
   Construction and maintenance of facilities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 247.183 et seq.
   Contracts for joint municipal libraries, see M.C.L.A. §§ 397.213 et seq.
   Discrimination generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.146 et seq. and Mich. Admin.
Code R 37.1
   Improvements in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4d et seq.
   Inspection of motor vehicles used by senior citizen centers, see M.C.L.A. §
257.715a
   Libraries generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 397.11 et seq., 450.691 et seq.
   Misapplication of park funds, see M.C.L.A. § 123.67
   Municipal bonds, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4e, 117.4g, 117.5,
117.14a, 117.35a
   Municipal Employees’ Retirement System, see M.C.L.A. §§ 38.1501 et seq.
   Municipal housing commissions, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.653 et seq.
   Notice of public meetings, see M.C.L.A. § 15.264
   Recall, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i
   Recodified tax increment financing, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4101 et seq.
   Recreation facilities in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4e
   Sale of park property, see M.C.L.A. § 117.5
   Shortening or extending term of office, see M.C.L.A. § 117.5
   Television and radio generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.507 et seq.
§ 30.01 COMMISSION ON AGING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, OLDER PERSON and SENIOR
CITIZEN means persons 60 years of age or older and their spouses.
   (B)   Establishment; composition; appointments; terms; compensation. There
is hereby established in and for the city a Commission on Aging, which shall
consist of seven members appointed by Council. The members initially appointed
shall be divided into three groups of three members each, with terms for the
members of each group expiring the first, second and third year, respectively,
following their initial appointments to the Commission. Successive terms shall
be for three years each in all cases, and all appointments to fill vacancies
shall be for the unexpired term being filled. No compensation shall be
furnished to the members of the Commission, except that, subject to the
approval of Council.
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Commission on Aging shall have the following
powers and duties:
      (1)   To plan, coordinate, evaluate, and provide activities, services,
and programs for older persons;
      (2)   To recommend the operations and maintenance of one or more
buildings or locations designed to carry out activities, services, and
programs;
      (3)   To encourage, assist and advocate in the development of activities,
projects, services, and programs directed towards the older persons of the
community;
      (4)   To initiate, coordinate, and administer applications for funds
designated to carry out the powers and duties of the Commission, and to utilize
any such funds in the execution of its powers and duties, all of which
activities shall be subject to advance approval by Council. However, this
provision shall not be construed to give the Commission the power to borrow
money without the advance consent of Council;
      (5)   To collect, analyze, and disseminate data concerning services which
affect older persons;
      (6)   To elect from its membership a Chairperson, Secretary, and such
assistant or vice-officers as it deems appropriate;
      (7)   To adopt such reasonable bylaws, rules, and regulations, which are
not in conflict with the City Charter or this section, as may be necessary for
its own government and for the full and complete execution of its power and
duties;
      (8)   To report on a monthly basis to Council, or otherwise as Council
may direct, with regard to the status of its programs and services; and
      (9)   To do any other act or thing arising from or concerning the
performance of its powers and duties, which Council deems necessary, so long as
such activities are not in conflict with any applicable laws or the City
Charter.
   (D)   Budget. The Commission on Aging shall submit a proposed budget to the
City Manager upon request.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2022)
§ 30.02 HOUSING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Establishment; composition; residency requirement; appointment; terms.
There is hereby established in and for the city a Housing Commission, which
shall consist of five members who must be residents of the city. They shall be
appointed by the Manager and serve for the terms provided by state statute.
(Prior Code, § 284.01)
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Housing Commission shall constitute a municipal
authority and shall perform the duties and have the powers granted to it by
state statute.
(Prior Code, § 284.02)
   (C)   Designation of members as Commissioners; officers; adoption of bylaws,
rules and regulations; compensation. The five members of the Housing Commission
shall be designated as Commissioners and shall select a Chairperson and Vice-
Chairperson and adopt bylaws, rules, and regulations as provided by state
statute. Such Commissioners shall receive no salary and may be removed for
cause as provided by state statute.
(Prior Code, § 284.03)
   (D)   Employees; supervision; compensation.
      (1)   The Housing Commission is hereby authorized to hire such employees
as it deems necessary to carry out its functions. Said employees shall be under
the direct supervision of the Housing Director.
      (2)   All compensation for such employees shall be subject to the
approval of the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 284.04)
   (E)   Conflicts of interest. No Commissioner or employee of the Housing
Commission shall acquire any interest in any plan, project, or contract of the
Commission. In the event that any such Commissioner or employee acquires any
interest in any plan, project, or contract, or anything proposed by such
Commission, he or she shall make a complete written report, which shall be
entered upon the minutes of such Commission.
(Prior Code, § 284.05)
   (F)   Reports. The Housing Commission shall present an annual report to
Council and any other reports as may be required.
(Prior Code, § 284.06)
§ 30.03 LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION.
   (A)   Establishment; composition; terms; vacancies; conflicts of interest.
There is hereby established in and for the city a Local Officers Compensation
Commission, which shall consist of five members, who are registered electors of
the city, appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority of the
members elected and serving on Council. The terms of office shall be five
years, except that of members first appointed, one each shall be appointed for
terms of one, two, three, four, and five years. All first members shall be
appointed within 30 days after the effective date of this section. Thereafter,
members shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment.
Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same
manner in which original appointments are made. No member or employee of the
legislative, judicial, or executive branch of any level of government, or
member of the immediate family of such member or employee, shall be eligible to
be a member of the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 286.01)
   (B)   Determination of salaries; rejection by Council; expense allowances.
The Local Officers Compensation Commission shall determine the salaries of all
locally elected officials, which determination shall be final unless Council,
by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected to and serving
thereon, rejects such salaries. The determinations of the Commission shall be
effective 30 days following their filing with the City Clerk, unless rejected
by Council. In case of rejection, the existing salary shall prevail. Any
expense allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials in addition to
salary shall be for expenses incurred during the course of city business and
accounted for to the city.
(Prior Code, § 286.02)
   (C)   Meetings; quorum; Chairperson; compensation; expenses. The Local
Officers Compensation Commission shall meet for not more than 15 session days
in every odd-numbered year and shall make its determination within 45 calendar
days of its first meeting. A majority of the members of the Commission
constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the Commission. The
Commission shall take no action or make determinations without a concurrence of
a majority of the members appointed and serving on the Commission. The
Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its members. As used in this
section, SESSION DAYS means any calendar day on which the Commission meets and
a quorum is present. The members of the Commission shall receive no
compensation, but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties.
(Prior Code, § 286.03)
   (D)   Implementation of section; revision of compensation procedure. Council
shall implement the provisions of this section by resolution. After one year
following the effective date of this section, the procedure for establishing
the compensation of elected officials may be changed by Charter amendment or
revision.
(Prior Code, § 286.04)
§ 30.04 RECREATION AND PARKS COMMISSION.
   (A)   Establishment; composition; terms; vacancies.
      (1)   There is hereby established in and for the city a Recreation and
Parks Commission, which shall consist of seven members, including five voting
members who are residents of the city, and two non-voting members, one a
resident of Negaunee Township, and one a resident of Richmond Township. The
five voting city resident members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with
approval of the Council. The Richmond and Negaunee Township non-voting members
shall be appointed by the townships by a method as determined by each township.
      (2)   All members shall serve for a period of two years or until their
successors qualify, except that when the Commission is first organized, the
terms of initial members shall be staggered as follows:
         (a)   One voting city resident for an initial term of three years;
         (b)   One voting city resident for an initial term of three years;
         (c)   One voting city resident for an initial term of two years;
         (d)   One voting city resident for an initial term of two years;
         (e)   One voting city resident for an initial term of one year;
         (f)   The Negaunee Township non-voting member for a term of two years;
and
         (g)   The Richmond Township non-voting member for a term of one year.
      (3)   Vacancies on the Commission occurring other than by expiration of
term shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
(Prior Code, § 288.01)
    (B)   Officers; adoption of bylaws, rules, and regulations. Immediately
after their appointment, members of the Recreation and Parks Commission shall
meet and organize by electing one of their members as Chairperson and by
electing such other officers as may be necessary. The Commission shall have the
power to adopt bylaws, rules, and regulations for the proper conduct of
business meetings.
(Prior Code, § 288.02)
   (C)   Authority of Commission. The Recreation and Parks Commission shall be
an advisory commission to the City Council and the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 288.03)
   (D)   Appointment of Recreation Director and other employees. The City
Manager shall have the power to appoint or designate a Recreation Director, who
is trained and properly qualified for the work, and such other personnel as are
approved in the city budget.
(Prior Code, § 288.04)
   (E)   Duties of Recreation Director. The Recreation Director shall conduct
activities on or in and supervise public playgrounds, parks, athletic fields,
recreation centers, and other recreational facilities on any of the properties
owned or controlled by the city or the city schools, subject to approval by the
School District, or on other properties with the consent of the owners and
authorities thereof.
(Prior Code, § 288.05)
   (F)   Budget; solicitation and acceptance of donations; audit.
      (1)   Annually, the Recreation and Parks Commission, working in
conjunction with the Recreation Director, shall submit a complete revenue and
expenditure budget to the city for approval. The Commission may also solicit or
receive any gifts or bequests of money or other personal property or donations,
and such money, property, or donations shall be applied for either temporary or
permanent use for playgrounds, facilities, or other recreational purposes.
      (2)   Annually, there shall be a complete financial audit of the
operation of the Commission, which audit shall be a part of the city’s general
fund audit.
(Prior Code, § 288.06)
   (G)   Reports. The Recreation and Parks Commission shall make a summary
annual report to the governing body, and other reports from time to time as
requested by the city.
(Prior Code, § 288.07) (Ord. passed 10-8-1998)
§ 30.05 DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Title. This section shall be known and cited as the “City of Negaunee
Downtown Development Authority Ordinance.”
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACT 57. Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4101 through
125.4915, as now in effect or hereinafter amended.
      AUTHORITY. The City of Negaunee City Downtown Development Authority
created by this section.
      BOARD or BOARD OF DIRECTORS. The Board of Directors of the Authority, the
governing body of the Authority.
      CITY. The City of Negaunee, Marquette County, Michigan.
      CITY COUNCIL. The Negaunee City Council.
   (C)   Determination of necessity. The City Council hereby determines that it
is necessary for the best interests of the public and the city to halt property
value deterioration and increase property tax valuation where possible in the
Downtown Business District of the city, to eliminate the causes of
deterioration and to promote economic growth by establishing a Downtown
Development Authority pursuant to Act 57.
   (D)   The Downtown Development Authority.
      (1)   The Downtown Development Authority, originally created pursuant to
Public Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through 125.1680, shall
hereby be operated under and pursuant to Act 57, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4101
through 125.4915.
      (2)   The Authority remains a public body corporate and shall be known as
and exercise its powers under the title of “The City of Negaunee Downtown
Development Authority”.
      (3)   The Authority remains able to adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in
any court of this state, and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry
out the purpose of its incorporation as provided by this section and Public Act
57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4101 through 125.4915.
      (4)   The enumeration of a power in this section or in Act 57, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4101 through 125.4915, shall not be construed as a limitation
upon the general powers of the Authority.
   (E)   Description of the Downtown Districts.
      (1)   Downtown District A in which the Authority shall exercise its
powers as provided by Act 57 shall consist of the described territory in the
city, subject to this section and Act 57, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4101 through
125.4915, as set forth in the map attached to this code of ordinances herein,
and available at www.cityofnegaunee.com, and made a part hereof.
      (2)   Downtown District B in which the Authority shall exercise its
powers as provided by Act 57, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4101 through 125.4915,
shall consist of the described territory in the city, subject to this section
and Act 57, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4101 through 125.4915, as set forth in the
map attached to this code of ordinances herein, and available at
www.cityofnegaunee.com, and made a part hereof.
   (F)   Board of Directors.
      (1)   The Authority shall be under the supervision and control of the
Board of Directors consisting of the City Manager and not less than eight or
more than 12 members as determined by the City Council.
         (a)   The members shall be appointed by the City Manager, subject to
the approval by the City Council.
         (b)   Not less than a majority of the members shall be persons having
interest in property located in the Downtown District. Not less than one of the
members shall be a resident of the Downtown District, if the Downtown District
has 100 or more persons residing within it.
         (c)   Of the members first appointed, an equal number, as near as is
practical, shall be appointed for one year, two years, and three years.
         (d)   Members shall hold office until the members’ successors are
appointed.
         (e)   Thereafter, each member shall serve for a term of four years.
         (f)   An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the City
Manager for the unexpired term only subject to approval of the Council.
      (2)   Members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall be
reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses.
   (G)   Powers of the Authority. The Authority shall have all powers
enumerated or implied by law in Act 57, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.4101 through
125.4915.
   (H)   Fiscal year; adoption of budget.
      (1)   The fiscal year of the Authority shall begin on January 1 of each
year and end on December 31 of the same year, or such other fiscal year as may
hereafter be adopted by the city.
      (2)   (a)   The Board shall annually prepare a budget and shall submit it
to the City Council on the same date that the proposed budget for the city is
required by law to be submitted to the City Council.
         (b)   The Board shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year
until the budget has been approved by the City Council.
         (c)   The Board may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection
with the operation of any improvements which have been financed by revenue
bonds where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing the revenue bonds.
      (3)   The Authority shall be audited annually by the same independent
auditors auditing the city. Copies of the audit report shall be filed with the
City Council.
   (I)   Dissolution.
      (1)   Upon completion of its purpose, the Authority may be dissolved by
an ordinance duly adopted by the City Council.
      (2)   The property and assets of the Authority, after dissolution and
satisfaction of its obligations, shall revert to the city.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0738dcf21f421e8d115b2bbb273306d0573c6511/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1568.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0738dcf21f421e8d115b2bbb273306d0573c6511/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1667.png]
 
 
(Ord. passed 12-12-2019; Ord. passed 10-12-2023)
§ 30.06 LIBRARY BOARD.
   (A)    Establishment; composition; appointments. There is hereby established
in and for the city a Library Board, which shall consist of five members to be
appointed to five-year terms by the Mayor with the approval of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 276.01)
   (B)   Terms. Members of the Library Board who are sitting on the day this
code of ordinances is enacted shall serve as the members of the Library Board
as established herein. Upon the expiration of each member’s existing five-year
term, the position shall be filled as described above.
(Prior Code, § 276.02)
   (C)   Membership. Members of the Library Board shall be from the city at
large, and no member of the Council shall serve on the Board in any capacity.
(Prior Code, § 276.03)
   (D)   Officers; meetings. The Library Board shall select a President and a
Secretary and shall meet at such times as the Board may determine.
(Prior Code, § 276.04)
   (E)   Duties and responsibilities. The duties and responsibilities of the
Library Board shall consist of all of the following.
      (1)   The Library Board shall have complete responsibility for management
of the library and for expenditures of all library funds, consistent with the
Charter, and shall have such other powers, duties and responsibilities as set
forth in M.C.L.A. § 397.205, as amended.
      (2)   The Board shall keep minutes of meetings.
(Prior Code, § 276.05)
(Ord. passed 6-12-2008; Ord. passed 2-9-2017; Ord. passed - -2023)
CHAPTER 31: PUBLIC SAFETY AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
Section
Police Department
   
31.01   Adoption of minimum employment standards for law enforcement officers
Fire Department
   
31.15   Establishment; adoption of constitution and bylaws; funding;
compensation
   
31.16   Organization and membership
   
31.17   Powers and duties of the Chief; enforcement of the Incident Command
System
   
31.18   Code Enforcement Officials
   
31.19   Power and authority of Chief and Incident Commander; obstructing and
assisting firefighters
   
31.20   Charges for services rendered by the Department
Statutory reference:
   Arrests, see M.C.L.A. § 117.34
   Borrowing money for fire protection, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4a
   Enforcement of laws, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i
   Firemen’s Retirement System, see M.C.L.A. §§ 38.551 et seq.
   Fire stations, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4e
   Jurisdiction outside city limits, see M.C.L.A. § 117.34
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 31.01 ADOPTION OF MINIMUM EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   The minimum employment standards for law enforcement officers, as
established and adopted by the state’s Commission on Law Enforcement Standards
in accordance with Public Act 203 of 1965, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 28.601
through 28.616, are hereby adopted by reference as the minimum employment
standards for law enforcement officers of the city.
(Prior Code, § 248.01)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 31.15 ESTABLISHMENT; ADOPTION OF CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS; FUNDING;
COMPENSATION.
   (A)   A volunteer Fire Department is hereby organized in and for the city
under the title of the Fire Department of the city (hereinafter sometimes
referred to as the “Fire Department”) and the duty of firefighting and the
prevention of fires in the city is hereby delegated to that Department. Its
organization and internal regulation shall be governed by the provisions of
this section and of these codified ordinances and by a constitution and bylaws
as may be adopted by the Fire Department and approved by Council, except as
otherwise provided by law and ordinance.
   (B)   The Fire Department is hereby authorized and directed to adopt and,
from time to time, amend a constitution and bylaws for its control, management,
and government, and for the regulation of its business and proceedings, which,
after adoption by a two-thirds’ vote of the members of the Fire Department,
shall not become effective and operative until presented to and approved by
Council. Amendments to said constitution and bylaws shall be adopted in the
same manner.
   (C)   Council shall appropriate funds to provide for operation and for such
apparatus and equipment for the use of the Fire Department as it may deem
expedient and necessary to maintain efficiency and to properly protect life and
property from fire and other hazards.
   (D)   The officers and members of the Fire Department shall receive such
compensation from the city as may from time to time be fixed by resolution of
Council.
(Prior Code, § 250.01)
§ 31.16 ORGANIZATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Fire Department shall consist of not less than 25 members, all of
whom shall:
      (1)   Be between 18 and 65 years of age;
      (2)   Be in, and maintain, a state of physical conditioning which will
enable them to perform all of the duties, functions, and activities expected of
a firefighter;
      (3)   Meet the applicable requirements for volunteer firefighters as
established by the state’s Firefighters Training Council and the policies of
the Fire Department; and
      (4)   Live within ten miles of the city’s fire station.
   (B)   (1)   The Fire Department shall have the following officers, in
descending order of rank:
         (a)   One Chief;
         (b)   One Assistant Chief;
         (c)   One Hose Captain;
         (d)   One Assistant Hose Captain;
         (e)   One Ladder Captain;
         (f)   One Assistant Ladder Captain;
         (g)   One or more Lieutenants;
         (h)   One Safety Officer;
         (i)   One Training Officer;
         (j)   One Secretary; and
         (k)   One Treasurer.
      (2)   These officers may be compensated as Council may, from time to
time, direct by resolution. The Fire Department shall also have a Board of
Trustees, consisting of three members of the Fire Department to be elected by
the members of the Fire Department, each of whom shall serve a three-year term.
   (C)   A vacancy in the office of Chief shall be filled by appointment of the
City Manager. Upon creation of a vacancy in the office of Chief, the next
highest ranking officer of the Fire Department shall perform the duties of the
Chief until such vacancy has been filled.
   (D)   Upon appointment, the Chief shall immediately assume office and shall
hold office until reappointed or removed for cause, or until service is
terminated by retirement, resignation, change of residence to outside the city
limits, death, or the inability of the Chief to perform his or her duties.
   (E)   The City Manager may employ or fill additional Fire Department
positions with full-time or part-time personnel, if budgeted, for the purpose
of Department administration, maintenance, or code enforcement. The duties and
compensation of such personnel shall be established by resolution of Council,
as recommended by the City Manager.
   (F)   A vacancy in the membership of the Fire Department shall be filled by
appointment of the City Manager, pursuant to the following procedures.
      (1)   The Department shall maintain a file of applications for
membership.
      (2)   Upon creation of a vacancy in the membership of the Department,
applications shall be submitted to, and voted upon by, the members of the
Department in accordance with the bylaws of the Department.
      (3)   The applicant receiving the highest number of votes shall be
recommended to the City Manager for membership in the Fire Department.
   (G)   All entry-level firefighters shall be subject to the policies of the
city and the Fire Department and shall be subject to the time limitations for
certification established by the state’s Firefighters Training Council.
   (H)   Active membership in the Fire Department shall terminate upon reaching
the age of 65 or when the City Manager determines that a member is no longer
able to perform the full range of duties, functions, and activities reasonably
expected of a firefighter. Any member of the Department under the age of 65 who
cannot perform all of the duties, functions, and activities of an active
firefighter, as described by the job descriptions of the Fire Department, may
elect to serve in such non-firefighting capacities as may be directed by the
Chief.
   (I)   All resignations from the Fire Department shall first be submitted to
the Chief, who shall thereupon submit them to the City Manager for appropriate
action. All resigning members of the Department, having fulfilled the
requirements for honorary membership in the Fire Department as set forth in the
bylaws of the Department, shall be placed on the honorary membership role.
   (J)   The Chief shall report to the City Manager the name of each member or
officer of the Department who has been expelled, demoted, or otherwise
disciplined and shall also report the circumstances of such expulsion,
demotion, or other disciplinary action. Any member or officer of the Fire
Department who has been expelled, demoted, or disciplined for any offense,
neglect of duty or insubordination shall have the right to appear before the
City Manager to present reasons why such expulsion, demotion, or other
disciplinary action should not be confirmed by the City Manager.
   (K)   The Department shall be organized into one or, at the option of the
Chief, into two or more companies.
      (1)   One such company shall consist of not more than ten non-compensated
auxiliary firefighters, which shall support the Fire Department during periods
of manpower shortages, and which shall serve as a pool of future candidates for
active membership in the Fire Department.
      (2)   Each such company of the Department shall be in charge of a Captain
or, in his or her absence, a Lieutenant who shall be responsible to the Chief.
      (3)   At any time deemed necessary, the Chief may make temporary
transfers of personnel between companies.
   (L)   The duties of all firefighters shall be described in the policies of
the Department, which shall be subject to approval of the City Manager.
   (M)   The election of the Secretary, Treasurer, Trustees, and such social
officers as the bylaws of the Fire Department may require shall be held at the
annual meeting of the Fire Department in such manner as is provided for in the
bylaws of the Department. In case of any vacancy in such offices, the Chief
shall appoint an active member of the Department in good standing to fill such
vacancy until the next annual meeting.
(Prior Code, § 250.02) (Ord. 2007-1, passed 1-11-2007)
§ 31.17 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CHIEF; ENFORCEMENT OF THE INCIDENT COMMAND
SYSTEM.
   (A)   The Chief shall have general supervision of the Department, subject to
this section and the policies of the Department, and shall be responsible for
the operation and general efficiency of the Department.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Chief to preside at all meetings of the
Fire Department, to call special meetings, to preserve order, to decide all
points of order that may arise, and to enforce observance of this section and
the constitution and bylaws of the Fire Department.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Chief to maintain the chain of command and
enforce the Incident Command System adopted by the county’s Firefighters
Association at all incidents to which the Fire Department is dispatched, as
follows.
      (1)   The ranking officer of the first truck to arrive at the scene of an
incident shall assume command of the incident, and shall relinquish such
command to the next higher officer subsequently arriving at the scene.
      (2)   The officer in charge of any incident shall be known as the
Incident Commander (IC).
      (3)   The Incident Commander shall assume complete command of, and entire
responsibility for, all incident operations, shall plan the control of the
same, shall direct the action of the companies when they arrive on the scene,
shall assure that every company performs its duty, shall grant leaves of
absence at the incident if deemed appropriate, and shall assure that
firefighting apparatus is located at reasonably safe positions.
      (4)   The Incident Commander shall maintain on the scene a record of all
operations and task assignments and shall be responsible for an accurate
account of all necessary information required by all state’s fire incident
reports of the Fire Marshal Division of the State Police.
   (D)   The Chief shall have the authority to demote, expel, or otherwise
discipline any officer or member of the Fire Department for neglect,
insubordination, failure, refusal, or inability to perform Departmental duties,
failure to attend meetings or training sessions, loss of certification or other
conduct detrimental to the Department, with such demotion, expulsion, or other
disciplinary action to be subject to appeal to the City Manager.
   (E)   No later than August 1 of each year, the Chief shall file with the
City Manager a detailed estimate of the appropriations needed for the conduct
of the Department during the ensuing year.
   (F)   It shall be the duty of the Chief to submit a written report to the
City Manager not later than February 1 of each year, and at such other times as
the Chief deems appropriate, relating to the condition of the various pieces of
apparatus and equipment, the number of incidents occurring since the previous
report, the date of such incidents and the loss occasioned thereby, the numbers
of members of each company of the Fire Department, the total number of active
members of the Fire Department, and any resignations or expulsions from the
Department since the preceding report. The Chief shall also report upon the
drill and training programs of the Department, together with other pertinent
information, including recommendations for such improvements as deemed proper
and necessary for the operation of the Fire Department.
   (G)   The Chief shall be responsible for the enforcement of all fire
prevention ordinances of the city, and state laws and regulations pertaining to
fire prevention, and shall keep citizens informed of fire prevention practices
and the activities of the Fire Department.
   (H)   The Chief shall keep a record of every incident to which any company
was called and shall enter in such report the locality of the incident, the
date, the time, and all pertinent information required by the state’s Fire
Incident Reporting System.
   (I)   The Chief shall keep an inventory of all apparatus and equipment and
an inventory of all hoses showing dates and results of tests on each length,
which shall be individually identified.
   (J)   The Chief shall perform such other duties as are incumbent on the
Commanding Officer of the Fire Department.
   (K)   The Chief shall have control of all apparatus and equipment used by
the Department and shall be responsible for its proper maintenance. The Chief
may authorize members of the Fire Department to carry out any type of
maintenance for apparatus, equipment, or structures that may be deemed
necessary for the effective operation of the Fire Department or to maintain
firefighter or community safety consistent with the approved budget of the Fire
Department. Emergency repair to apparatus or equipment which does not exceed
$5,000 may be authorized by the Fire Chief without first securing the prior
approval of the City Manager, provided that such amounts are available within
the approved budget of the Fire Department.
   (L)   The Chief shall be responsible for assuring that no firefighting
equipment or apparatus shall be used for any purpose except for incident
control and abatement, or in training therefor, except pursuant to an agreement
approved by the City Manager upon recommendation of the Fire Chief. With
approval of the Chief, such equipment and apparatus may be used for purposes
other than incident control within the city limits, provided that a report of
all such uses shall be made annually to Council.
(Prior Code, § 250.03)
§ 31.18 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.
   (A)   The City Manager may, upon recommendation of the Fire Chief and
approval of Council, appoint or designate a Code Enforcement Official, and as
many Deputy Code Enforcement Officials as may be deemed necessary, for the
purpose of enforcing applicable fire prevention codes and for the purpose of
inspecting structures and conditions within the city as may be required by this
section for fire safety and prevention.
   (B)   Code Enforcement Officials may inspect structures, premises, and
thoroughfares within the city for the purpose of identifying and causing to be
corrected any condition liable to cause or contribute to fire or a release of
hazardous materials, or any violations of applicable codes or regulations. Such
Code Enforcement Officials shall also investigate and, when appropriate, issue
permits in accordance with the regulations of the state’s Fire Marshal and all
applicable fire prevention codes, for the storage and handling of explosives
and inflammable liquids within the city. Such Code Enforcement Officials and
the Fire Chief shall also perform such other duties as may be required by the
state’s Fire Marshal.
   (C)   (1)   The Code Enforcement Officials shall file a complete report of
all structures, premises, and thoroughfares inspected as may be required by
this section or by other law or by the state’s Fire Marshal and shall submit
copies of such reports to the Fire Chief, the City Manager, the property owner,
and any other official agency requesting such reports.
      (2)   Such inspection reports shall be kept on file at the state’s Fire
Station and/or the City Hall.
(Prior Code, § 250.04)
§ 31.19 POWER AND AUTHORITY OF CHIEF AND INCIDENT COMMANDER; OBSTRUCTING AND
ASSISTING FIREFIGHTERS.
   (A)   The Fire Chief or the Incident Commander at any incident, under the
authority of the Department, is vested with full and complete police power and
authority at the scene of such incident. Such power and authority shall
include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following.
      (1)   Any officer of the Department may cause the arrest of any person
failing to give the right- of-way to Fire Department vehicles in responding to
an incident.
      (2)   The Fire Chief may prescribe certain limits at the scene of an
incident within which no persons except firefighters and police officers, and
those admitted by order of any officer of the Department, shall be permitted to
enter.
      (3)   The Fire Chief shall have the power to cause the removal of any
property from fire, to prevent the spreading of fire or to protect adjoining
property, and during the progress of any fire, the Chief shall have the power
to order the removal or destruction of any property necessary to cause the
removal of all wires or other facilities, and the turning off of all
electricity or other services where the same impede the work of the Department
during a fire or hazard abatement.
      (4)   Any firefighter, while acting under the direction of the Fire Chief
or other officer in command, may enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the
vicinity of any burning structure or hazardous situation, and other property
then on fire, for the purpose of extinguishing such fire.
   (B)   Any person who shall hinder, resist, or obstruct any firefighter in
the discharge of his or her duty as herein above provided shall be deemed
guilty of resisting a firefighter in the discharge of his or her duty.
   (C)   Every person who shall be present at an incident such as a fire shall
be subject to the orders of the Fire Chief or other officer in command and may
be required to render assistance in fighting such fire or in removing or
guarding property. The Fire Chief or other officer in command shall have the
authority to cause the arrest of any person refusing to obey such orders.
(Prior Code, § 250.05)
§ 31.20 CHARGES FOR SERVICES RENDERED BY THE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Fire Department shall have the authority to bill insurance
carriers for loss of or damage to equipment used in fighting any fire or
abating any hazardous condition. Such service charges shall be billed to the
company providing coverage to the owner upon whose property the incident
occurred and shall not include charges for normal wear and usage of equipment
or for the cost of consumables such as water or other extinguishing agents, or
labor. Only equipment damaged or lost as a direct result of extinguishing a
fire or other hazard abatement, at the specific site charged, shall be subject
to such service charge. No service charge for any single piece of equipment or
apparatus shall exceed the original purchase price of such equipment or
apparatus, and such charges shall be prorated for usage whenever practical.
Each such service charge shall be itemized and shall be payable to the City
Treasurer.
   (B)   The Department shall impose a service charge for services rendered by
it in connection with motor vehicle accidents. The amount of such service
charge shall be the current apparatus hourly rate, described in the annual
report of the Fire Chief submitted to the City Manager by February 1 of each
year, and the current hourly rate for each firefighter responding to each such
incident.
      (1)   In motor vehicle accidents resulting in the issuance of citations
by the investigating police agencies, the person or persons found responsible
or guilty of any infraction causing or contributing to said motor vehicle
accident shall be billed for the entire amount of such service charge.
      (2)   In motor vehicle accidents where one or more parties are issued
citations by the investigating police agency, and where more than one party is
found responsible or guilty of any infraction causing or contributing to the
occurrence of said motor vehicle accident, all such parties found responsible
or guilty shall be jointly and severally liable for the entire amount of such
service charges imposed by the Department.
      (3)   If no citations are issued by the investigating police agency, the
service charge imposed by the Fire Department shall be shared equally by all
owners of all vehicles involved in said motor vehicle accident.
   (C)   In the event that equipment of the Department is lost or damaged in
the course of providing mutual-aid assistance to the Fire Department of another
jurisdiction pursuant to an existing mutual-aid agreement, the Department shall
impose a charge for such lost or damaged equipment to the jurisdiction to which
mutual-aid assistance was rendered, provided that the imposition of such charge
does not violate the terms or conditions of the mutual-aid agreement.
   (D)   The Department shall impose a service charge upon the owner of any
property located outside the city limits to which the Department responds to a
call for firefighting or hazard abatement services, if such call for services
was made by the owner or occupant of such property. The Department shall also
impose a service charge upon any other governmental entity to which the
Department provides assistance in firefighting or hazard abatement if such
request for assistance was made by the governmental entity, and if such other
governmental entity was not a party to a mutual-aid assistance agreement with
the city. The charges imposed upon such property owners or governmental
entities shall be calculated in the same manner as the service charge described
in division (B) above.
   (E)   Any site within the city limits having any type of automatic warning
device which will result in the automatic dispatching of the Department to such
a site must maintain such system in good working order at all times. In the
event of a false alarm for any reason as a result of the activation of the
property owner’s automated system, the following shall apply.
      (1)   Each site is allowed one false alarm per calendar year from January
1 through December 31, without charge.
      (2)   If a second false alarm occurs within such calendar year, the
property owner shall be billed by the Department the hourly cost for each
apparatus responding to such false alarm as established in the annual report of
the Department submitted to the City Manager on or before February 1 of each
year, and also the hourly cost of each firefighter responding to such false
alarm.
      (3)   Third and subsequent false alarms at the same site shall be billed
service charges computed in the same manner as described in division (B)(2)
above.
      (4)   All such false alarm charges shall be paid to the City Treasurer.
   (F)   All service charges and fees imposed by the Department under authority
of this section shall be due and payable to the City Treasurer within 30 days
after the mailing of written invoices therefor. If not paid within 30 days, the
city may take all measures available to it by law to collect such charges.
(Prior Code, § 250.06)
CHAPTER 32: EMPLOYEES
Section
   
32.01   Definitions
   
32.02   General employment policy
   
32.03   Classified and exempt service
   
32.04   Employees’ status; probationary periods
   
32.05   Administrative powers and duties of Personnel Director
   
32.06   Disciplinary action; dismissal; demotion
   
32.07   Preference for veterans
Cross-reference:
   Local Officers Compensation Commission, see §
30.03
Statutory reference:
   Civil service, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i
   Compensation and salaries in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.3, 117.5,
117.17, 117.19, 117.20, 117.28, 117.32, 117.33
   Municipal Employees’ Retirement System, see M.C.L.A. §§ 38.1501 et seq.
§ 32.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPOINTMENT. All means of selection, promotion, appointment, or employment
as to any person holding any office, place, or position of employment in the
classified service of the city.
   BOARD. The Personnel Board of the city, as established in §
30.03.
   MEMBER. A member of the Personnel Board.
   PERSONNEL DIRECTOR. The City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 260.01)
§ 32.02 GENERAL EMPLOYMENT POLICY.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the personnel policy of the city that
employment in the city government shall be based on merit and fitness, free of
personal and political considerations. Just and equitable incentives of
employment shall be established and maintained to promote efficiency and
economy in the operation of the city government. Appointments and other actions
requiring application of the merit principle shall be based on systematic
evaluations.
   (B)   Tenure of employees covered by this chapter shall be subject to good
behavior, honest and satisfactory performance of work, necessity for the
performance of work, and the availability of funds.
(Prior Code, § 260.02)
§ 32.03 CLASSIFIED AND EXEMPT SERVICE.
   All offices and positions of the city are divided into the classified and
exempt service, as follows.
   (A)   The exempt service shall include the following:
      (1)   All elected officials and members of boards and commissions,
including the Election Commission and members of the various Precinct Election
Boards;
      (2)   The City Manager and the City Attorney;
      (3)   Volunteer personnel, including volunteer firefighters;
      (4)   Consultants and outside counsel rendering temporary professional
service; and
      (5)   Such positions involving seasonal or part-time employment, or which
consist of unskilled work, as may be specifically placed in the exempt service
by the City Manager.
   (B)   The classified service shall include all other positions in the city
service that are not specifically placed in the exempt service by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 260.03)
§ 32.04 EMPLOYEES’ STATUS; PROBATIONARY PERIODS.
   (A)   After May 23, 1982, all persons holding positions in the classified
service shall have permanent status if they have held their present positions
for at least six months immediately preceding such date.
   (B)   If they have held their positions for less than six months, then they
shall serve a probationary period of six months from the time of their
appointment before acquiring permanent status, except for police officers, who
shall serve a probationary period of one year.
(Prior Code, § 260.04)
§ 32.05 ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS AND DUTIES OF PERSONNEL DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Personnel in the classified service, volunteer firefighters, and
seasonal or part-time employees shall be administered by the Personnel
Director, who shall:
      (1)   Administer all the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Draft such rules as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of
this chapter. Such rules shall be submitted to Council for adoption by
resolution, whereupon they shall be given full force and effect. Amendments to
the rules shall be made in accordance with the same procedure;
      (3)   Prepare and recommend revisions and amendments to the personnel
rules; and
      (4)   Maintain adequate records of his or her own official actions, as
well as the employment record of every employee.
   (B)   Council, upon recommendation of the Personnel Director, may contract
with any qualified person or agency for the performance of such technical
services as may be desired in the establishment and operation of the personnel
program.
   (C)   All of the administrative and executive powers and duties pertaining
to personnel management shall be vested in the Personnel Director, and such
powers and duties are to be administered by him or her under the rules which
have been adopted in accordance with this chapter. The Personnel Director shall
have charge of applications for employment, the examination of all applicants
for positions, and the certification of payrolls as to the duties and the rate
of pay of all employees. He or she shall be the custodian of all personnel
records and shall be the official upon or with whom all notices or requests for
hearing, complaints, and official documents relating to the personnel service
shall be served or filed.
(Prior Code, § 260.05)
§ 32.06 DISCIPLINARY ACTION; DISMISSAL; DEMOTION.
   (A)   When, in the judgement of the Personnel Director, an employee’s work,
performance, or conduct justifies disciplinary action short of dismissal, the
employee may be suspended without pay, provided that the employee’s rights
under the Veterans and Members of Armed Forces Act are respected, if said
employee is entitled to the benefits thereof.
   (B)   Permanent employees may be dismissed or demoted whenever, in the
judgement of the Personnel Director, the employee’s work or misconduct so
warrants, provided that said dismissal is in compliance with the Veterans and
Members of Armed Forces Act, if said employee is entitled to the benefits
thereof.
   (C)   During the course of any investigation, the Personnel Director may
request any employee to attend a proceeding and testify thereat. Any employee
refusing to do so may be subject to disciplinary action, as the Personnel
Director shall determine, in accordance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 260.06)
Statutory reference:
   Preference in employment, see Public Act 205 of 1897, being M.C.L.A. §§
35.401 through 35.404
§ 32.07 PREFERENCE FOR VETERANS.
   In all cases of appointments, promotions, or removals, preference or
priority shall be given to any veteran of the military or naval service of the
United States in compliance with state or federal law.
(Prior Code, § 260.07)
CHAPTER 33: VOTING PRECINCTS AND POLLING PLACES
Section
   
33.01   Establishment of precincts
   
33.02   Voting places
   
33.03   Description of Precinct 1
   
33.04   Description of Precinct 2
   
33.05   Voting precinct map
Statutory reference:
   Apportionment of wards; copy of apportionment plan, see M.C.L.A. § 117.27a
   Equal representation, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3
§ 33.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF PRECINCTS.
   The city is hereby divided into two voting precincts, to be designated as
Precinct 1 (the South Precinct) and Precinct 2 (the North Precinct).
(Prior Code, § 206.01)
§ 33.02 VOTING PLACES.
   The voting place for Precinct 1 (the South Precinct) shall be located at the
city’s Senior Center. The voting place for Precinct 2 (the North Precinct)
shall be the Lakeview School Memorial Gym Lobby.
(Prior Code, § 206.04) (Ord. passed 4-13-2017)
§ 33.03 DESCRIPTION OF PRECINCT 1.
   Precinct 1 (the South Precinct) shall consist of the following described
area: Beginning at the intersection of Teal Lake Avenue extended and the south
shore of Teal Lake, then westerly along said south shore to the west city limit
line, which is also the west line of Section 35, Township 48 North, Range 27
West; then south along said west section line to the southwest corner of said
Section 35, Township 48 North, Range 27 West; then east along the south line of
said Section 35 to the northwest corner of Section 1, Township 47 North, Range
27 West; then south along the west section lines of Sections 1, 12, and 13 of
Township 47 North, Range 27 West, to the south city limit line; then east along
the south city limit line to the east city limit line; then north along the
east city limit line to the southeast corner of Section 33, Township 48 North,
Range 26 West; then west along said section line to the southwest corner of
said Section 33, Township 48 North, Range 26 West; then southwesterly through
fenced caving grounds to the centerline of Mitchell Avenue, extended; then
northwesterly along the centerline of Mitchell Avenue to the centerline of East
Arch Street; then westerly along the centerline of East Arch Street to the
centerline of Teal Lake Avenue; then northerly along the centerline of Teal
Lake Avenue to the point of beginning, all as shown on the map on file with the
Clerk of the city.
(Prior Code, § 206.02)
§ 33.04 DESCRIPTION OF PRECINCT 2.
   Precinct 2 (the North Precinct) shall consist of the following described
area: Beginning at the intersection of Teal Lake Avenue extended and the south
shore of Teal Lake, then westerly along the south shore of Teal Lake to the
west city limit; then north along such line to the north city limit line, then
east along such line to the east city limit line; then south along the east
line to the southeast corner of Section 33, Township 48 North, Range 26 West;
then west along the section line to the southwest section corner; then
southwesterly through the fenced caving grounds to the centerline of Mitchell
Avenue extended; then northwesterly along the centerline of Mitchell Avenue to
the centerline of East Arch Street; then westerly along the centerline of East
Arch Street to the centerline of Teal Lake Avenue; then northerly along the
centerline of Teal Lake Avenue to the point of beginning, all as shown on the
map on file with the Clerk of the city.
(Prior Code, § 206.03)
§ 33.05 VOTING PRECINCT MAP.
   The City Clerk shall maintain, and shall have available for inspection
during regular business hours at the office of the City Clerk, a map showing
the boundaries of the voting precincts within the city.
(Prior Code, § 206.05)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
Section
Tax Increment Financial Plan
   
34.01   Title
   
34.02   Adoption of plan; requirements
TAX INCREMENT FINANCIAL PLAN
§ 34.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the “Negaunee City Downtown
Development Authority Development and Tax Increment Financing Plan Ordinance.”
(Ord. passed 8-8-2019)
§ 34.02 ADOPTION OF PLAN; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The City Council, having held a public hearing on July 18, 2019, on
the Development and Tax Increment Financing Plan (the “Plan”) prepared by the
Downtown Development Authority, attached to this code of ordinances herein, and
incorporated herein by reference, hereby makes the determination that the Plan
constitutes a public purpose and adopts the Plan.
   (B)   This determination and adoption is based on the following
considerations:
      (1)   The Plan meets the requirements set forth in § 217(2) of the
Recodified Tax Increment Financing Act, Public Act 57 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §
125.4217(2);
      (2)   The Plan includes a proposed method of financing the development
that is feasible and the Downtown Development Authority has the ability to
arrange the financing;
      (3)   The development described in the Plan is reasonable and necessary
to carry out the purpose of the Act;
      (4)   Any land within the development area that may be acquired by the
Downtown Development Authority under the Plan will be reasonably necessary to
carry out the purpose of the Plan and the Act in an efficient and economically
satisfactory manner;
      (5)   The Plan is in reasonable accord with the city’s Master Plan;
      (6)   Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities,
are or will be adequate to service the project area; and
      (7)   Any changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and
utilities are reasonably necessary for the project and for the city.
(Ord. passed 8-8-2019)
CHAPTER 35: MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Definitions
   
35.02   Municipal civil infractions action; commencement
   
35.03   Schedule of civil fines established
Ordinance Violations Bureau
   
35.15   Establishment, control, and powers of Bureau
   
35.16   Location; supervision; organization; administrations
   
35.17   Disposition of violations; other remedies
   
35.18   Bureau limited to accepting admission of responsibility
   
35.19   Municipal civil infractions notices
   
35.20   Appearance; payment of fines and costs
   
35.21   Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. Public Act 236 of 1961, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.101 et seq., as amended.
   AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL. A police officer or other personnel of the city
authorized by this chapter or any ordinance or resolution of Council to issue
municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation
notices.
   BUREAU. The City of Negaunee Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau as
established by this chapter.
   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION. An act or omission that is prohibited by these
codified ordinances or any ordinance of the city, but which is not a crime
under these codified ordinances or other ordinance, and for which civil
sanctions, including, without limitation, fines, damages, expenses, and costs
may be ordered, as authorized by Chapter 87 of Public Act 236 of 1961, as
amended. A MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION is not a lesser included offense of a
violation of these codified ordinances that is a criminal offense.
   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION. A civil action in which the defendant is
alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION. A written complaint or notice prepared
by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in court regarding
the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the
person cited.
   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION NOTICE. A written notice prepared by an
authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the city’s Municipal
Ordinance Violations Bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed
for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, as
authorized under M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8396 and 600.8707(6) of the Act.
(Prior Code, § 292.01)
§ 35.02 MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS ACTION; COMMENCEMENT.
   (A)   Municipal civil infractions action; commencement. A municipal civil
infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city
official of:
      (1)   A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged
violator to appear in court; and/or
      (2)   A municipal civil infraction notice directing the alleged violator
to appear at the Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau.
(Prior Code, § 292.02)
   (B)   Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance and service. Municipal
civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized city
officials as follows.
      (1)   The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a
reasonable time after the citation is issued.
      (2)   The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the 96
District Court.
      (3)   Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a
form approved by the state’s Court Administrator. The original citation shall
be filed with the District Court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by
the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by § 8705 of the Act,
being M.C.L.A. § 600.8705.
      (4)   A municipal civil infraction citation signed by an authorized city
official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the
citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the citation, and if
the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and
signature of the official: “I declare under the penalties of perjury that the
statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge, and
belief.”
      (5)   An authorized city official who witnesses a person committing a
municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and
as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a municipal civil
infraction citation or a municipal civil infraction notice.
      (6)   An authorized city official may issue a municipal civil infraction
citation or a municipal civil infraction notice to a person if:
         (a)   Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to
believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; and/or
         (b)   Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly
witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has
reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction
and the Prosecuting Attorney or the City Attorney approves in writing the
issuance of the citation.
      (7)   Municipal civil infraction citations and municipal civil infraction
notices shall be served by an authorized city official as follows.
         (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(7)(b) below and in §
35.21(g), an authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of a
citation or notice upon the alleged violator.
         (b)   If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or
occupancy of land, a building, or other structure, a copy of the citation or
notice does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may
be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building, or other structure
by posting the copy on the land or attaching a copy to the building or
structure. In addition, a copy of the citation or notice shall be sent by
first-class mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at such
owner’s last known address.
(Prior Code, § 292.03)
   (C)   Municipal civil infraction citations; contents.
      (1)   A municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the name and
address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the
place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of
the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made.
      (2)   Further, such citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or
she may do one of the following:
         (a)   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail,
in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance;
         (b)   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction “with
explanation,” by mail by the time specified for appearance, or in person or by
representation; or
         (c)   Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing
either of the following:
            1.   Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or
District Court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city; or
            2.   Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with
the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
      (3)   The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of the
following.
         (a)   If the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility “with
explanation” in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to
the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation, within the
time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an
appearance.
         (b)   If the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the
alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or
by representation, within the time specified for appearance and obtain a
scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is
specified on the citation.
         (c)   A hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing
is requested by the alleged violator or the city.
         (d)   At an informal hearing, the alleged violator must appear in
person before a judge or District Court magistrate, without the opportunity of
being represented by an attorney.
         (e)   At a formal hearing, the alleged violator must appear in person
before the judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
      (4)   The citation shall contain a notice in bold-face type that the
failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the
citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor
and will result in entry of a default judgment against the violator on the
municipal civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 292.04)
§ 35.03 SCHEDULE OF CIVIL FINES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The civil fines payable to the Bureau for admissions of responsibility
by persons served with municipal civil infraction notices shall be:
      (1)   Fifty dollars for the first offense within any 12-month period; and
      (2)   One hundred dollars for a second or any subsequent municipal civil
infraction of the same requirement or provision of this code of ordinances
committed by any person within any 12-month period for which such person admits
responsibility.
   (B)   This schedule, as amended from time to time, shall be posted at the
Bureau.
(Prior Code, § 292.06)
ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
§ 35.15 ESTABLISHMENT, CONTROL, AND POWERS OF BUREAU.
   Pursuant to § 8396 of Public Act 12 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. § 600.8396, as
amended, there is hereby established a Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau in
the city for the purpose of accepting admissions of responsibility for
municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs
provided for in the schedule provided for in this chapter and in §
10.99. The Bureau shall be under the supervision and control of the City
Manager.
(Prior Code, § 292.05)
§ 35.16 LOCATION; SUPERVISION; ORGANIZATION; ADMINISTRATIONS.
   (A)   The Bureau shall be located at City Hall.
   (B)   The City Manager shall, subject to the approval of Council, appoint
qualified city employees to administer the Bureau and adopt rules and
regulations for the operation thereof.
(Prior Code, § 292.05)
§ 35.17 DISPOSITION OF VIOLATIONS; OTHER REMEDIES.
   The Bureau may dispose of municipal civil infraction violations for which a
municipal civil infraction notice has been issued and for which specific fines
and costs are prescribed in the schedule provided for in this chapter and/or in
§
10.99. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the city from filing a
municipal civil infraction citation with the District Court or otherwise limit
the remedies available to the city for violations of these codified ordinances.
No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction at the
Bureau, and the unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the
Bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person’s
rights, privileges and protection accorded by law. Further, the fines set forth
in the schedule provided for in this chapter and in §
10.99 shall apply only to admissions of responsibility made at the Bureau and
shall in no way bind or restrict the discretion of any court in formulating a
remedy for the commission of a municipal civil infraction.
(Prior Code, § 292.05)
§ 35.18 BUREAU LIMITED TO ACCEPTING ADMISSION OF RESPONSIBILITY.
   The scope of the Bureau’s authority shall be limited to accepting admissions
of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining
civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The Bureau shall not
accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the
offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event
shall the Bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of
any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation.
(Prior Code, § 292.05)
§ 35.19 MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS NOTICES.
   Municipal civil infraction notices shall be issued and served by authorized
city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as
provided for citations in §§
35.02(B)(6) and (B)(7). In addition to any other information required by this
code of ordinances or any other ordinance, the notice of violation shall
indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the Bureau, the
methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of
the Bureau, the hours during which the Bureau is open, the amount of the fine
scheduled for the alleged violation, and the consequences for failure to appear
and pay the required fine within the required time.
(Prior Code, § 292.05)
§ 35.20 APPEARANCE; PAYMENT OF FINES AND COSTS.
   (A)   An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction notice
shall appear at the Bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the
time specified for acceptance in the municipal civil infraction notice.
   (B)   An appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by representation.
(Prior Code, § 292.05)
§ 35.21 PROCEDURE WHERE ADMISSION OF RESPONSIBILITY NOT MADE OR FINE NOT PAID.
   If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal civil
infraction notice, and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the
civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by ordinance for the violation are not
paid at the Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau, a municipal civil infraction
citation may be filed with the District Court and a copy of such citation may
be served by first-class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged
violator’s last known address. The citation filed with the Court and served
upon the alleged violator shall comply with the provisions of §
35.02.
(Prior Code, § 292.05)
CHAPTER 36:
ETHICAL STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
Section
   
36.01   Title
   
36.02   Interpretation
   
36.03   Severability
   
36.04   Reference to other sections
   
36.05   Public policy declaration
   
36.06   Definitions
   
36.07   Standards of conduct
   
36.08   Prohibited acts
   
36.09   Exclusions
   
36.10   Integrity, reputation and the ability to enforce standards
   
36.11   Review process
 
   
36.99   Penalty
§ 36.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be titled “Ethical Standards of Conduct.”
(Ord. passed 3-13-2025)
§ 36.02 INTERPRETATION.
   This chapter shall establish ethical standards of conduct for elected and
appointed officials of the City of Negaunee whether compensated or not.
(Ord. passed 3-13-2025)
§ 36.03 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision or section of this chapter may later be amended or its
application to any person or circumstance be held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provisions or applications.
(Ord. passed 3-13-2025)
§ 36.04 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   This chapter and any sections or parts of this chapter, take precedence over
other sections of this code. The Negaunee City Council automatically amends
affected sections of this code upon proper adoption, from time to time, of
subsequent amendments.
(Ord. passed 3-13-2025)
§ 36.05 PUBLIC POLICY DECLARATION.
   It is hereby declared to be the standard of ethical service to the City of
Negaunee that all officials avoid conflicts between their private interests and
those of the general public whom they serve. To enhance the faith of the people
and to assure the integrity and impartiality of all officials of the city, it
is necessary that adequate guidelines be provided for separating their roles as
private citizens from their roles as public servants. Elected and appointed
officials, whether compensated or not, serve the public trust and any effort to
realize personal gain through official conduct is a violation of that trust.
The ethical standards established herein are intended to eliminate to the
fullest extent possible violations of ethical conduct and to ensure that such
are investigated and punished where applicable.
(Ord. passed 3-13-2025)
§ 36.06 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
   APPOINTED. Selected and installed in an office or position.
   ASSOCIATED. The condition of being an owner, partner, member, part-owner,
employee, limited partner, stockholder, director, lender, borrower, or having a
financial interest in.
   BENEFICIARY. A person or entity receiving a benefit.
   BUSINESS. Commercial or industrial enterprise or commercial establishment,
store, work, employment, profession of an individual or group.
   CANDIDATE. Someone who seeks or who has been proposed for an office,
position, or award.
   CITY. The City of Negaunee.
   CITY EMPLOYEE. An employee of the City of Negaunee whether full- or part-
time, contract or hired.
   CITY FUNDS. Any funds, money, or monetary rights owned by the city, or under
city control in a fiduciary or representative capacity.
   CITY PERSONNEL. Individuals working for the City of Negaunee as employees
for wages, salary or other agreed benefits.
   CITY PROPERTY. Anything tangible or intangible including rights, owned by
the city or under the control of the city in fiduciary or representative
capacity.
   COMPENSATION. Money, property, thing of value or benefit conferred upon or
received by any person or sought for any person in return for services rendered
for or to be rendered to himself or herself or another.
   CONFLICT OF INTEREST. An interest that competes with or is adverse to a
legitimate interest of the city, whether monetary or not.
   CONSIDERATION. Something given or promised in exchange for something else,
tangible or intangible, including promises.
   CONTRACTS. Agreements or mutual understandings supported by present or
future consideration.
   CONTRIBUTION. Money or aid given another.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Negaunee.
   DECISION MAKING. Exercising public power to adopt laws, regulations or
standards, render decisions, establish policy, determine questions of
discretion.
   DURING THE COURSE OF CITY BUSINESS. While planning, working on, reporting
on, or carrying out the affairs of the city whether for compensation or not.
   DUTY OF CARE. Exercising power, trust, authority or decision making as a
prudent person would exercise; not acting on a direct conflict of interest or a
potential conflict of interest to self-benefit or the benefit of another.
   ELECTED. Chosen by the eligible voters of the city following a formal
ballot.
   ELECTED/APPOINTED OFFICIAL. Any person seeking to hold, elected or appointed
to, a position on the Negaunee City Council.
   EMPLOYEE. A person working for the city for wages, salary, or other benefits
and under the control and supervision of the city as to hours, work standards,
and rules of work, etc.
   EXCHANGE. To give in return.
   EXPECTATION. Looking forward to something; a looking forward as due.
   FAVOR. An unfair partiality; an obliging act.
   FINANCIAL GAIN. An increase or an expected increase in monetary or material
wealth or earnings.
   GAIN. An increase in power, advantage, wealth, possessions, earnings, means
something of value given without recompense.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY. A spouse, child or step-child, mother, father, step-
parents, grandparents, step-grandparents, brothers, sisters, step-brothers or -
sisters, or in-laws of any kind.
   INFLUENCE. The power of persons or things to influence others.
   MEMBER. Any of the persons constituting an organization or group.
   MORAL TURPITUDE. A baseness; vileness or depravity; conduct contrary to
honesty, justice or good morals.
   OFFICIAL CONDUCT. Action or inaction by an officer or employee acting on
behalf of the city.
   OFFICIAL DUTY/OFFICIAL ACTION. A decision, action, recommendation, approval,
disapproval or other action or failure to action which involves the use of
power, trust, decision making, or authority, or with moral turpitude.
   OTHER PERSONS/ANYONE ELSE. Members of one’s immediate family or individual
persons, or businesses, entities, associations, or groups.
   PERSONAL GAIN. An advantage or increase in wealth, possessions, power or
other benefits for an individual or on behalf of another individual.
   POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST. A situation whereby the interests of the
city and the interests of someone else will, may, or might become in conflict
in the ordinary course of events.
   PROMISE. An agreement to do or not do something.
   REWARD. Something given for something done.
   RULES OF ETHICAL CONDUCT. The provisions of this chapter.
   SOLICIT. To ask or seek; often earnestly; to entice another to do something.
(Ord. passed 3-13-2025)
§ 36.07 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
   The city’s integrity rests solidly on the foundation of several general
rules of ethical behavior. These rules form fundamental values to be understood
and honored by all.
   (A)   Principles. The city expects elected or appointed officials to be
honest, to tell the truth, and to “play by the rules.” The city expects its
elected or appointed officials to be aware the first small step taken that
undermines one’s integrity or the integrity of the city usually leads to
another and another. In a short time, without having done anything major,
integrity is compromised.
   (B)   Honesty. The city expects its elected or appointed officials to not
misrepresent situations, to not steal from the city, not falsify records, or
misuse city property, equipment, supplies or assets for personal or financial
gain or benefit, or for the gain or benefit of others.
   (C)   Fairness. The city expects its elected or appointed officials to treat
each other and everyone else with evenhandedness, fairness and sincerity.
   (D)   Perception. The city expects elected or appointed officials to act in
such a way as to create the perception that he, she, and the city are acting
fairly, honestly, and evenhandedly without partiality, favoritism, or
dishonesty. The city expects elected or appointed officials to avoid the
appearance of impropriety, that behavior which suggests he, she or the city is
acting questionably.
   (E)   Letter of law, intent and spirit of law. The city expects its elected
or appointed officials to follow the letter of the law, and honor the intent
and spirit of the law, including federal, state and local laws.
   (F)   Direction and suggestion. The city expects its elected or appointed
officials to understand that no improper action is made proper because a higher
officer, official or employee might have directed or suggested the action, or
the higher officer, official or employee themselves engaged in improper action.
   (G)   Gray areas. Recognizing that there are times when elected or appointed
officials confront situations where there are two or more legitimate points of
view, where there is no clear right or wrong answer, and that past practices
have given way to new practices. It is in these situations the city expects its
elected or appointed officials to be particularly careful and give thorough
examination and thought before taking action or making decisions.
(Ord. passed 3-13-2025)
§ 36.08 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   The following acts, actions, inactions, and attempted acts and actions
constitute a violation of the ethical standards of conduct for elected or
appointed officials. These include, but are not necessarily limited to these
specific references but, rather, are intended as providing examples of actions
and inactions that are prohibited by this chapter.
   (A)   Gratuities. No elected or appointed official of the city shall
solicit, accept or receive, directly or indirectly, any gift, whether in the
form of money, service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or
promise, or in any other form, under circumstances in which it can reasonably
be inferred that the gift is intended to influence him or her in the
performance of their official duty/duties or is intended as a reward for any
official action on their part.
   (B)   Preferential treatment. No elected or appointed official of the city
shall use or attempt to use their official position to unreasonably secure,
request or grant, any privileges, exemptions, advantages, contracts, or
preferential treatment for themselves or others.
   (C)   Use of information.
      (1)   No elected or appointed official of the city who acquires
information in the course of their official duties, which information by law or
policy is not available at the time to the general public, shall use such
information to further the private interests of themselves or anyone else.
      (2)   No elected or appointed official of the city shall obtain or use
city records, documents, communications, or others written or electronic
records of the city or those under the control of the city to further the
private interests of themselves or anyone else.
      (3)   No elected or appointed official of the city shall use their
position to obtain information records, which information or records by law or
policy is not available at the time to the general public without requesting
such information or records through the methods granted by the Freedom of
Information Act.
   (D)   Full disclosure. No elected or appointed official of the city shall
participate, as an agent or representative of the city, in approving or
disapproving, voting, abstaining from voting, recommending, or otherwise acting
upon any matter in which he or she has a direct or indirect interest without
disclosing the full nature and extent of their interest. Such a disclosure must
be made before the time to perform their duty or concurrently with that
performance. If the elected or appointed official is a member of a decision-
making or advisory body, the disclosure must be made to the Chairman and other
members of the body on the official record. Otherwise, a disclosure would be
appropriately addressed by an appointed officer or employee to the supervisory
head of the organization, or by an elected officer to the general public.
   (E)   Use of city property. No elected or appointed official of the city
shall, directly or indirectly, make use of or permit others to make use of city
property, equipment, vehicles, or supplies of any kind primarily for personal
gain.
   (F)   Other prohibited conduct. No elected or appointed official shall
engage in any of the practices described below in list form. The following
acts, actions, inactions, and attempted acts and actions constitute a violation
of the ethical standards of conduct for elected or appointed official. These
include but are not necessarily limited to these specific references but,
rather, are intended as providing examples of actions and inactions that are
prohibited by this chapter, if not the Charter and labor agreements. They
include:
      (1)   Impeding government operations and/or violating federal, state and/
or local laws;
      (2)   Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity
of the city;
      (3)   Interfering on behalf of an employee or a member of one’s immediate
family;
      (4)   Divulging confidential information;
      (5)   Misusing city personnel resources, property, funds or assets for
personal gain or the gain of others;
      (6)   Representing his or her individual opinion as that of the city;
      (7)   Violating labor agreements between the city and its employees;
      (8)   Violating policies adopted by the City Council;
      (9)   Engaging in a business transaction that causes the candidate,
officer, official or employee to derive a personal gain;
      (10)   Engaging in employment or rendering services that are incompatible
or in conflict with the discharge of his or her official duties;
      (11)   Offering a candidate, officer, official or employee of the city a
gift, loan, contribution, reward or promise based on agreement, promise, or
expectation that the vote, decision making or action of the candidate, officer,
official or employee of the city would be influenced thereby.
      (12)   Engaging in an act, actions or other conduct contrary to honesty,
justice or good morals; or an act or actions of moral turpitude;
      (13)   Acting on behalf of the city or on the behalf of the City Council
when authority has not been specifically given;
      (14)   Making a city decision outside of the official channels;
      (15)   Soliciting support, financial or material, for city social,
athletic, or recreational parties from individuals or firms that do business
with the city or want to;
      (16)   Appearing before city bodies on behalf of a private interest;
      (17)   Participating in decision making affecting the interest of one’s
business or immediate family. The decision making may include monetary
decisions, labor agreements, or other decisions that impact one’s business and/
or immediate family; and/or
      (18)   Notwithstanding the provisions of the City Charter, missing in
attendance from three consecutive regularly called meetings at which the
attendance of the city officer, or official is required and know as part of the
duties of such elected or appointed official.
(Ord. passed 3-13-2025)
§ 36.09 EXCLUSIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to cover the following:
   (A)   This chapter shall not prohibit a elected or appointed official from
accepting minor gifts such as meals, awards, pens, pencils, and other token
items valued at $25 or less when the gift is extended during the course of city
business and no return promise is made by the recipient.
   (B)   This chapter shall not prevent any elected or appointed official from
accepting irregular compensation.
   (C)   This chapter does not prohibit the expression of views and opinions or
communications of plans for future action, nor does it prohibit contributions
to political parties or candidates as permitted by law.
   (D)   This chapter shall not apply to a elected or appointed official who,
in the course of decision making, discloses a direct or indirect conflict of
interest or potential conflict of interest in any matter before the City
Council, advisory board or commission and is permitted to continue
participating in the decision making.
   (E)   This chapter shall not prohibit the City Manager, City Attorney and
all law enforcement officials from exercising their usual power, control and
discretion, which are part of their duties.
   (F)   This chapter shall not prohibit the Mayor and City Council from making
policy decisions, enacting legislation, and directing the affairs of the city
in accordance with their legal powers and responsibilities as provided in the
City Charter or state statutes.
   (G)   This chapter shall not be enforced to cause any person to be favored
or discriminated against because of race, gender, age, handicap, religion,
country of origin or political affiliation.
(Ord. passed 3-13-2025)
§ 36.10 INTEGRITY, REPUTATION AND THE ABILITY TO ENFORCE STANDARDS.
   Preserving the integrity of the City of Negaunee is important to all
officers, officials and employees of the city. Fairness, honesty,
evenhandedness, and sincerity, a kind that transcends both the law and the
values of individuals, are achieved by observing an overriding set of ethical
standards. Integrity is also preserved by recognizing, at times, complaints of
questionable actions of city officers, officials and employees and others that
need to be handled with the same fairness, honesty, evenhandedness and
sincerity. A city’s reputation and its overall success are securely linked. The
City of Negaunee’s reputation, obviously, is based on more than the collective
reputations of its employees and officials. The city’s reputation depends on
how people perceive that the city, whatever the issue or set of circumstances,
will act with integrity. Preserving the integrity of the city may result in
official action to enforce and punish violations of the ethical standards of
conduct.
   (A)   Controlling authorities. Requests to investigate or take action to
enforce the ethical standards of conduct regarding elected or appointed
officials shall go to the Mayor, City Council and City Attorney. The request
may be made by the individual or any elected or appointed official, or city
employee. Any elected or appointed official that is the subject of the request
shall not be a part of the controlling authority.
   (B)   Authority to render advisory opinions. The above listed authorities
may issue written advisory opinions, when deemed appropriate, interpreting the
ethical standards of conduct ordinance as set forth herein. Any elected or
appointed official may seek guidance from the controlling authority upon
written request on questions directly relating to the propriety of their
conduct as elected or appointed officials. Each written request and advisory
opinion shall be confidential unless released by the requester.
   (C)   Authority to punish violations. The above listed authorities shall
take appropriate action upon any complaint, request for information, or
otherwise resolve matters concerning the ethical standards of conduct ordinance
for the City of Negaunee. Except for direct references that may be provided by
City Charter or labor agreements controlling any action either authority above
may take or except as either may establish an action that either authority may
take, both authorities are herein empowered to take and enforce actions, as
they deem appropriate. The appropriate action to be taken in any individual
case shall be at the sole discretion of the controlling authority involved
which may include but is not necessarily limited to any of the following:
      (1)   Referral of the matter to a higher authority;
      (2)   Pursuing further investigation by the controlling authority;
      (3)   Deeming no action to be required;
      (4)   Pursuing another course of action which is reasonable, just and
appropriate under the circumstances;
      (5)   Taking appropriate disciplinary action, including declaring a
forfeiture of office pursuant and removal from office consistent with the
provisions of the City Charter.
         (a)   If the violation is for an offense also contained in the City
Charter and is one which the Charter determines is punished by removal, the
process for removal from office is the same as the process in the City Charter.
         (b)   If the violation is for an offense also contained in labor
agreements between the city and its employees, then the process for removal is
the same as contained in the labor agreements.
         (c)   If the violation is for an offense contained in this chapter and
for which the controlling authority recommends the forfeiture and removal from
office, whether elected or appointed, then the process contained herein is the
process that is followed.
   (D)   Advisory opinions. Any elected or appointed official or employee of
the City of Negaunee may seek advisory opinions. Advisory opinions may include
guidance to any candidate, officer, official or employee. Request for an
advisory opinion shall be made in writing and provide as much detail as
possible. The controlling authority may investigate as it deems appropriate.
The controlling authority may take as much time as it deems necessary before
rendering its opinion provided that all attempts to satisfy the request in a
timely manner are made. The controlling authority shall issue its advisory
opinions in writing. The advisory opinion shall be confidential and shall not
be released to anyone or any entity unless the person making the request
releases the opinion.
(Ord. passed 3-13-2025)
§ 36.11 REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   Determination to proceed. The controlling authority shall first make a
determination to proceed. Any elected or appointed official, official or
employee of the City of Negaunee may request that the controlling authority
review, investigate and recommend action regarding alleged violations of the
City of Negaunee ethical standards of conduct ordinance; such requests shall be
in writing. The controlling authority may decide to review, investigate and
recommend action regarding alleged violations of this chapter on their own
determination or at the request of other persons. All decisions to review,
investigate and recommend action shall first be made in writing.
   (B)   Duty of due care. The controlling authority shall be entitled to
proceed as it deems necessary and appropriate. The controlling authority shall
conduct itself in a manner so as to be thorough, complete and proceed in a
reasonable and prudent manner protecting the rights of individuals.
   (C)   Recommendation for punishment. Any elected or appointed official for
whom the controlling authority recommends punishment, shall be entitled to a
hearing and representation before the controlling authority as herein
determined.
      (1)   The controlling authority shall notify, in writing, the elected or
appointed official of the charges that the controlling authority is basing its
recommendation of punishment.
      (2)   The elected or appointed official shall have the opportunity to a
hearing before the controlling authority.
      (3)   The elected or appointed official shall notify the controlling
authority, in writing, that it wishes to be present at a hearing and whether or
not legal counsel will attend as well as any witnesses the elected or appointed
official plans to call.
      (4)   The hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days of the notification
of the recommendation for punishment. The hearing shall be closed to the public
unless the elected or appointed official selects to have the hearing open to
the public.
      (5)   Minutes of the hearing shall be kept and held by the City Attorney
for at least 12 months after which they may be destroyed.
      (6)   Following the hearing, the controlling authority shall decide to:
         (a)   Hold the recommendation for further review and investigation;
         (b)   Amend its previous recommendation and determine punishment;
         (c)   Reject its previous recommendation altogether and take new
action or determine to take no punitive action; or
         (d)   Proceed with its previous recommendation and take punitive
action.
      (7)   Any punitive action recommended by the controlling authority shall
be forwarded to the City Council which shall vote on the recommendation for
punitive action at its next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council. At
that meeting, the City Council, less any member for whom the punitive action is
recommended, a majority of those members remaining shall vote to accept, to
reject or to send the recommendation back to the controlling authority for
further consideration.
      (8)   If the recommendation of either the controlling authority or the
City Council is to result in further review and investigation of the
controlling authority, the process shall begin anew.
      (9)   If the recommendation of the controlling authority is accepted by
the City Council, its effect is binding and immediate and the elected or
appointed official has been deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter
offending all persons, the City Council, boards, and commissions, of the City
of Negaunee.
(Ord. passed 3-13-2025)
§ 36.99 PENALTY.
   While the City Council may find a person or persons guilty of misconduct and
take punitive action against the guilty party, including removal of office,
only a court of competent jurisdiction may convict a person for violations of
this chapter. Every person convicted of a violation of this chapter, by a court
of competent jurisdiction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 or
by a sentence of not more than 93 days in jail, or both, at the discretion of
the court.
(Ord. passed 3-13-2025)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SEWERS
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   ELECTRICITY
      
53.   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
CHAPTER 50: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Use of public sewers required
   
50.03   Private sewage disposal
   
50.04   Building sewers and connections
   
50.05   Use of public sewers
   
50.06   Damaging sewerage works
   
50.07   Authority to inspect
   
50.08   Discharge to sanitary or storm sewers or receiving streams
   
50.09   Connections to the system
   
50.10   Violations; notice to correct
Finances and Administration
   
50.25   Industrial surcharges
   
50.26   Industrial cost recovery
   
50.27   Recordkeeping
   
50.28   Authority to operate a wastewater utility
   
50.29   Free service
   
50.30   Levels of rates
   
50.31   Operating year
   
50.32   Financial hardship
Accounts, Rates, and Billing
   
50.45   Account applications and deposits
   
50.46   Rates
   
50.47   Billing
   
50.48   Enforcement
   
50.49   Shut-off
 
   
50.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Sewer and sewer systems generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 46.171 et seq., 67.34,
   Sewers and sewer systems in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4b,
117.4e, 117.4f, and 117.35
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning
five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other places of disposal.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Pollution Control Act of 1972, being 33 U.S.C.
§§ 1251 et seq., as amended.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. A substance amenable to treatment in the wastewater
treatment plant, such as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES
permit if the publicly-owned treatment works was designed to treat such
pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.
Examples of such additional pollutants may include: chemical oxygen demand,
total organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, nitrogen compounds,
fats, oils, and greases of animal or vegetable origin.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. Charges levied to customers of the wastewater system,
which charges are used to pay principal, interest, and administrative costs of
retiring the debt incurred for construction of the wastewater system. The DEBT
SERVICE CHARGE shall be in addition to the user charge specified above.
   FEDERAL GRANT. A grant in aid in construction of wastewater treatment works
provided under 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   FEDERAL GRANT AMOUNT FOR THE INDUSTRIAL RECOVERY CHARGES. Only that portion
of the total project costs of Project No. C-262310 for wastewater treatment
which was funded by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food
and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS. Any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant.
   INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY. Recovery by the local agency from industrial users
of the treatment works, or that portion of the federal grant amount allocable
to the construction of facilities for the treatment of wastes from such users.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Wastewater discharges from industrial, manufacturing,
trade, or business processes, as distinct from their employees domestic wastes
or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
   LOCAL AGENCY. The City of Negaunee or its designated official or department.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. Any industrial user of the publicly-owned
treatment works that:
      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste;
      (3)   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
the standards issued under § 307(a) of the Act; or
      (4)   Is found by the Permit Issuance Authority, in connection with the
issuance of an NPDES permit to the publicly-owned treatment works receiving the
waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works. All MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRIES shall be
monitored.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface ground water.
   NON-INDUSTRIAL USER. Any governmental or residential user and also includes
commercial, institutional, and other industrial users where it has been
determined that the wastes contributed by these users are primarily segregated
domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTES. Wastewaters from segregated domestic and/or sanitary
conveniences, as distinct from wastes from industrial processes, which domestic
wastes do not exceed a BOD strength of 250 mg/l or a suspended solids strength
of 300 m/l.
   NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System prescribed in the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. All work, materials, equipment, utilities, and
other effort required to OPERATE AND MAINTAIN the wastewater transportation and
treatment system consistent with insuring adequate treatment of wastewater to
produce an effluent in compliance with the NPDES permit and other applicable
state and federal regulations, and includes the cost of replacement.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, group, or
corporation.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. Wastes from the preparation, cooking, or
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and which is controlled by the local agency.
   RECOVERED AMOUNTS. Annual payments from industrial users for their share of
the federal grant amount allocable to the treatment of industrial waste by the
recovery period. The first payment by an industrial user shall be made not
later than one year after such user begins use of the treatment works.
   RECOVERY PERIOD. The industrial cost recovery period, which is hereby
defined as a period of 30 years.
   REPLACEMENT. The replacement in whole or in part of any equipment in the
wastewater transportation or treatment systems to ensure continuous treatment
of wastewater in accordance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state
and federal regulations.
   RETAINED AMOUNTS. The portion of the recovered amounts retained by the local
agency. The RETAINED AMOUNTS will be equal to 50% of the recovered amounts,
together with interest earned thereon. RETAINED AMOUNTS shall be under the
jurisdiction of the city.
   REVENUES and NET REVENUES. Defined in § 3 of the Public Act 94 of 1933, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. § 141.103.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface,
and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. The sum applicable of the user charge, surcharges,
industrial cost recovery, and debt service charges.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   STORM DRAIN and STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage, but which excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
   SURCHARGE. As a part of the service charge, means the additional charge
required to be paid by any customer discharging wastewater having strength in
excess of 250 mg/l BOD and 300 mg/l SS, to cover the cost of treating such
excess strength wastewater.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids, and that are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   SYSTEM. The complete city sanitary sewage system, including all mains,
pumps, lift stations, and collection and disposal facilities, including all
appurtenances thereto and including all extensions and improvements thereto,
which may hereafter be acquired.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of a treatment works for the cost of
operation and maintenance of sewage works, pursuant to the Clean Water Act,
being 33 U.S.C. § 1284(b), and includes the cost of replacement.
   USER CLASS. The kind of user connected to sanitary sewers, including, but
not limited to, residential, industrial, commercial, institutional, and
governmental.
      (1)   COMMERCIAL USER. An establishment listed in the Office of
Management and Budget’s Standard Industrial Classification Manual (1972
edition), involved in a commercial enterprise, business, or service which,
based on a determination by the local agency, discharges primarily segregated
domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences and which is not a
residential user or an industrial user.
      (2)    GOVERNMENTAL USER. Any federal, state, or local government user of
the wastewater treatment works.
      (3)   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any non-governmental user or manufacturing or
processing facility that discharges industrial waste to a publicly-owned
treatment works. INDUSTRIAL USERS shall be identified in the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual (1972 edition), Office of Management and
Budget, as amended and supplemented under the following divisions: Division A -
Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing; Division B - Mining; Division D -
Manufacturing; Division E - Transportation, Communication, Electric, Gas, and
Sanitary Services; Division I - Services.
      (4)   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Any establishment listed in the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual (1972 edition) involved in a social,
charitable, religious, or educational function, which, based on a determination
by the local agency, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes
from sanitary conveniences.
      (5)   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user of the treatment works whose premises or
buildings are used primarily as a domicile for one or more persons, including
dwelling units such as detached, semi-detached and row houses, mobile homes,
apartments, and permanent multi-family dwellings. Transit lodging is not
included; it is considered commercial.
   WASTEWATER. A combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground waters as may be present.
   WASTEWATER PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating wastewater.
   WASTEWATER WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of wastewater.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 50.02 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in an
unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the local agency, or
in any area under its jurisdiction, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or
other objectionable waste.
   (B)   No person shall discharge to any natural outlet any sanitary sewage,
industrial wastes, or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose, situated within the local
agency and abutting on any street, alley, or right- of-way in which there is
now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer, is hereby
required at his or her expense to install suitable sewage facilities therein,
and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after the date
of official notice to do so.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§
50.02(D), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system that complies with the county’s Health Department regulations.
   (B)   At such times as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
50.02(D), direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned for sanitary use, filled with suitable
material, and sealed.
   (C)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the local
agency.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 50.04 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
openings into, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the local agency. No
building sewer shall be covered until after it has been inspected and approved
by the authorized official. The cost of the application and permit shall be
$10.
   (B)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer to the public sewer connection shall be borne by the owner.
   (C)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building.
   (D)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with the new buildings
only when they are found on examination and test to meet all requirements of
this chapter.
   (E)   A newly constructed building sewer shall be schedule 40 PVC, cast
iron, vitrified clay sewer pipe, or asbestos cement pipe. Joints shall be tight
and waterproof. Materials and joints shall be as approved by the local agency.
Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water
service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron. If installed in filled or
unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except
that non-metallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed
or cradle. Transitions or connections will be constructed only with fabricated
connection fittings approved by the local agency.
   (F)   The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the
approval of the local agency, but in no event shall the diameter be less than
six inches. The slope of such six-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth
inch per foot, unless otherwise permitted.
   (G)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid
parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be
weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The
building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in a straight line.
   (H)   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall
be lifted by a pumping system approved by the local agency and discharged to
the building sewer.
   (I)   No sewer connection will be permitted unless there is capacity
available in all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains, and the sewage
treatment plant, including capacity for treatment of BOD and suspended solids.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, water from footing drains, or roof water to any
sanitary sewer or sewer connection except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. Downspouts and roof leaders shall be disconnected from sanitary sewers
within one year of the date of this chapter.
   (B)   Storm water, ground water, water from footing drains, and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such sewers as are specifically
designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters
may be discharged, upon application and approval of the local agency and the
appropriate state agency, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewer:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (66°C)
or lower than 32°F (0°C);
      (2)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per
million by weight of fat, oil, or grease;
      (3)   Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel, oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas;
      (4)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
      (5)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastic, woods, paunch manure, or other solid or viscous
substance capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewerage works;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes having corrosive properties capable of causing
drainage hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewerage works;
      (7)   Any waters with a pH lower than 6.5 or greater than 9.5;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving
waters of the treatment plant;
      (9)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such
materials at the sewage treatment plant;
      (10)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance; and/or
      (11)   Any industrial waste that may cause a deviation from the NPDES
permit requirements, pretreatment standards, and other state or federal
regulations.
   (D)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when liquid
wastes contain grease in excessive amounts, or other harmful ingredients,
except that such interceptors shall not be required for single-family or
multiple-family dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the local agency and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors
shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and
extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction,
water-tight, and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted into
place, shall be gas-tight and water-tight.
   (E)   Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.
   (F)   (1)   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes
containing more than 250 mg/l of BOD or 300 mg/l of suspended solids, or
containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in
division (C) above, having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average
daily flow of the local agency, shall be subject to review and approval of the
local agency. Preliminary treatment shall be provided at no expense to the
local agency as may be necessary to reduce the BOD to 250 mg/l and suspended
solids to 300 mg/l, or to reduce objectionable characteristics for constituents
to within the maximum limits provided for in division (C) above, or to control
the quantity and rates of discharges of such waters or wastes. A person may be
required to remove, exclude, or require pretreatment of any industrial waste in
whole or in part for any reasons deemed to be in the interest of the local
agency. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his or her expense. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be
submitted for approval, and no construction of any facility shall be commenced
until said approvals are obtained in writing.
      (2)   The local agency may elect to treat industrial wastes, discharged
in excess of normal domestic concentrations, on a basis prescribed by written
agreement and for an established surcharge to cover the added cost.
   (G)   The owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such
manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the local agency. The manhole
shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained
by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (H)   (1)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which references are made shall be determined in
accordance with standard methods for examination of water and wastewater and
guidelines establishing test procedure for the analysis of pollutants, Federal
Regulation 40 C.F.R. part 136, published in the Federal Register on October 16,
1973, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in division
(G) above, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole.
      (2)   In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
   (I)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement between the local agency and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern, provided that
such agreement shall not violate NPDES requirements and provided that user
charges, surcharges, and industrial cost recovery payments as provided in this
chapter are agreed to in the agreement.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.06 DAMAGING SEWERAGE WORKS.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any sewerage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under a charge of
disorderly conduct.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.07 AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   Duly authorized employees or representatives of the local agency, bearing
proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 50.08 DISCHARGE TO SANITARY OR STORM SEWERS OR RECEIVING STREAMS.
   (A)   Any industry or structure discharging process flow to the sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, or receiving stream shall comply with the provisions of
division (B) below.
   (B)   The local agency may require each person who applies for or receives
sewer service, or who, through the nature of the enterprise, creates a
potential environmental problem, to do the following:
      (1)   File a written statement setting forth the nature of the
enterprise, the source and amount of water used, the amount of water to be
discharged, and the present or expected bacterial, physical, chemical,
radioactive, or other pertinent characteristics of the wastes;
      (2)   Provide a plan map of the building, works, or complex, with each
outfall to surface waters, a sanitary sewer, a storm sewer, a natural
watercourse, or ground waters noted and described and the waste stream
identified;
      (3)   Make sample tests and file reports with the local agency and
appropriate state agencies on appropriate characteristics of wastes on a
schedule, at locations, and according to methods approved by the local agency;
      (4)   Place waste treatment facilities, process facilities, waste
streams, or other potential waste problems under the specific supervision and
control of persons who have been certified by an appropriate state agency as
properly qualified to supervise such facilities;
      (5)   Provide a report on raw materials entering the process or support
systems, intermediate materials, final products, and waste by-products, as
those factors may affect waste control;
      (6)   Maintain records and file reports on the final disposal of specific
liquid, solid, sludge, oil, radioactive material, solvent, or other wastes;
      (7)   Give written notification to the local agency if any industrial
process is to be altered to include a process waste or potential waste, which
shall then be subject to the approval of the local agency;
      (8)   Site development plans must have an on-site storm water management
system that properly lowers peak discharge from a 24-hour ten-year event. All
plans for redevelopment or new construction must include provisions for proper
management of storm water. Unless permitted to discharge into a city storm
sewer or approved detention or retention pond in accordance with city
ordinances, all lots shall retain storm water runoff on-site or detain it so as
to allow discharge at a rate that is equal to or less than what left the site
prior to redevelopment or new construction; and
      (9)   No development shall be permitted which will increase the rate of
runoff discharge from a lot or parcel onto an abutting property including a
surface water body. No land uses shall be permitted which will reduce the level
of service currently being provided by existing storm water management
infrastructure or existing drainage patterns. Direct discharging of untreated
storm water to a water body is prohibited. All storm water management systems
must be properly maintained so as to comply with the requirements of this
section. Each application requiring an on-site storm water management system
must include a maintenance agreement to be reviewed and approved by the city
approving authority. It shall be demonstrated that the person responsible for
the proposed use shall be able to continually provide adequately for the
services and facilities deemed essential to the use under consideration.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019; Ord. passed 9-11-2025)
§ 50.09 CONNECTIONS TO THE SYSTEM.
   (A)   All premises to which services of the system shall be available shall
connect to the system within 90 days after the mailing of a notice to such
premises by the city indicating that such services are available and requiring
that such connection be made. All premises shall be charged a connection fee of
$25 per single-family user equivalent. Said charge shall be payable before
connection.
   (B)   Where a sewer is constructed by a landowner, said landowner shall pay
the cost of construction. Construction shall not be commenced until all
required permits are obtained and all connection charges are paid to the city.
   (C)   The city will be responsible for the operation and maintenance of all
sewer mains. All lateral connections to the city sewer main or any subsequent
problems arising in those laterals will be the responsibility of the property
owner.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 50.10 VIOLATIONS; NOTICE TO CORRECT.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except
§
50.06, shall be served by the local agency with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit (but not
exceeding 60 days) for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall,
within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations.
   (B)   Any person who violates §
50.06 or who fails to comply with the notice provided for in division (A)
above, within the period of time provided for therein, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (C)   In addition to the penalty provided in §
50.99, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the local agency for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by
reason of such violation.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019) Penalty, see §
50.99
FINANCES AND ADMINISTRATION
§ 50.25 INDUSTRIAL SURCHARGES.
   (A)   If the character of the sewage of any manufacturing or industrial
plant or any other building or premises shall be such as to impose any
unreasonable burden upon the sewers of the system or upon the sewage treatment
plant in excess of a maximum limit prescribed in this chapter, then an
additional charge shall be made over and above the regular rates, or the local
agency shall require that such sewage be treated by the person responsible
therefor before being emptied into the sewer, or the right to empty such sewage
shall be denied, if necessary, to protect the system or any part thereof.
Surcharges required shall be computed as the prorated share of the annual costs
of operation and maintenance, including replacement, attributable to treating a
substance, multiplied by the ratio of the weight of surchargeable excess of the
discharged substance to the total weight of such substance that is treated in
that year. This amount shall be collected on the basis of estimated
surchargeable amounts with each billing and shall be adjusted annually to
reflect actual operation, maintenance, and replacement costs. If any premises
connected to the system discharge a large portion of total water used into the
storm sewer and not into the sanitary sewer, all such discharges shall comply
with the requirements of state and federal agencies.
   (B)   Any wastewater discharged into the sewer system having a substance in
excess of the limits prescribed in §
50.05 shall be permitted only if provided for in a special agreement with the
industrial concern discharging the wastewater, and then only if such agreement
provides for the payment by the industrial concern for the full cost of
treating such excess constituents in the wastewater.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 50.26 INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.
   (A)   Project No. C-262310 is defined as a separate and distinct
construction project for the construction of the treatment works which was
sponsored by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of
the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. and granted through the
city. This project does not include past or future construction, equipment, or
other services not included under the specific project number and the approved
plans, specifications, and approved change orders for the project.
   (B)   In order to comply with the special grant conditions under the Clean
Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., which require the grantee to
recover from industrial users of the waste treatment facilities that portion of
the grant amount allocable to the treatment of industrial wastes, the local
agency will collect all required industrial cost revenue charges and remit the
same in accordance with federal requirements of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency as prescribed in this chapter.
   (C)   Recovered amounts shall be collected each year during the industrial
cost recovery period from each industrial user as defined in §
50.01.
   (D)   An industrial user’s share shall be based on all factors which
significantly influence the cost of the treatment works. Factors such as
strength, volume, and delivery flow rate characteristics shall be considered
and included to insure a proportional distribution of the grant assistance
allocable to industrial use to all industrial users of the treatment works.
   (E)   If there is a substantial change in the strength, volume, or delivery
flow rate characteristics introduced into the treatment works by an industrial
user, such user’s share shall be adjusted accordingly.
   (F)   If there is an expansion or upgrading of the treatment works, each
existing industrial user’s share shall be adjusted accordingly.
   (G)   The industrial user’s share shall include only that portion of the
grant assistance allocable to its use or to capacity firmly committed for its
use.
   (H)   The industrial user’s share shall not include an interest component.
   (I)   Retained amounts shall be monies held from recovered amounts. The
local agency shall retain 50% of the amounts recovered from industrial users.
The remaining 50% of recovered amounts, together with any interest earned
thereon, shall be returned to the U.S. Treasury on an annual basis.
   (J)   (1)   A minimum of 80% of the amounts retained by the local agency,
together with interest earned thereon, shall be used solely for the eligible
costs of the expansion or reconstruction of treatment works associated with the
project.
      (2)   The local agency shall obtain the written approval of the Regional
Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency prior to commitment
of the retained amounts for any expansion and reconstruction.
      (3)   The remaining 20% of the retained amounts may be used as the local
agency sees fit.
   (K)   Pending use, the local agency shall invest the retained amounts for
reconstruction and expansion in either obligations of the U.S. Government or
obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the U.S. Government of
any agency thereof, or shall deposit such amounts in accounts fully
collateralized by obligations of the U.S. Government or by obligations fully
guaranteed as to principal and interest by the U.S. Government or any agency
thereof.
   (L)   All process wastewater with a flow greater than the equivalent of
25,000 gallons per day sanitary flow, from industrial facilities, are subject
to an industrial cost recovery charge. The ICR charge is to be collected with
sewer service billings.
   (M)   In addition, for BOD greater than 250 mg/l, or for suspended solids
greater than 300 mg/l, an additional industrial cost recovery surcharge will be
levied equal to the cost of treatment per pound of BOD in excess of 250 mg/
l and the cost of treatment per pound of suspended solids in excess of 300 mg/
l.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 50.27 RECORDKEEPING.
   (A)   The local agency will maintain and keep proper books of records and
accounts, separate from all other records and accounts, in which shall be made
full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the system. The local
agency will cause an annual audit of such books of record and account for the
preceding operating year to be made by a recognized independent certified
public accountant and will supply such audit report to authorized public
officials on request.
   (B)   In conjunction with the audit, there shall be an annual review of the
sewer charge system to determine whether or not it is sufficient to meet
expected expenditures for the following year.
   (C)   Classification of old and new industrial users shall also be reviewed
annually.
   (D)   The local agency will maintain and carry insurance on all physical
properties of the system, of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by
public utility companies and municipalities engaged in the operation of sewage
disposal systems. All monies received for losses under any such insurance
policies shall be applied solely to the replacement and restoration of the
property damaged or destroyed.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 50.28 AUTHORITY TO OPERATE A WASTEWATER UTILITY.
   It is hereby determined to be desirable and necessary for the public health,
safety, and welfare of the city that its sanitary sewerage system be operated
on a public utility rate basis in accordance with the provisions of Public Act
94 of 1933, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 141.101 through 141.138.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 50.29 FREE SERVICE.
   No free service shall be furnished by the system to any person, public or
private, or to any public agency or instrumentality.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 50.30 LEVELS OF RATES.
   The rates fixed by this chapter are estimated to be sufficient to provide
for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation of the system
and such expenses of maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the
same in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other
expenditures and funds for said system as this chapter may require. Such rates
shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce
these amounts.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 50.31 OPERATING YEAR.
   The system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year commencing on
January 1 and ending on December 31 next following.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 50.32 FINANCIAL HARDSHIP.
   The owner of a single-family residence, which residence has been assessed a
connection charge, may submit a hardship application to the city seeking a
deferment in the partial or total payment of the charges for benefits provided
for in this chapter, based upon a showing of financial hardship, subject to and
in accordance with the following.
   (A)   The owners of the premises shall, under oath, complete a hardship
application provided by Council and file such application, together with all
other information and documentation reasonably required by the city, with the
City Council not less than 60 days prior to the date of the annual installment
due. Any such deferment shall be for that annual installment only. An
application shall be completed and filed by each and every legal and equitable
interest holder in the premises, except financial institutions having security
interests in the premises.
   (B)   Hardship applications shall be reviewed by Council, and, after due
deliberation of the same, Council shall determine, in each case, whether there
has been an adequate showing of financial hardship, and shall forthwith notify
the applicant of said determination.
   (C)   An applicant aggrieved by the determination of Council may request the
opportunity to appear before Council in person for the purpose of showing
hardship and presenting any argument or additional evidence. A denial of
hardship following such a personal appearance before Council shall be final and
conclusive.
   (D)   In the event that Council makes a finding of hardship, Council shall
fix the amount of deferment of partial or total charges so imposed, and in so
doing, shall require an annual filing of financial status by each applicant,
provided that upon a material change of financial status of an applicant, said
applicant shall immediately notify the Clerk of the city so that a further
review of the matter may be made by Council, and provided, further, that the
duration of the deferment granted shall be self-terminating upon the occurrence
of any one of the following events:
      (1)   A change of the applicant’s financial status which removes the
basis for financial hardship;
      (2)   A conveyance of any interest in the premises by any of the
applicants, including the execution of a new security interest in the premises
or extension thereof; and/or
      (3)   A death of any of the applicants.
   (E)   (1)   Upon receiving a determination of Council deferring partial or
total charges imposed, the owners of the premises shall, within one month,
execute a recordable security instrument on the premises to the city, as the
secured party, payable on or before the death of any of the applicants, or, in
any event, upon the sale or transfer of the premises.
      (2)   Said security interest shall be in an amount necessary to cover all
fees and charges required under this chapter, and all costs of installation and
connection, the consideration for said security interest being the grant of
deferment pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
ACCOUNTS, RATES, AND BILLING
§ 50.45 ACCOUNT APPLICATIONS AND DEPOSITS.
   No connection or provision of sewer service shall be made until an applicant
therefor shall complete and sign an application form, which form shall include
an agreement that all charges for services shall be promptly paid when billed.
The application shall contain the name and address of both the consumer of the
service and the owner of the premises to be connected, and such other
information as the City Manager or Council shall require. In addition to
completing an application, the consumer shall make an account deposit as
determined by resolution of the Council. The city may require an increase in
the initial deposit if the account holder develops a record of delinquent
payments after the account has been opened. A new utility account shall not be
opened, nor shall any utility services be provided to a person or other legal
entity, until all prior unpaid utility charges, interest, penalties, and
collection fees owed to the city by that person or legal entity have been paid
in full. The account application shall also state that the applicant consents
to allow access to city meters at reasonable times by city employees for
inspection, maintenance, reading, and calibration.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 50.46 RATES.
   Rates to be charged for sewer service furnished by the system are listed in
the Council approved city fee schedule. These rates are estimated to be
sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and
operation of the system and such expenses of maintenance of the system as are
necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, and to provide
for such other expenditures and funds for said system as this chapter may
require.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 50.47 BILLING.
   Cycle billing shall be made for all consumers of wastewater services. All
water meters shall be read or estimated within two days before or after the
first day of the month, and bills will be generated on a monthly basis
thereafter, payable without penalty before or by the billing statement due date
thereon. Payment received after such period shall be considered delinquent and
bear a penalty as listed in the Council approved city fee schedule.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 50.48 ENFORCEMENT.
   Charges for sewerage service shall constitute a lien on the property or
premises served, and liens for delinquent charges may be recorded against the
property with the office of the county’s Register of Deeds. If payment is not
made within six months of the beginning of the delinquency, the same shall be
certified to Council at the regular November meeting of the Council, and the
amounts so certified and approved by Council shall be spread upon the December
tax roll for collection. This procedure shall not apply if a lease has been
legally executed, containing a provision that the lessor shall not be liable
for payment of water or sewage bills accruing subsequent to the filing of the
written notice and a copy of the signed lease provided by this chapter. A
written notice with respect to the execution of a lease containing this
provision shall be filed with the Board, Commission, or other official in
charge of the water works system or the sewerage system, or both, and 20-day
notice shall be given by the lessor of any cancellation of, change in, or
termination of the lease. The written notice shall contain a notation of the
expiration date of the lease.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 50.49 SHUT-OFF.
   (A)   An account that has not been paid in full by the billing statement due
date shall be considered delinquent and shall have added to it a penalty in the
amount identified in the Council approved city fee schedule. Such charges and
penalties may be recovered by the city by court action. Once the account is
delinquent, the city shall mail a notice of delinquency and shut-off, on a form
approved by Council, to the consumer and to the owner of the premises, as
indicated on the account application, if different from the consumer. The
notice shall indicate that the account is delinquent and that services shall be
terminated as of the date reflected on said notice, unless the delinquent
portion of the account is paid in full. Before the wastewater services are
again turned on after such discontinuance, a reconnection fee established in
the Council-approved city fee schedule shall be paid, and an agreement
acceptable to the city, shall be made to pay the account in full.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
   (B)   (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of non- payment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set
forth on the bill;
         (b)   That, if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second
bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid
within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued
for nonpayment; and
         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to be heard at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been unpaid for at least 30 days.
      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for non- payment of bills, service will be reinstated
only after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with connection
charge in an amount established in our city fee schedule.
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   In addition to the penalty provided in §
10.99, any water meter found to have been tampered with or bypassed, having the
capability of being circumvented or with an illegal cross-connection present,
shall be presumed conclusively to have been in such condition for six months
prior to its discovery by the city. The owner of the premises serviced by a
meter which has been bypassed or circumvented, or having the capability of
being circumvented, shall be assessed and charged an amount double the sewer
usage of any comparable premises in six months. This charge shall be billed
subsequent to discovery of the bypass or circumvention and shall also be
recorded as a lien against the premises and certified and spread on the tax
rolls. For the purpose of this chapter, a comparable premises in the case of a
dwelling house shall be one with an equal number of adults and children, if
said information is available; otherwise the average usage for a similar size
dwelling should be used. For other types of premises, a comparable premises
shall be a similar establishment, i.e. a church, office, store, and the like.
Any residence or structure found in violation of this chapter shall be subject
to immediate utility disconnect and shall not be reconnected to the utility
supply until all bills, penalties, reconnection charges, and deposits have been
paid.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
Water Generally
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Accounts, rates for metered service, and billing
   
51.03   Water rates for unmetered service
   
51.04   Tap-in charges
   
51.05   Charges for thawing freeze-ups and fixing leaks
   
51.06   Installation and use of meters and special pipes
Services and Charges
   
51.20   Turn-off of service for non-use or waste
   
51.21   Turn-off service for delinquency; reconnection fee
   
51.22   Collection of charges
   
51.23   Use of monies collected
   
51.24   Tampering with meters
   
51.25   Right of entry
   
51.26   Separate water meter
Water Supply Cross-Connections
   
51.40   Adoption of rules of the state’s Department of Environmental Quality
   
51.41   Responsibility of Water Division
   
51.42   Right of entry
   
51.43   Discontinuance of service
   
51.44   Testing of backflow prevention assemblies
   
51.45   Protection of water supply
   
51.46   Interpretation
Wells
   
51.55   State and Health Department requirements
   
51.56   Notification of city
   
51.57   Permits
   
51.58   Inspection
   
51.59   Improper construction
   
51.60   Well construction
   
51.61   Relation to public water system
   
51.62   Enforcement
 
   
51.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Water quality, see M.C.L.A. §§ 67.38
   Water supply generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 46.171 et seq., 486.51 et seq.,
486.101 et seq.
   Water supply in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.4b, 117.4e, 117.4f,
117.35
WATER GENERALLY
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FLAT RATE AND UNMETERED SERVICE. The furnishing of water, the amount of
which is not measured.
   METERED SERVICE. The furnishing of water, the amount of which is measured by
city meters used in conjunction therewith on the premises served.
   WATER RATES. Present charges for water, including the supplying and
furnishing thereof and any and all service charges incidental thereto.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 51.02 ACCOUNTS, RATES FOR METERED SERVICE, AND BILLING.
   (A)   Account applications and deposits. No connection or provision of water
service shall be made until an applicant therefor shall complete and sign an
application form, which form shall include an agreement that all charges for
services shall be promptly paid when billed. The application shall contain the
name and address of both the consumer of the service and the owner of the
premises to be connected, and such other information as the City Manager or
Council shall require. In addition to completing an application, the consumer
shall make an account deposit as determined by resolution of the Council. The
city may require an increase in the initial deposit if the account holder
develops a record of delinquent payments after the account has been opened. A
new utility account shall not be opened, nor shall any utility services be
provided to a person or other legal entity, until all prior unpaid utility
charges, interest, penalties, and collection fees owed to the city by that
person or legal entity have been paid in full. The account application shall
also state that the applicant consents to allow access to city meters at
reasonable times by city employees for inspection, maintenance, reading, and
calibration.
   (B)   Rates. Rates to be charged for water furnished by the system are
listed in the Council approved city fee schedule. These rates are estimated to
be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and
operation of the system and such expenses of maintenance of the system as are
necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, and to provide
for such other expenditures and funds for said system as this subchapter may
require.
   (C)   Billing. Cycle billing shall be made for all consumers of water
services. All water meters shall be read or estimated within two days before or
after the first day of the month, and bills will be generated on a monthly
basis thereafter, payable without penalty before or by the billing statement
due date thereon. Payment received after such period shall be considered
delinquent and bears a penalty as listed in the Council approved city fee
schedule.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 51.03 WATER RATES FOR UNMETERED SERVICE.
   (A)   For premises served by the city’s water system, the monthly rates for
unmetered water are listed in the Council approved city fee schedule. The
minimum fixed monthly charge shall be based on the meter size required if the
customer were metered. The estimated quantity of water used shall be based on a
representative average usage of similar metered customers.
   (B)   Bulk water rates for unmetered services are also available through
prior written agreement with the city’s Water Department, and are subject to
the Council approved city fee schedule.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 51.04 TAP-IN CHARGES.
   (A)   For each three-fourth inch tap-in to the water main, the rate payer
shall pay to the city prior to the work being instituted a sum to be
established from time to time by resolution of Council. For said charge, the
city shall provide the water lateral from the main to the shut-off which shall
include the following items: copper tubing, shut-off, corporation stops, curb
box, street and curb restoration, and landscaping as required on city rights-
of-way.
   (B)   For each one-inch tap-in to the water main, the rate payer shall pay
to the city prior to the work being instituted a sum to be established from
time to time by resolution of Council. For said charge, the city shall provide
the water lateral from the main to the shut-off which shall include the
following items: copper tubing, shut-off, corporation stops, curb box, street
and curb restoration, and landscaping as required on city rights-of-way.
   (C)   In case a specially adapted tap in excess of one inch is needed for a
tap-in because of unusual use of the premises, an advance deposit, the amount
of which shall be established from time to time by resolution of Council, will
be required and the customer shall pay the actual cost of the tap-in.
   (D)   For the purposes of this subchapter, the city shall charge a re-
connection fee and a fee for sidewalk restoration. As established from time to
time by resolution of Council, said fees are to be paid in advance by the
property owner. Increases in these fees shall be by Council resolution. Re-
connection fees caused by water main freeze-up and main replacement shall be
waived.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 51.05 CHARGES FOR THAWING FREEZE-UPS AND FIXING LEAKS.
   (A)   All frozen water pipes from the shut-off to private dwellings, and on
or under private property, are not the responsibility of the city, and shall be
remedied privately by the property owner. If the property owner wishes to
retain the city to have the lines on his or her private property thawed, he or
she can arrange to do so, but the owner agrees to hold the city harmless and
expressly waives any liability of the city arising from any city thawing work.
Due to the potential hazard, no thawing services will be done after 8:00 p.m.
or before 7:00 a.m. The first thaw of frozen pipes by the city shall be at no
charge to the property owner. Subsequent thaws by the city shall be charged to
the owner pursuant to the Council approved city fee schedule. Failure to pay
charges pursuant to this subchapter shall be grounds for discontinuing service.
   (B)   All leaks and damage to mains and laterals under the street and up to
the shut-off shall be repaired at the city’s expense. But leaks and repairs
necessary from the shut-off to private dwellings, and on or under private
property, shall not be repaired or remedied by the city, but shall be remedied
privately by the property owner.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 51.06 INSTALLATION AND USE OF METERS AND SPECIAL PIPES.
   (A)   All meters of a size over one inch shall be furnished by the city, but
the person requesting said meter shall be charged the cost thereof.
   (B)   All meters of a size of three-fourth inch or less shall be installed
free of charge by the city.
   (C)   All special pipes or connections and all pipes over one inch shall be
charged to the person requesting the same.
   (D)   In the event that a water meter recording device is defective for any
reason and fails to record the water passing through the meter for any given
period of time, the city shall estimate the amount of water consumed during the
inoperable period of time. The estimate shall be reasonable and based on the
past record of consumption as shown on the city records. The city shall charge
a meter testing fee as established from time to time by resolution of Council,
to be paid in advance by the customer. If the meter is found to be defective,
it shall be repaired and the meter testing fee returned to the customer.
Council may adjust the meter testing fee from time to time by resolution.
   (E)   If a resident is permitted to allow his or her water to run in order
to prevent the water line from freezing, the procedure to be followed shall be
as adopted by Council in its Let Run Policy. Said policy may be amended from
time to time by Council resolution. Water shall not be permitted to run to
prevent freezing without first contacting the city for written permission.
   (F)   Water meters shall be installed upon any premises supplied with water
by the city, except as the Council shall by resolution provide. Water meters
shall remain the property of the city. The cost of repair or replacement of any
water meter that is damaged, except for damage resulting from normal wear and
tear, shall be assessed to the occupant or owner of the premises.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
SERVICES AND CHARGES
§ 51.20 TURN-OFF OF SERVICE FOR NON-USE OR WASTE.
   Pursuant to the city’s requirements to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the community, the city shall have the right to turn-off the city
connection from the main to any premises where it is apparent that the water is
not being used, or that the water is being turned-on and wasted for no proper
useful purpose.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 51.21 TURN-OFF SERVICE FOR DELINQUENCY; RECONNECTION FEE.
   (A)   An account that has not been paid in full by the billing statement due
date shall be considered delinquent and shall have added to it a penalty in the
amount identified in the Council approved city fee schedule. Such charges and
penalties may be recovered by the city by court action. Once the account is
delinquent, the city shall mail a notice of delinquency and disconnection, on a
form approved by Council, to the consumer and to the owner of the premises, as
indicated on the account application, if different from the consumer. The
notice shall indicate that the account is delinquent and that services shall be
terminated as of the date reflected on said notice, unless the delinquent
portion of the account is paid in full. Before the water is again turned-on
after such discontinuance, a reconnection fee established in the Council
approved city fee schedule shall be paid, and an agreement acceptable to the
city shall be made to pay the account in full. Turn-off and reconnection fees
may be subject to federal and state guidelines as to qualifying customers for
assistance or payment arrangements.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
   (B)   (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of non- payment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set
forth on the bill;
         (b)   That, if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second
bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid
within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued
for nonpayment; and
         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to be heard at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been unpaid for at least 30 days.
      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for non- payment of bills, service will be reinstated
only after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a
connection charge in an amount established in our city fee schedule.
§ 51.22 COLLECTION OF CHARGES.
   Charges for water service shall constitute a lien on the property or
premises served, and liens for delinquent charges may be recorded against the
property with the county’s Register of Deeds. If payment is not made within six
months of the beginning of the delinquency, the same shall be certified to
Council at the regular November meeting of the Council and the amounts so
certified and approved by Council shall be spread upon the December tax roll
for collection. This procedure shall not apply if a lease has been legally
executed, containing a provision that the lessor shall not be liable for
payment of water or sewage bills accruing subsequent to the filing of the
written notice and a copy of the signed lease provided by this subchapter. A
written notice with respect to the execution of a lease containing this
provision shall be filed with the Board, Commission, or other official in
charge of the water works system or the sewerage system, or both, and 20-day
notice shall be given by the lessor of any cancellation, change in, or
termination of the lease. The written notice shall contain a notation of the
expiration date of the lease.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 51.23 USE OF MONIES COLLECTED.
   (A)   All monies collected from water rates shall be allocated to the
following funds and uses:
      (1)   The cost of operation of the water system;
      (2)   Reserve for depreciation; and
      (3)   Capital improvements.
   (B)   It is the policy of the city that the Water Division shall be self-
supporting or as nearly as may be possible.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 51.24 TAMPERING WITH METERS.
   (A)   No person shall remove, circumvent, bypass, tamper with, or interfere
with the installation, use, operation, or maintenance of a water meter in the
city, nor shall any premises have a water outlet on the waterline between the
curb stop and the water meter.
   (B)   Whoever violates this subchapter is liable for a civil infraction.
   (C)   Service to any premises shall be immediately disconnected if any meter
is found bypassed, tampered with, or illegally connected, and shall not be
reconnected until a correct meter and connection is installed and all past due
charges, penalties, reconnection fees, and deposits are paid in full.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.25 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   A representative of the city’s Water Division shall have the right to enter,
at reasonable times, any premises served by city sewer or water service for the
purpose of inspecting, maintaining, reading, replacing, or calibrating the
meter and piping systems. If the owner or occupant of the premises refuses
entry, he or she shall then be given written notice (notice to one constitutes
notice to both) that water service shall be shut-off and discontinued if entry
is not permitted within 24 hours of personal service of the notice on the owner
or occupant, shall remain shut-off during the period of such refusal and shall
not be re-established until entry is permitted and all charges, penalties, and
reconnection fees are paid in full.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
§ 51.26 SEPARATE WATER METER.
   (A)   Any person may request that the city’s Water Utility furnish a
separate water meter to be attached to the hose bib or water faucet outside the
person’s home or business. The purpose of such meter shall be to measure water
used for such outdoor purposes as washing cars, watering lawns, and other
similar uses, where the water used will not be entering the public sanitary
sewer system.
   (B)   The only separate water meter permitted to be used shall be a new
meter with vacuum breakers originally furnished by the city. In all cases, a
person requesting permission to use such a meter shall secure approval from the
City Manager or designee, install a vacuum breaker on all hose bibs that the
new meter is connected to, and have such meter and installation inspected by
the city’s Water Utility prior to use.
   (C)   The fee for the purchase and inspection of a new meter and vacuum
breakers shall be stated in the Council approved city schedule.
   (D)   The meter shall be the property of the premises owner or person
purchasing the meter and the city shall not be responsible for any repair or
maintenance of the meter.
   (E)   A meter owner may request that the city test the meter. The charge for
summer meter testing shall be the same as the fee for testing of regular water
meters as set forth in the Council approved city fee schedule.
   (F)   Such separate meter may only be used to record water consumption
through the approved connections where installed during the months of April
through November each year. The separate meter shall be removed by the premises
owner or person purchasing the meter during the months of December through
March of each year and shall not be used during said period. It shall be the
premises owner’s responsibility to remove the meter to prevent it from freezing
and to re-install it each year in time for the city to conduct any required
inspections.
   (G)   Water consumption recorded by the separate meter shall be billed by
inclusion in the normal monthly water/sewer bill to the premises, except that
there shall be subtracted from the overall bill that portion of the regular
sewer charge attributable to the flow through the separate meter.
   (H)   If any such separate water meter shall become defective, it shall be
the responsibility of the premises owner to have the meter repaired or
replaced. Any and all readings from a defective meter shall result in the
premises owner being billed for both water and sewer consumption, without
credit for that portion of the sewer charge attributable to the flow through
the separate meter.
(Ord. passed 3-13-2003)
WATER SUPPLY CROSS-CONNECTIONS
§ 51.40 ADOPTION OF RULES OF THE STATE’S DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY.
   The city adopts by reference the water supply cross-connection rules of the
state’s Department of Environmental Quality, being R 325.11401 to R 325.11407
of the state’s Administrative Code.
(Ord. passed 7-18-2013)
§ 51.41 RESPONSIBILITY OF WATER DIVISION.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the city’s Water Division to cause inspections
to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross-
connection with the public water supply is deemed possible.
   (B)   The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential
health hazards involved shall be as established by the city’s Water Division
and as approved by the state’s Department of Environmental Quality.
(Ord. passed 7-18-2013)
§ 51.42 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   The representative of the city’s Water Division shall have the right
to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the
public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping
system or systems thereof for cross-connections.
   (B)   On request, the owner, lessees, or occupants of any property so served
shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the
piping system or systems on such property.
   (C)   The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested,
shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connection.
(Ord. passed 7-18-2013)
§ 51.43 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   The city’s Water Division is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue
water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in
violation of this subchapter exists and to take such other precautionary
measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the
public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be
restored until the cross- connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with
the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 7-18-2013) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.44 TESTING OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES.
   All testable backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested initially upon
installation to be sure that the assembly is working properly. Subsequent
testing of assemblies shall be on an annual basis as required by the city and
in accordance with the state’s Department of Environmental Quality
requirements. Only individuals that are approved by the city and state
certified shall be qualified to perform such testing. The individuals shall
certify the results of his or her testing.
(Ord. passed 7-18-2013)
§ 51.45 PROTECTION OF WATER SUPPLY.
   The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the
public water supply be protected from possible contamination as specified by
this subchapter and by the state’s and county’s Plumbing Code. Any water outlet
which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied
by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as:
 

WATER UNSAFE
FOR DRINKING.
 
(Ord. passed 7-18-2013)
§ 51.46 INTERPRETATION.
   This subchapter does not supersede the state’s Plumbing Code and the
county’s Plumbing Code, but is supplementary to them.
(Ord. passed 7-18-2013)
WELLS
§ 51.55 STATE AND HEALTH DEPARTMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   All new wells, if approved by the Planning Commission or the Zoning
Administrator, must be constructed in accordance with state and Health
Department requirements.
(Ord. passed 3-9-2023)
§ 51.56 NOTIFICATION OF CITY.
   Any property owner that currently has a well must notify the city by
December 31, 2023.
(Ord. passed 3-9-2023)
§ 51.57 PERMITS.
   All existing wells with a permit must provide the city with the proper
approved permit documentation by December 31, 2023.
(Ord. passed 3-9-2023)
§ 51.58 INSPECTION.
   All existing wells without a permit must have verification that they have
been properly constructed, including local Health Department inspection and
approval by December 31, 2023.
(Ord. passed 3-9-2023)
§ 51.59 IMPROPER CONSTRUCTION.
   If a well is deemed improperly constructed, it must be capped and abandoned
in accordance with state and Health Department guidelines.
(Ord. passed 3-9-2023)
§ 51.60 WELL CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Well drilling, construction and installation shall only be performed
by State of Michigan registered well drillers.
   (B)   Well construction shall be completed in accordance with Part 127 of
Act 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended, and the rules and regulations
issued thereunder.
   (C)   Well construction shall include fully grouting the entire length of
the well casing in accordance with Part 127 of Act 368 of the Public Acts of
1978, as amended, and the rules and regulations issued thereunder.
(Ord. passed 3-9-2023)
§ 51.61 RELATION TO PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   No well, spring, or other water supply shall be permitted for
residential, commercial or industrial usage when property is adjacent to the
public water system.
   (B)   Exclusions are available for vegetative growth water usage as approved
by the Planning and Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission; however the
well must comply with all Health Department regulations.
(Ord. passed 3-9-2023)
§ 51.62 ENFORCEMENT.
   Failure to comply with this subchapter will result in a fine of $100 per
well per month.
(Ord. passed 3-9-2023)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions
of this chapter or any written order of the city, in pursuance thereof, shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each violation. Each day
upon which a violation of the provision of the Act shall occur shall be deemed
a separate and additional violation for the purpose of this chapter.
   (B)   In addition to the penalty provided in §
10.99, any water meter found to have been tampered with or bypassed, having the
capability of being circumvented, or with an illegal cross-connection present,
shall be presumed conclusively to have been in such condition for six months
prior to its discovery by the city. The owner of the premises serviced by a
meter which has been bypassed or circumvented, or having the capability of
being circumvented, shall be assessed and charged an amount double the water
usage of a comparable premises in six months. This charge shall be billed
subsequent to discovery of the bypass or circumvention and shall also be
recorded as a lien against the premises and certified and spread on the tax
rolls. For the purposes of this chapter, a comparable premises in case of a
dwelling house shall be one with an equal number of adults and children, if
said information is available; otherwise the average usage for a similar size
dwelling should be used. For other types of premises, a comparable premises
shall be a similar establishment, i.e. a church, office, store, and the like.
Any residence or structure found in violation of this chapter shall be subject
to immediate utility disconnect and shall not be reconnected to the utility
supply until all bills, penalties, reconnection charges, and deposits have been
paid.
   (C)   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
municipal civil infraction. A person, firm, or corporation determined to be
responsible or responsible “with explanation” for a municipal civil infraction
shall be subject to a civil fine of not more than $100, plus costs, and if
applicable, damages and expenses as provided by law. A municipal civil
infraction action brought for any violation of this chapter shall follow
procedures set forth in Public Act 12 of 1994, as amended, and a defendant
charged with a municipal civil infraction violation shall have all of the
rights, duties, responsibilities, and obligations set forth therein.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person having a separate meter to suffer,
allow, or permit any of the water passing through such meter to be used in any
fashion whereby the water will be introduced into the sanitary sewer system of
the city.
(Ord. passed 3-13-2003; Ord. passed 7-18-2013; Ord. passed 4-11-2019)
CHAPTER 52: ELECTRICITY
Section
Sales; Rates and Charges
   
52.01   Sale and distribution by city; compliance
   
52.02   Application for service
   
52.03   Continuation of service
   
52.04   Location and ownership of meters
   
52.05   Cycle billing
   
52.06   Default in payment
   
52.07   Connection of meter required; deposit; charges
   
52.08   Reconnection of meters
Enforcement
   
52.20   Hardship cases
   
52.21   Collection of charges
   
52.22   Delinquent former consumers
   
52.23   Reports to Council
   
52.24   Claims against decedents’ and bankrupt consumers’ estates
   
52.25   Theft of service
   
52.26   Tampering with meters or lines
System
   
52.40   Repairs and alterations to system
   
52.41   Preparation and approval of rules and regulations
   
52.42   Right of entry
   
52.43   Prohibitions regarding bid demand response
   
52.44   Customer-owned distributed generation facilities
   
52.45   Overbilling and underbilling
   
52.46   Temporary service
 
   
52.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Electrical Code in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.3, 117.4b et seq.,
117.4f
SALES; RATES AND CHARGES
§ 52.01 SALE AND DISTRIBUTION BY CITY; COMPLIANCE.
   All electricity sold and distributed by the city to consumers, other than
the city and its agencies, shall be governed by, and be subject to, the
provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations concerning the use of
electricity as may from time to time be adopted and approved by Council.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
§ 52.02 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   No connection or provision of electric current shall be made until an
applicant therefor shall complete and sign an application form, which form
shall include an agreement that all charges for electrical service shall be
promptly paid when billed. The application shall contain the name and address
of both the consumer of the electricity and the owner of the premises to be
connected, and such other information as the City Manager or Council shall
require. In addition to completing an application, the consumer shall make an
account deposit as listed in the Council approved city fee schedule. The
account application shall also state that the applicant consents to allow
access to city meters at reasonable times by city employees for inspection,
maintenance, or calibration. The city may require increases in the initial
deposit if the account holder develops a record of delinquent payments after
the account has been opened.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
§ 52.03 CONTINUATION OF SERVICE.
   Service to a consumer shall be continuous as long as such consumer is in
good standing.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
§ 52.04 LOCATION AND OWNERSHIP OF METERS.
   All meters hereafter installed for measuring the consumption of electricity
shall be placed on the outside of the premises and shall remain the property of
the city.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
§ 52.05 CYCLE BILLING.
   Cycle billing shall be made for all consumers of electricity. All
electricity meters shall be read or estimated within two days before or after
the first day of the month. Once each month, the city shall mail to each
electrical consumer a statement of charges for electrical services for the
preceding month, any and all overdue charges and any and all other unpaid
charges, penalties, or assessments. All such amounts billed shall be paid by
the consumer within 30 days after the date the statement was mailed.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
§ 52.06 DEFAULT IN PAYMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Every account that has not been paid in full within 30 days
after the statement referred to in §
52.05 is mailed shall be considered delinquent and shall have added to it a
penalty as listed in the Council approved city fee schedule.
      (2)   After the account has been delinquent for 15 days, the city shall
mail a notice of delinquency and disconnection, on a form approved by Council,
to the consumer and to the owner of the premises, as indicated on the account
application, if different from the consumer.
      (3)   The notice shall indicate that the account is delinquent and that
services shall be terminated on the fifteenth day after mailing of the notice
of delinquency and disconnection, unless the account is paid in full.
      (4)   Once electrical service has been terminated for non-payment of an
account, the entire account must be paid in full before service will be
reconnected.
      (5)   No connection shall be made nor any electrical services supplied to
any consumer who owes the city on an account for a previous connection.
   (B)   (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of non- payment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set
forth on the bill;
         (b)   That, if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second
bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid
within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued
for nonpayment; and
         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to be heard at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been unpaid for at least 30 days.
      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for non- payment of bills, service will be reinstated
only after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a
connection charge in an amount established in our city fee schedule.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
§ 52.07 CONNECTION OF METER REQUIRED; DEPOSIT; CHARGES.
   (A)   No electricity shall be furnished to a new consumer until the meter
has been connected.
   (B)   (1)   A deposit as listed in the approved city fee schedule is
required from the applicant before electric service connection.
      (2)   All applicable rates, charges, and fees listed in the Council
approved city fee schedule will be applied to a consumer once service is
connected.
   (C)   (1)   In the event that the city disconnects any consumer for failure
to pay his or her electric bill, the disconnection shall terminate the pre-
existing consumer-city relationship.
      (2)   In the event that the person whose service has been disconnected
desires to purchase electricity again from the city, he or she shall be treated
as a new consumer and subject to all of the applicable rates, fees, charges,
and deposits as listed in the Council approved city fee schedule.
   (D)   For any service after regular working hours, the charges will be based
on the time and materials required by the utility personnel to perform the
service requested.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
§ 52.08 RECONNECTION OF METERS.
   Where a meter has been disconnected for any reason, the consumer who desires
the meter to be reconnected shall first comply with all of the requirements of
this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 52.20 HARDSHIP CASES.
   If any consumer claims that because of hardship he or she is unable to pay
electricity charges as billed, said consumer shall apply for relief from the
proper agency and the city shall receive payment from said agency. No
electricity shall be furnished to any person free of charge.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
§ 52.21 COLLECTION OF CHARGES.
   Charges for electrical service shall constitute a lien on the property or
premises served, and liens for delinquent charges may be recorded against the
property with the office of the county’s Register of Deeds. Those charges
delinquent for six months or more shall be certified to Council at the regular
November meeting of Council, and the lien on the premises served shall be
entered on the tax roll. Those amounts so certified as delinquent and approved
by Council shall be spread upon the December tax roll for collection. In a case
where a tenant is responsible for the payment of the charges and Council is so
notified in writing, which notification shall include a true copy of the lease
of the affected premises, such charges shall not become a lien against the
premises after the date of notification. In the event of filing of the
notification, the city shall render no further electrical service to the
premises until a cash deposit in a sum fixed pursuant to this chapter is made.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
§ 52.22 DELINQUENT FORMER CONSUMERS.
   Where a former consumer, who is delinquent in his or her payment of charges
to the city, is no longer an electric utility consumer, an earnest effort shall
be made, as soon as practical, to collect the delinquency.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
§ 52.23 REPORTS TO COUNCIL.
   The City Treasurer shall report to Council not less than annually as to the
status of individual delinquent accounts, showing the last date electricity was
furnished, the last date of payment, and the amount currently due. He or she
shall also report such information as he or she has concerning residence,
employment, and other pertinent data.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
§ 52.24 CLAIMS AGAINST DECEDENTS’ AND BANKRUPT CONSUMERS’ ESTATES.
   Claims for unpaid electricity charges shall be promptly filed against any
decedent or bankrupt consumer’s estate.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
§ 52.25 THEFT OF SERVICE.
   All electricity consumed shall pass through a meter furnished by the city.
If any device is attached in such a way as to permit the consumer to receive
electricity without passing through the meter, the device shall promptly be
confiscated. An effort shall be made as soon as practical to determine the
amount of electricity wrongfully taken and the consumer shall be charged
therefor. Whoever violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.26 TAMPERING WITH METERS OR LINES.
   (A)   No person shall remove, circumvent, bypass, tamper with, or interfere
with the installation, use, operation, or maintenance of an electric meter in
the city, nor shall any premises have an outlet, device, or any other
connection on the conductor between the distribution line and the electric
meter enabling electric current to service the premises without passing through
the meter.
   (B)   Whoever violates this chapter is liable for a civil infraction.
   (C)   Service to any premises shall be immediately disconnected if any meter
is found bypassed, tampered with, or illegally connected, and shall not be
reconnected until a correct meter and connection is installed and all past due
charges, penalties, reconnection fees, and deposits are paid in full.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019) Penalty, see §
52.99
SYSTEM
§ 52.40 REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS TO SYSTEM.
   No person shall make any attachment or connection to the distribution system
or make any repairs, additions to, or alterations of any fixtures connected
with the system, unless the same are in accordance with the National Electrical
Code, with this chapter, and with the rules and regulations provided for
herein. The city reserves the right to refuse service on proof of disregard of
such safety regulations. All work performed and additions made shall be subject
to inspection by duly authorized agents of the city.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.41 PREPARATION AND APPROVAL OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Manager shall prepare, for approval by Council, rules and
regulations for the Administration of the Electric Utility. Said rules and
regulations shall establish all charges and procedures incident thereto,
including service charges, deposits, and rates.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
§ 52.42 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   A representative of the city’s Electricity Division shall have the right to
enter, at reasonable times, any premises served by city electrical service for
the purpose of inspecting, maintaining, reading, replacing, or calibrating the
meter. If the owner or occupant of the premises refuses entry, he or she shall
be given written notice (notice to one constitutes notice to both) that
electrical service shall be shut- off and discontinued if entry is not
permitted within 24 hours of personal service of the notice on the owner or
occupant, shall remain shut-off during the period of such refusal, and shall
not be re-established until entry is permitted and all charges, penalties, and
reconnection fees are paid in full.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
§ 52.43 PROHIBITIONS REGARDING BID DEMAND RESPONSE.
   (A)   WPPI Energy, as the city’s authorized designee, is the sole entity
permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served by the
city directly into any Federal Energy Regulatory Commission-approved
independent system operator’s or Regional Transmission Organization’s organized
electric markets.
   (B)   Retail customers served by the city wishing to bid their demand
response into a Federal Energy Regulatory Commission-approved independent
system operator’s or Regional Transmission Organization’s organized electric
markets may do so by participating in the program established by the city or
its authorized designee. Retail customers are not permitted to participate in
the demand response program of any other entity without the express prior
authorization of the city.
   (C)   WPPI Energy, as the city’s authorized designee, is the sole entity
permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served by the
city directly into any Federal Energy Regulatory Commission-approved
independent system operator’s or Regional Transmission Organization’s organized
markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves,
reactive power, and voltage control, or regulation and frequency response
ancillary services (or its functional equivalent in the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission-approved independent system operator’s or Regional
Transmission Organization’s tariff).
   (D)   Retail customers served by the city wishing to bid their demand
response into a Federal Energy Regulatory Commission-approved independent
system operator’s or Regional Transmission Organization’s organized markets for
energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power, and
voltage control, or regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or
its functional equivalent in the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission-approved
independent system operator’s or Regional Transmission Organization’s tariff)
may do so by participating in the program established by the city or its
authorized designee. Retail customers are not permitted to participate in the
demand response program of any other entity without the express prior
authorization of the city.
(Ord. passed 5-14-2009)
§ 52.44 CUSTOMER-OWNED DISTRIBUTED GENERATION FACILITIES.
   (A)   Requirements. In order to provide for the safety of customers, Utility
personnel, and others, and to assure reliable electric service consistent with
the requirements of the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978, being
16 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., the following requirements are established for the
interconnection and operation of customer-owned Distributed Generation (DG)
Facilities in parallel with the city’s Electric Utility (Utility) Distribution
System:
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AVOIDED COST RATE. The cost of the power, as set by the Utility’s
wholesale power supplier, that is not purchased by the Utility when a DG
facility delivers excess power to the Distribution System.
      CUSTOMER. Any account of the Utility in good standing and receiving
retail electric power service from the Utility’s Distribution System.
      DISTRIBUTED GENERATION (DG) FACILITY. The customer’s device(s) for the
conversion of energy to electricity, as identified in the interconnection
application.
      DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. The facilities and equipment owned by Utility and
used to deliver electricity to homes and industries.
      INTERCONNECTION APPLICATION. A customer’s formal request to interconnect
a new DG facility to the Utility’s Distribution System, or make a material
modification to the operating characteristics of an existing DG facility that
is interconnected to the Utility’s Distribution System.
      RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES. Any naturally occurring and theoretically
inexhaustible source of energy, including biomass, solar, wind, tidal wave, and
water current (e.g., run-of-river hydroelectric) resources, that are not
derived from fossil or nuclear fuel.
   (C)   Availability and participation requirements. The requirements in this
chapter apply to all customer-owned DG Facilities. Any customer may make a
request to interconnect a DG facility by completing the Utility’s
interconnection application and submitting it to the Utility for review with
all applicable charges as established by resolution of Council. Once the
Utility has determined that the DG facility complies with all applicable safety
and reliability standards, including but not limited to this chapter, ANSI/IEEE
Std. 1547, UL 1741, National Electrical Code, and the state’s Electrical Code,
the customer and the Utility shall execute a DG interconnection agreement.
Proposed DG Facilities will be handled on a case-by-case basis at the
discretion of the Utility and will be subject to a review process that may take
into account the impact of the interconnection on reliability, rates, power
supply agreements, and local and regional system planning. DG Facilities must
be interconnected on the customer side of the Utility’s metering, serving only
the customer’s premises, and must be intended to offset a portion or all of the
customer’s requirements for electricity. If the customer does not meet all of
the requirements listed in this chapter, the Utility may terminate parallel
operation of the DG facility and the customer shall be liable for any damages
or injury resulting from unauthorized or improper interconnection and/or
operation of the DG facility. These requirements apply to both existing and
proposed installations. The customer shall be responsible for procuring and
complying with all building, electrical, operating, and environmental permits
that are required by any governmental authority having jurisdiction for the
type of DG facility and for the necessary ancillary structures to be installed.
The DG facility is subject to inspection by duly authorized agents of the city
before commencement of parallel operation. In addition, the Utility may, at its
discretion, inspect or test the facility at any time. The customer shall pay
for all costs associated with any addition to, or alteration of, the Utility’s
equipment for the safe and reliable operation of the customer’s generating
equipment in parallel with the Utility’s Distribution System. The customer
shall also pay for costs of changes required due to safety or adverse effects
on other customers and/or on the Utility caused by the interconnection and/or
operation of the DG facility.
   (D)   Safety and reliability requirements. The DG facility’s Control and
Protection System shall provide for immediate automatic shutdown or separation
of the customer’s generator and the Utility System in the event of momentary or
extended loss of power from the Utility, including loss of one or more phases
if the customer is generating three phase power. The shutdown or separation
must continue until normal Utility service is restored. The shutdown or
separation shall occur when frequency, voltage, and/or current deviate from
normal Utility standards. The customer shall be liable if the customer’s
protection system fails to function. A safety disconnect device suitable for
use as a protective tag location may be required so as to be accessible,
visible, and in reasonably close proximity to the billing meter. The customer
shall advise the Utility prior to making any revisions to the DG facility, the
control system, or the interface between the two power systems after the
installation. Any such revision must be acceptable to the Utility.
   (E)   Net energy billing. Net energy billing is available only to customers
who operate DG Facilities using renewable energy sources with a nameplate
capacity of 20 kWAc or less, and are interconnected with the Utility’s
Distribution System, to generate a portion or all of the customer’s own
electricity. DG Facilities using non-renewable energy sources are not eligible
for credit of excess generation. The customer’s net energy consumption shall be
determined by a single meter installed by the Utility measuring delivered and
received power flow. When a customer’s monthly net energy consumption results
in a net flow of energy from the Utility to the customer, the customer shall
pay the full retail rate as listed in the Council approved city fee schedule.
When the customer’s monthly net energy consumption results in a net flow of
energy from the customer to the Utility, the customer shall be credited the net
energy billing avoided cost rate for the energy provided to the Utility as
listed in the Council approved city fee schedule. Net energy billing will be
done on a monthly basis. The credit for any excess generation, as determined by
each month’s meter reading, shall be credited against the following month’s
bill. Any credit carried forward to the following month that is not used up
that month shall be carried forward for use in subsequent billing periods. If a
customer terminates service with the Utility while having a net energy billing
credit amount on their account, the Utility shall refund the remaining credit
amount to the customer following a final meter reading by the Utility.
Customers shall be eligible to continue participation in net energy billing for
a minimum period of ten years under the terms of net energy billing in effect
at the time of enrollment. A participating customer may terminate net energy
billing at any time for any reason.
   (F)   Utility purchase of excess DG facility output. An excess DG facility
output avoided cost rate will be applied to customers who operate DG facilities
with a nameplate capacity greater than 20 IcWac using renewable energy sources,
and are interconnected with the Utility’s Distribution System, to generate a
portion or all of the customer’s own electricity. DG Facilities using non-
renewable energy sources are not eligible for credit of excess generation. The
customer’s energy consumption and production shall be determined by a single
meter installed by Utility measuring power flow in each direction. The customer
shall pay the full retail rate as listed in the Council approved city fee
schedule for all energy that flows from the Utility to the customer. The
customer shall be credited at the Utility’s excess DG facility output avoided
cost rate for excess energy that flows from the customer to the Utility as
listed in the Council approved fee schedule. Excess DG facility output billing
will be done on a monthly basis.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
§ 52.45 OVERBILLING AND UNDERBILLING.
   (A)   In the event the Utility becomes aware of an overbilling of a
customer, the Utility shall promptly correct the billing error and notify the
customer of the circumstances surrounding the overbilling. The Utility shall
then determine the time period during which the overbilling occurred. Once the
Utility has determined the period of overbilling, the Utility shall calculate
the amount that it has overbilled the customer. The Utility shall then make a
refund to the customer of the amount of the overbilling for a time period not
to exceed three months from the date the overbilling was discovered.
   (B)   In the event the Utility becomes aware of an underbilling of a
customer, the Utility shall promptly correct the billing error and notify the
customer of the circumstances surrounding the underbilling. The Utility shall
then determine the time period during which the underbilling occurred. Once the
Utility has determined the period of underbilling, the Utility shall calculate
the amount that it has underbilled the customer. The Utility has the option to
back bill the customer for the amount of the underbilling for a time period not
to exceed three months from the date the underbilling was discovered.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
§ 52.46 TEMPORARY SERVICE.
   (A)   The customer will pay fees and/or agree to reimburse the Utility for
its expenditures as listed in the Council approved city fee schedule.
   (B)   Temporary service shall be given to a customer connection only after
being inspected and approved by duly authorized agents of the city. The post
supporting the unit shall be located as near as possible to the location of
permanent service to the building. Abnormal conditions involving compliance
with the foregoing provision will be cleared with the Utility and permission
granted by the Utility prior to locating the customer connection.
   (C)   All temporary service shall be maintained in a safe manner in order to
keep the Utility harmless from injury to persons or property. The service shall
remain temporary only for a reasonable time and must be made permanent when the
Utility directs such action.
   (D)   Should the customer elect to receive permanent service, installation
charges as listed in the Council approved city fee schedule will be made to
such consumer. Credit shall be given for the payment already made for that
portion of the temporary service facilities which can be used for permanent
service without modification.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   In addition to the penalty provided in §
10.99, any electric meter found to have been tampered with or bypassed, having
the capability of being circumvented, or with an illegal connection present,
shall be presumed conclusively to have been in such condition for six months
prior to its discovery by the city. The owner of the premises serviced by a
meter which has been bypassed or circumvented, or having the capability of
being circumvented, shall be assessed and charged an amount double the electric
usage of any comparable premises in six months. This charge shall be billed
subsequent to discovery of the bypass or circumvention and shall also be
recorded as a lien against the premises and certified and spread on the tax
rolls. For the purposes of this chapter, a comparable premises in the case of a
dwelling house shall be one with an equal number of adults and children, if
said information is available; otherwise the average usage for a similar size
dwelling should be used. For other types of premises, a comparable premises
shall be a similar establishment, i.e. a church, office, store, and the like.
Any residence or structure found in violation of this chapter shall be subject
to immediate utility disconnect and shall not be reconnected to the utility
supply until all bills, penalties, reconnection charges, and deposits have been
paid.
(Ord. passed 1-10-2019)
CHAPTER 53: GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
Section
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Collections and disposal by city or contractor
   
53.03   Interpretation; purpose; promulgation of rules
   
53.04   Pre-collection practices
   
53.05   Collection practices
   
53.06   Collection and disposal of yard waste
   
53.07   Collection fees
   
53.08   Payment of collection fees
   
53.09   Other rates and charges
Statutory reference:
   Garbage and refuse generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 46.171 et seq., 123.361 et
seq.
   Municipal authority, see M.C.L.A. §§ 123.301 et seq.
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASHES. The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or other
combustible materials.
   BUILDING MATERIALS. All material resulting from the razing, repair,
excavation, or construction of buildings or structures, including, but not
limited to, lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials,
electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar,
concrete or cement, nails, screws, or any other materials used in the
construction of a structure.
   CITY. The City of Negaunee.
   CONTAINER. A can, bag, or other receptacle made of metal, plastic, or such
other substance approved by the City Manager.
   CONTRACTOR. The contractor hired by the city to collect refuse.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Dangerous materials or substances, such as poisons, acids,
caustics, infected materials, explosives, and other materials not suitable for
a class I landfill.
   JUNK. Parts of machinery or motor vehicles, boat hulls, unused stoves, or
other appliances, furniture, or other cast-off material of any kind, except
building material, refuse, and yard waste.
   LANDFILL. The Marquette County Landfill operated by the county’s Solid Waste
Authority, as well as any transfer station operated by any of the political
subdivisions of the county.
   LIVING UNIT. Any single-family dwelling and each single-family unit in a
multiple dwelling.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
organization of any kind.
   REFUSE. All of the following: kitchen wastes, including cans, bottles,
household food, accumulations of animal food, and vegetable matter attendant to
the preparation, use, cooking, and serving of food; general household trash,
including ashes, empty cartons, crates, boxes, wrapping materials, newspapers,
magazines, cloth materials, empty cans, discarded types, and similar materials;
and all miscellaneous debris, except building materials, junk, hazardous waste,
and yard waste.
   RUBBISH. Any useless waste or rejected matter, unspoilable, and not
identified as garbage, consisting of both combustible and non-combustible
materials such as paper, cardboard, leaves, tree trimmings, concrete, crockery,
metal, building materials, furniture, appliances, bedding, and similar
materials.
   SOLID WASTE. Building materials, garbage, hazardous waste, junk, refuse,
rubbish, and yard waste.
   YARD CLIPPINGS. Shall be consistent with and as defined in the Public Act
451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. § 324.11506, as amended, which states that YARD
CLIPPINGS means leaves, grass clippings, vegetable, or other garden debris,
shrubbery, or brush or tree trimmings less than four feet in length and two
inches in diameter, that can be converted to compost humus. This term does not
include stumps, agricultural wastes, animal waste, roots, sewage sludge, or
garbage.
   YARD WASTE. Grass clippings, weeds, bushes, brush clippings, and branch
clippings.
(Prior Code, § 1060.01)
§ 53.02 COLLECTIONS AND DISPOSAL BY CITY OR CONTRACTOR.
   (A)   Collection. The collection, conveyance, and disposal of certain solid
waste generated in the city shall be performed by the city or by a contractor
under contract with the city, in conformance with this chapter, and all other
applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Division (A) above shall not prohibit the actual producers of solid
waste, or the owners of premises upon which solid waste has accumulated, from
personally collecting, conveying, and disposing of such solid waste, provided
that such producers or owners comply with the provisions of this chapter and
with any other governing laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
      (2)   Division (A) above shall not be construed to prohibit collectors of
solid waste from outside the city from conveying such solid waste over city
streets, provided that such collectors comply with the provisions of this
chapter and with any other governing laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1060.02)
§ 53.03 INTERPRETATION; PURPOSE; PROMULGATION OF RULES.
   It is the intent of Council that this chapter shall be liberally construed
for the purpose of providing a sanitary and satisfactory method for the
collection, conveyance, and disposal of solid waste. To that end, the City
Manager is authorized to make and implement such rules and regulations as from
time to time are necessary to carry out this intent, provided, however, that
such rules and regulations may not conflict with this chapter or with any other
applicable laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations, and provided, further,
that such rules and regulations shall be subject to the approval of Council.
Any person aggrieved by a rule or regulation implemented by the City Manager
shall have the right to appeal to council, which shall have the authority to
confirm, waive, revoke, or modify any such rule or regulation.
(Prior Code, § 1060.03)
§ 53.04 PRE-COLLECTION PRACTICES.
   (A)   Containers.
      (1)   Containers may be cans or bags made of metal or plastic and shall
have a capacity of not more than 50 gallons.
      (2)   Cans shall be equipped with suitable handles and tight fitting
covers, shall be water-tight, and shall not have ragged or sharp edges or any
other defect liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents
thereof.
      (3)   Cans shall be of a type approved by the City Manager and shall be
kept in a clean, neat, and sanitary condition at all times.
      (4)   Containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee, or
occupant of a premises.
      (5)   Any container that does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter shall be promptly replaced.
   (B)   Preparation of solid waste.
      (1)   All garbage, before being placed in a container for collection,
shall have drained from it all free liquids and may be wrapped in paper.
      (2)   All refuse shall be drained of liquid before being placed in a
container for collection.
      (3)   All cans and bottles which have contained food shall be thoroughly
rinsed and drained before being placed in a container for collection or
recycling.
   (C)   Points of collection. Containers shall be placed on or near the curb
or traveled roadway line of a street or alley adjoining the premises served, so
as to be readily accessible to the collection crew on collection day. If
containers are not so placed before the collection crew arrives at the premises
being served, the contents of such containers will not be collected until the
next regularly scheduled collection time.
   (D)   Storage of solid waste.
      (1)   No person shall place any solid waste in any street, alley, or
other public place, or upon any private property, whether owned by such person
or not, within the city except in proper containers for collection, or with the
express approval of the City Manager, nor shall any person place or deposit any
solid waste in any river, stream, or other body of water.
      (2)   Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any premises is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any
existing accumulation of solid waste shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1060.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.05 COLLECTION PRACTICES.
   (A)   Schedule for collection. The City Manager shall establish a schedule
for the collection of garbage and refuse.
      (1)   Garbage and refuse accumulated in residential areas shall be
collected at least once each week, when possible.
      (2)   Hotels, restaurants, and such other commercial businesses and
institutions as deem it necessary may enter into an agreement for more frequent
collection of garbage and refuse.
      (3)   Where necessary to protect the public health and safety, the City
Manager shall have the authority to require that collections of garbage and
refuse be made more frequently than weekly for particular residential premises
or commercial businesses or institutions.
   (B)   Use of garbage bags and cans. When placed for collection pursuant to §
53.04(C), garbage and refuse shall be in standard garbage bags with a capacity
of not more than 50 gallons. Said bags shall be placed in standard garbage cans
on days of non-collection, but may be removed from cans and sealed immediately
before being placed for collection.
   (C)   Responsibility for disposal.
      (1)   The owners and occupants of any premises within the city shall be
responsible for the sanitary condition of such premises, and no person shall
place or deposit or allow to be placed or deposited, or accumulate or allow to
be accumulated, on his or her premises, any solid waste except as authorized by
the terms of this chapter or any other applicable ordinances, laws, rules, or
regulations.
      (2)   No person shall deposit, place, or leave any solid waste on the
premises of another person, and no person shall bury solid waste anywhere in
the city.
      (3)   Any person generating or disposing of solid waste not covered by
this chapter shall make arrangements for the collection and disposal of such
solid waste and shall comply in all respects with the terms of this chapter and
all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      (4)   A person generating building materials shall be responsible for the
proper and lawful disposal of such building materials. Such building materials
may be disposed of at the landfill through the city only if such building
materials were generated within the corporate limits of the city. No
contractors, commercial, or industrial agents or concerns, non-residents, or
residents not working on a building or dwelling within the city, shall dispose
of building materials at the landfill through the city.
      (5)   A mandatory yard waste recycling/composting program is hereby
established in the city. Yard waste shall be disposed of pursuant to the rules
and regulations for such program established by the city pursuant to §
53.03. Yard waste is not eligible for regular collection as refuse.
      (6)   All garbage, refuse, rubbish, junk, hazardous waste, and building
materials which accumulate on any premises and are not disposed of pursuant to
this chapter shall be deemed to be a nuisance and shall be subject to the
requirements and penalties of §
10.99.
      (7)   Hazardous waste materials shall not be collected by the city or its
duly authorized contractor. The owner, occupant, or person in charge of any
premises which generate or have custody of any hazardous waste materials shall
be solely responsible for the lawful disposal of such materials in accordance
with this chapter and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      (8)   Containers that are broken or rotted or otherwise fail to meet the
requirements of this chapter may be claimed and disposed of as refuse by the
city or its duly authorized collection contractor. After notice to the person
responsible for such a container, collection from that container may be refused
by the city or its duly authorized collection contractor.
   (D)   Limitation on quantity. In the promulgation of rules and regulations
pursuant to §
53.03, the City Manager shall direct the collection of a reasonable quantity of
refuse and garbage from hotels, restaurants, and other businesses and
institutions during a collection period. In the promulgation of such rules and
regulations, the City Manager shall have the authority to determine what
amounts of refuse and garbage shall be considered reasonable and to refuse to
collect amounts determined by the City Manager to be unreasonable.
   (E)   Collection and conveyance by actual producers and outside collectors.
      (1)   The actual producers of garbage and refuse, or the owners of
premises upon which garbage and refuse are accumulated, who desire personally
to collect, convey, and dispose of such garbage and refuse, and collectors of
garbage and refuse from outside the city who desire to convey such garbage and
refuse over the streets of the city, shall use a water-tight vehicle provided
with a tight cover and so operated as to prevent offensive odors seeping
therefrom and to prevent the contents of such vehicles from being blown,
dropped, or spilled therefrom.
      (2)   Disposal of solid waste by persons pursuant to division (E)(1)
above shall be made outside the city limits, unless otherwise specifically
authorized by the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 1060.05) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 53.06 COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF YARD WASTE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the improper
collection and disposal of yard clippings that are generated on land that is
within the corporate jurisdiction of the city and to provide a penalty for
those owners of land or solid waste haulers who collect yard clippings
generated on land located within the city, except city employees in the
performance of city-related duties and except others permitted by the city for
city purposes.
   (B)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   No person shall dispose of within the city, yard clippings that are
not generated on land located within the city.
      (2)   No person shall collect for disposal any yard clippings that are
generated on land located within the city, except for disposal as provided for
herein.
   (C)   Disposal. All yard clippings shall be disposed of by placing the same
into a compost pile. The City Manager shall cause a sign to be erected at the
entrance of the city’s compost pile describing the hours of operation.
Information regarding the hours of operation shall also be maintained at the
City Clerk’s office.
   (D)   Interpretation; conflicts. This section is to be interpreted in
conjunction with all other applicable laws. Whenever any provision of this
section imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions, or
limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or
ordinance, then the provisions of this section shall govern. Conversely,
whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent
requirements, regulations, restrictions, or limitations than are imposed by
this section, then the provisions of such other law or ordinance shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 1060.06) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 53.07 COLLECTION FEES.
   (A)   Solid waste shall be picked up and collected pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, subject to payment based on a fee schedule enacted,
from time to time, by resolution of Council.
   (B)   All solid waste collection charges shall be billed by the city’s
Utility billing office through its usual billing procedure, unless otherwise
directed by rules and regulations promulgated by the City Manager pursuant to §
53.03.
   (C)   Special collection charges shall be levied on a time, equipment,
labor, and tipping fee basis whenever the city is required to clean up a
premises pursuant to §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 1060.07)
§ 53.08 PAYMENT OF COLLECTION FEES.
   (A)   All bills for solid waste collection and disposal services must be
paid within 30 days from the date of the bill. Any bill not so paid on a timely
basis will be subject to the addition of a penalty of 1.5% per month of the
total amount payable.
   (B)   Charges for solid waste collection and disposal are hereby made a lien
on the premises served, and liens for delinquent charges may be recorded
against the property with the office of the county’s Register of Deeds. If
payment is not made within six months of the beginning of the delinquency, the
same shall be certified to Council at the regular November meeting of the
Council and the amounts so certified and approved by Council shall be spread
upon the December tax roll for collection. This procedure shall not apply if a
lease has been legally executed, containing a provision that the lessor shall
not be liable for payment of solid waste collection and disposal bills accruing
subsequent to the filing of the written notice and a copy of the signed lease
provided by this chapter. A written notice with respect to the execution of a
lease containing this provision shall be filed with the Board, Commission, or
other official in charge of the solid waste collection and disposal system, and
20 days’ notice shall be given by the lessor of any cancellation, change in, or
termination of the lease. The written notice shall contain a notation of the
expiration date of the lease.
(Prior Code, § 1060.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.09 OTHER RATES AND CHARGES.
   Other rates and charges may, from time to time, be established by resolution
of Council.
(Prior Code, § 1060.09)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC CODE
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC CODE
Section
   
70.01   Title
   
70.02   Purpose
   
70.03   Adoption of Michigan state statutes; conflicts
   
70.04   Severability
   
70.05   Applicability
   
70.06   Existing remedies
   
70.07   Definitions
   
70.08   Administration and enforcement
   
70.09   Civil infraction violations
   
70.10   Parking restriction in designated business district and Parking
Violations Bureau
   
70.11   Winter parking ban and snow and ice removal
   
70.12   Snowmobiles
   
70.13   All-terrain vehicles
   
70.14   Bus stops
   
70.15   Campers/trailers/motor homes on-street parking prohibited
   
70.16   Parking, storage and use of trailers, campers, motor homes and other
vehicles off-street
   
70.17   Truck routes and weight limits
   
70.18   Bicycles, roller skates, coasters, electronic propelled devices and
other similar devices
   
70.19   Food trucks and mobile food vending units
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Traffic rules and regulations generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 257.601 et seq.,
257.634 et seq.
   Traffic rules and regulations in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4h
   Uniform Traffic Code, see M.C.L.A. §§ 257.951 et seq.
§ 70.01 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as the Traffic Code of the City of Negaunee
(the "city"), hereinafter referred to as the "Traffic Code."
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Traffic Code is to provide for the safe travel of all
forms of traffic upon city streets, alleyways and elsewhere within the city
corporate limits; provide for managed vehicular parking upon public and private
properties; provide for standards of parking and storage in order to maintain
health, safety and welfare; to provide for restrictions of specific use; to
increase the longevity of the public streets, alleys and parking lots; and to
provide for penalties for violations thereof.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.03 ADOPTION OF MICHIGAN STATE STATUTES; CONFLICTS.
   (A)   Michigan Vehicle Code. The Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300
of 1949 (M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 et seq.) and the penalties provided for therein, as
amended, is hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   Michigan Uniform Traffic Code. The Michigan Uniform Traffic Code,
Public Act 62 of 1956 (M.C.L.A. §§ 257.951 et seq.), as amended, is hereby
adopted by reference.
   (C)   Motor Carrier Safety Act. The Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act,
Public Act 181 of 1963 (M.C.L.A. §§ 480.11 et seq.), as amended, is hereby
adopted by reference.
   (D)   Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act. The
Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of
1994, as it pertains to snowmobiles (M.C.L.A. §§ 324.101 et seq.), as amended,
is hereby adopted by reference.
   (E)   Michigan Insurance Code. The Michigan Insurance Code, Public Act 218
of 1956, as it pertains to required insurance (M.C.L.A. §§ 500.3102 et seq.),
as amended, is hereby adopted by reference.
   (F)   Penalties. The penalties provided by the pertinent sections of the
above referenced statutes are hereby adopted by reference; however, the city
may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the
maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days.
   (G)   Conflicts. In case of a conflict among the above referenced statutes
and the additional regulations set forth herein, which cannot be resolved by
construing the provisions as complementary or supplementary to each other, then
the Michigan statutory provision(s) shall supersede.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.04 SEVERABILITY.
   If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision of this Traffic
Code, or any of the statutory provisions adopted by reference above, to be
unenforceable, in whole or in part, such declaration shall only affect the
provision(s) held to be unenforceable and shall not affect any other part or
provision; provided that if a court of competent jurisdiction declares a
penalty provision to exceed the authority of the city, the penalty shall be
construed as the maximum penalty that is determined by the court to be within
the authority of the city to impose.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.05 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this Traffic Code shall apply to any person or entity
owning, occupying, managing, utilizing, and/or controlling any motor vehicle,
motorcycle, camper, trailer, motor home, or other vehicle or mode of
transportation identified by this Traffic Code within the city limits of
Negaunee.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.06 EXISTING REMEDIES.
   The provisions in this Traffic Code shall not be construed to abolish or
impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies
relating to the Traffic Code.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.07 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL VEHICLE. A motor vehicle or conveyance designed and intended
for agricultural use, including, but not limited to, garden tractors, farm
tractors and other implements, either self-propelled or customarily towed,
which are used in farming operations; but shall not include lawn mowers,
rototillers or similar small equipment customarily associated with home
gardening activities.
   ALLEYWAY. A narrow passageway between lots or behind buildings that is part
of the public right-of-way.
   ATV or ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. A motorized off-highway vehicle designed to
travel off-road, or such other definition as may be provided for herein (e.g.,
motor/electric vehicle) or by state law.
   BOAT/WATERCRAFT. A vessel propelled on water by oars, sails, or an engine,
including jet skis, or which has any type of hull.
   BODY SHOP. A licensed garage or other licensed facility offering commercial
services for the repair and restoration of vehicles' bodies.
   BUS STOP. A place where a bus regularly stops for the loading and unloading
of passengers.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. A designated part of a city where there are many
businesses and pedestrian traffic.
   CAMPER, TRAILER, or MOTOR HOME. A class or type of vehicle or trailer that
people can live in or sleep in when they are traveling or camping.
   CODE OFFICIAL OR OTHER DESIGNEE OF THE CITY MANAGER. The official who is
charged with the administration and enforcement of the Traffic Code, or any
duly authorized representative. The CODE OFFICIAL OR OTHER DESIGNEE OF THE CITY
MANAGER may be the Chief of Police, the Building Inspector, the Zoning
Administrator, or any duly authorized representative of the City Manager or
Chief of Police.
   ELECTRONIC PROPELLED DEVICE. An electric vehicle or other device able to
generate driving force with electric power from an in-vehicle power storage
device and used for locomotion purposes.
   EMERGENCY. A condition which is a violation of this Traffic Code and which
constitutes an imminent danger, calling for immediate action in order to avoid
death, injury or illness to a human or the destruction or severe damaging of
real or personal property.
   FIRST RESPONDER. A person with specialized training and who is among those
responsible for going immediately to the scene of an accident, incident or
emergency to aid.
   FOOD TRUCK. A self-contained, motorized vehicle used for the preparation,
distribution or sale of food.
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of a way publicly
maintained when any part of the way is open to the use of the public for the
purpose of vehicular travel. HIGHWAY includes city streets and alleys.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. A vehicle to which any of the following conditions
pertains;
      (1)   It is being dismantled for the sale, salvage, repair or reclamation
of parts thereof;
      (2)   It does not have all its main component parts properly attached; or
      (3)   Any other or additional conditions exist which cause the vehicle,
if eligible for operation upon the public streets, to be incapable of being
operated in a lawful manner upon the public streets.
   MAIN COMPONENT PARTS. All such parts or equipment as are necessary for a
vehicle to be lawfully driven or drawn upon the public streets pursuant to the
Michigan Vehicle Code, being Act 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended,
including fenders, hood, wheels, radiators, motor, windows, doors, muffler,
body and essential engine parts.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDING UNIT. Any motorized or non-motorized vehicle, trailer,
food truck, or other device designed to be portable and not permanently
attached to the ground from which food is prepared, vended, served or offered
for sale.
   MOTOR/ELECTRIC VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is intended to move or transport
persons or property, and which is self-propelled by means of an internal
combustion engine or by electric engine, including, but not limited to,
automobiles, trucks, vans, buses, truck-tractors, motorcycles, motorbikes,
motor scooters, mopeds, bulldozers, side-by-sides, front-end loaders and other
types of construction equipment, logging skidders and snowmobiles.
   NUISANCE. All property conditions that are prohibited by the Traffic Code.
   OPERATE. To ride in or on, and to be in actual control of, the operation of
a vehicle.
   OPERATOR. A person who operates or is in actual physical control of the
operation of a vehicle.
   OVERNIGHT PARKING. Any vehicle or trailer present and parked on a public
right-of-way or public parking lot, after the hours preventing the parking
thereof.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm, corporation or entity having legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of
the state, county or municipality as holding title, including the guardian of
the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate
of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
   PARKING. Standing a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a highway when
not loading or unloading, except when making necessary repairs.
   PARKING LOT. An area where cars or other vehicles may be left temporarily.
   PERMITTED PARKING. A parking permit validated and issued by the city
allowing a resident to park in any designated parking space.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity of any
kind.
   PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designated, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, not including the shoulder. If a highway includes two or
more separate roadways, the term roadway refers to a roadway separately, but
not to all roadways collectively.
   SALVAGE, JUNK or SCRAP VEHICLE. Any vehicle, camper or ORV that is partially
disassembled and/or missing doors, windows, wheels and/or tires and other
parts.
   SHOULDER. That portion of the highway contiguous to the roadway that
generally extends the contour of the roadway, not specifically designed for
vehicular travel but maintained for the temporary accommodation of disabled or
stopped vehicles which are otherwise permitted on the roadway.
   SIDE-BY-SIDE VEHICLE. An off-road vehicle with seats positioned side-by-side
and enclosed within a roll cage structure and which has a minimum of four
wheels.
   SKATEBOARD. A single platform mounted on wheels, which are propelled solely
by human power, and which has no mechanism or other device with which to steer
or to control the movement or direction of the platform.
   SNOWMOBILE. A motor vehicle, especially one with runners in the front and
caterpillar tracks in the rear, for traveling over snow.
   STORAGE. A space available for storing something, whether in an interior
structure or upon any surface area.
   TEMPORARY DWELLING. A caravan, mobile home, vehicle, trailer, camper, motor
home, or other structure or thing, wheeled or otherwise, which is capable of
being moved from one place to another, and used for human habitation for a time
period not exceeding 110 days.
   THROUGH TRUCK TRAFFIC. Truck traffic that originates outside the city and
which travels over city streets to a designation outside the city.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle which is not self-propelled and is designed and
intended for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle.
   TRUCK. Every truck, truck tractor, trailer, semitrailer, or any combination
thereof having a gross weight of ten tons or more, including the truck and its
load, as administered by the State of Michigan registration certificate.
   TRUCK ROUTE. Travel over certain streets, as designated herein, over and
along which trucks coming into and going out of the city must operate.
   UNLICENSED VEHICLE. Any vehicle, camper, or ORV that does not maintain
current license plate and tags as issued by the Michigan Secretary of State or
other appropriate licensing agency or bureau.
   VEHICLE. Motor or electric vehicles, trailers and agricultural vehicle.
   WEIGHT LIMIT. A limit on permitted weight.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violations. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm, corporation, or
entity to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this
Traffic Code.
   (B)   Enforcement process. The city may, but shall not be required to, bring
a violation of the standards established in this Traffic Code to the attention
of the property or vehicle owner or other responsible person by issuing a
notice of violation, citation or by any other lawful means.
   (C)   Citations and notice. The Negaunee City Police shall serve a written
citation or notice of violation, which will include identification of the
property or vehicle involved, a statement of the violation and why the notice
is being issued. An order of correction may also be issued allowing time to
make the repairs and improvements consistent with the Traffic Code, the right
to appeal the violation, and a statement indicating that the city may abate
violation, charge such costs to the property owner, and/or file a lien against
the subject property and/or vehicle. A citation, notice, or order of correction
shall be served by personal delivery to the owner or sent first-class mail to
the last known address of the owner.
   (D)   Exceptions. The city may allow for permitted parking as needed, within
the discretion of the City Manager's office, with temporary permits available
from the City Manager's office. The Negaunee City Council shall set a fee
applicable for permitted parking and publish the fee in the City of Negaunee
fee schedule, as amended.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.09 CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of any vehicle to violate the
following, which shall be, and hereby are, designated as civil infractions:
   (A)   Failure to park with wheels parallel to the roadway and within 12
inches of any existing right-hand curb;
   (B)   Failure to park with wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the
left-hand curb of a properly signed one-way street;
   (C)   Stopping, standing, or parking a vehicle other than at the angle to
the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by signs or markings;
   (D)   Leaving a vehicle standing unattended without effectively setting the
brakes thereon, stopping the motor of said vehicle and, when standing upon any
grade, without turning the front wheels of such vehicle to the curb or side of
the highway;
   (E)   Parking on a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to
leave available insufficient width of the roadway for free movement of
vehicular traffic;
   (F)   Parking on a sidewalk or crosswalk;
   (G)   Parking within two feet of a public or private driveway;
   (H)   Parking within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
   (I)   Parking within 20 feet of a crosswalk, or if none, then within 15 feet
of the intersection of property lines at an intersection of streets and
highways;
   (J)   Parking within 30 feet upon approach to any flashing beacon, stop
signs, or traffic control signal located at the side of a street or highway;
   (K)   Parking within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
   (L)   Parking within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of said entrance when properly signposted;
   (M)   Parking upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or
highway, excepting parking on the Rail Street overpass over Silver Street, in
designated parking spots only;
   (N)   Parking within 200 feet of an accident at which first responders are
in attendance;
   (O)   Parking in front of any theater;
   (P)   Parking in any place or in any manner so as to block exit or exits
conspicuously marked as such, of buildings;
   (Q)   Parking in any place or in any manner so as to block or hamper
immediate use of and immediate egress from any fire escape, conspicuously
marked as such and providing an emergency means of egress from any building;
   (R)   The stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with traffic or the direction of a police officer, in
violation of any legally established parking restrictions or prohibitions duly
posted by sign in accordance with the ordinances of the city;
   (S)   The stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle in an unloading,
delivery or pick-up zone except for unloading or loading merchandise;
   (T)   The stopping, standing or parking of buses or taxicabs at any place
other than a bus stop or taxicab stand except as may be permitted by law;
   (U)   The parking of a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or a taxicab
in a taxicab stand when the stop or stand has been officially designated and
appropriately signed;
   (V)   The parking of a vehicle upon or across a line or mark designating a
parking space; and
   (W)   Parking in a designated handicapped parking space without an approved
handicapped certificate or handicapped registration plate appropriately
displayed.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.10 PARKING RESTRICTION IN DESIGNATED BUSINESS DISTRICT AND PARKING
VIOLATIONS BUREAU.
   (A)   The Business District. For the purposes of this Traffic Code, the
Business District shall include the following: all of Iron Street and Rail
Street, from Gold Street to Division Street; Division Street, from Rail Street
to Jackson Street; Jackson Street, from Tobin Street to Teal Lake Avenue; and
Tobin Street, from Jackson Street to Iron Street (herein after, the "Business
District").
   (B)   Time limits in the Business District. Unless otherwise permitted by §
70.08(D) or § 70.19(A) herein, no person shall park any vehicle, trailer or
other object in a non-metered parking space located on any street, alley or
parking lot in the Business District, where parking is otherwise permitted by
law, for a period in excess of two consecutive hours between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m.; provided, however, if use of the non-metered parking space
is otherwise restricted to a shorter period of time, the shorter period of time
shall control.
   (C)   Commercial vehicles and trailers. The provision of this Traffic Code
shall not apply to commercial vehicles or trailers parked while the same are
being used to make deliveries or, consistent with this chapter, in an activity
necessary for the construction, general repair, or the other types of
commercial activity occurring within the Business District of the city.
   (D)   Signage. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Traffic Code to the
contrary, the provisions of the Traffic Code shall not be enforced as to any
streets or alleys located within the Business District of the city if there is
not first posted an appropriate sign or signs giving notice of a two-hour or
other parking time limit.
   (E)   Campers and trailers. Unless provided for herein, operating a camper,
trailer or motor home for a commercial use in a B1 Zoning District is
prohibited.
   (F)   Establishment; purpose; supervision; control. Pursuant to M.C.L.A. §
600.8395, as amended, a Parking Violations Bureau, for the purpose of handling
alleged parking violations within the City of Negaunee, is hereby established.
The Parking Violations Bureau shall be under the supervision and control of the
City Manager.
   (G)   Duties of City Manager. The City Manager shall, subject to the
approval of the Council, establish a convenient location for the Parking
Violations Bureau, appoint qualified city employees to administer the Bureau,
and adopt rules and regulations for the operation thereof.
   (H)   Disposition of violations. Parking violations shall not be required to
be disposed of at the Parking Violations Bureau. The person in charge of such
Bureau may refuse to dispose of a violation, in which case any person having
knowledge of the facts may make a sworn complaint before any court having
jurisdiction of the offense as provided by law.
   (I)   Specific request of violators required for disposition. No violation
shall be disposed of at the Parking Violations Bureau except at the specific
request of the alleged violator. No penalty for any violation shall be accepted
from any person who denies having committed the offense, and in no case shall
the person who is in charge of the Bureau determine, or attempt to determine,
the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to such alleged violation.
No person shall be required to dispose of a parking violation at the Bureau,
and all persons shall be entitled to have any such violation processed before a
court having jurisdiction thereof if they so desire. The unwillingness of any
person to dispose of any violation at the Bureau shall not prejudice him or her
or in any way diminish the rights, privileges, and protection accorded to him
or her by law.
   (J)   Traffic tickets. The issuance of a traffic ticket or notice of
violation by a police officer of the city shall be deemed an allegation of a
parking violation. Such traffic ticket or notice of violation shall indicate
the period of time within which the person to whom the same was issued must
respond before the Parking Violations Bureau. It shall also indicate the
address of the Bureau, the hours during which the Bureau is open, the amount of
the penalty scheduled for the offense for which the ticket was issued, and the
fact that a warrant for the arrest of the person to whom the ticket was issued
will be sought if such a person fails to respond within the time prescribed.
   (K)   Parking fines and costs. The Parking Violations Bureau may accept a
civil infraction admission in parking violation cases and collect and retain
civil fines and costs as follows.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Bureau shall
accept a penalty for and in full satisfaction of the violation, as detailed in
the city's fee schedule, as adopted by the Negaunee City Council and amended
from time to time; provided that the payment is received within 72 hours of 5:
00 p.m. of the date upon which notice is attached to the offending vehicle,
trailer, or object, giving notice to the owner or operator thereof that such
vehicle, trailer, or object has been parked in violation of the laws of the
city and instructing such owner or operator to report to the Bureau in regard
to such notice.
      (2)   If the owner or operator fails to pay the applicable penalty, as
set forth in division (K)(1) above, within the 72-hour period, such owner or
operator may, within an additional 27 days, pay to the Bureau, as a penalty for
and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum detailed in the city's fee
schedule, as adopted by the Negaunee City Council and amended from time to
time.
      (3)   If the owner or operator fails to pay the applicable penalty, as
set forth in divisions (K)(1) and (2) above, he or she shall be cited for the
violation and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a civil fine of not more
than the sum detailed in the city's fee schedule, as adopted by the Negaunee
City Council and amended from time to time, plus costs of prosecution, for each
offense.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.11 WINTER PARKING BAN AND SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
   (A)   Non-winter parking. Parking between the edge of the roadway pavement
and the sidewalk (where sidewalks exist) is prohibited during the months of
May, June, July, August, September and October, and only permissible during the
remainder of the year.
   (B)   Winter parking prohibited. No person shall park or leave unattended
any motor vehicle or other vehicle on the streets, alleys, or sidewalks which
are regularly plowed in the city or on city-owned or leased parking lots
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. during the months of January,
February, March, April, November, and December of each year for a period of
time any longer than 30 minutes unless specifically permitted by the city.
Physicians on emergency calls are exempted from this provision. Anyone parking
in the city right-of-way at any other time does so solely at his or her own
risk and the city shall not be responsible for any damage to any vehicle or any
object so parked.
   (C)   Ticketing and impounding. Any vehicle found parked or abandoned in
violation of division (B) above shall be subject to a civil infraction citation
and/or other sanctions as permitted by law. The city may also take additional
actions to remediate a winter parking ban violation, including, but not limited
to, causing the offending vehicle to be towed and impounded at the vehicle
owner's expense; the same shall constitute as a lien against the said vehicle
until paid.
   (D)   Deposit in right-of way restricted. No person shall take or remove, or
cause to be taken or removed, any snow, ice, or other material from any
property owned, occupied, or controlled by him or her and pile or dump the same
within the lines of any street right-of-way of the city, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter.
   (E)   Lawful deposits in rights-of-way. Any person may take and remove snow
or ice from a driveway on property owned, occupied or controlled by him or her
and pile the same in a public street, but only along, parallel with and as a
part of the bank of snow formed by the city in its snow plowing operations.
Such snow or ice shall be piled on the bank immediately in front of and
adjacent to the property so owned or occupied and in no event shall the snow or
ice so placed extend more than two feet, six inches farther into the roadway
than the existing bank. Further, snow shall not be piled, blown, or otherwise
placed upon any portion of the street or sidewalk within 25 feet of the later
curb of any intersecting road, street, or alley. Snow shall also not be piled,
blown, or otherwise placed upon any portion of the street or sidewalk right-of-
way within 20 feet of any driveway intended to be used by the general public
for access to any commercial establishment. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in this chapter, the city shall have and retain the right to
limit or prohibit the placement of snow or ice in any street right-of-way if
such limitation or prohibition is deemed reasonably necessary for the health,
safety, and welfare of the general public.
   (F)   Minimum street width to be maintained. No person shall take or remove,
or cause to be taken or removed, any snow, ice, or other material from any
public walk or from the banks of snow formed by the city in its snow plowing
operations and pile, dump, or blow the same within the street right-of-way in
such manner as to reduce the width between the banks of snow formed by the city
in its snow plowing operations by more than two feet, six inches on either
side.
   (G)   Removal of unlawfully deposited snow, ice and the like. Snow, ice, or
other material moved, piled, or dumped in violation of this chapter may be
removed or caused to be removed by the city, and the expense of such removal
may be charged to the person found to be in violation of this chapter. Said
charges may be collected as "costs" in connection with a civil infraction
action and/or by civil process.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.12 SNOWMOBILES.
   (A)   Authorization. The City Manager or designee is hereby authorized to
permit the use of snowmobiles on any street when, because of snow or other
extreme weather conditions, conventional vehicles cannot be used for necessary
transportation.
   (B)   Operation. A snowmobile may be operated on a street when necessary to
cross a street or bridge or culvert. The snowmobile shall be brought to a
complete stop before entering the street, and the operator shall yield the
right-of-way to a vehicle approaching the street.
   (C)   Routes of operation. Unless specifically designated otherwise as
provided herein, all highways, city streets and alleys, or designated trailways
within the city are hereby designated to be access routes upon which a
snowmobile may be operated for the purpose of providing access to and from
areas where snowmobile operation is permitted. Such access routes do not
include or involve state or federal highways.
   (D)   Speed. A snowmobile may be operated at speeds that do not exceed ten
mph within the city limits.
   (E)   Time of operation. A snowmobile may be operated between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. within the city limits, except for in the case of an
emergency.
   (F)   Location of operation. A snowmobile operator must travel on the
extreme right-hand shoulder of the street if one is available. If no shoulder
is available, the operator must travel on the extreme right-hand side of
street, except on the streets and places listed in division (G) below, upon
which the use of snowmobiles are strictly prohibited.
   (G)   Prohibited areas of operation. No person shall operate a snowmobile in
any of the following locations:
      (1)   On a frozen surface of any waters within 100 feet of a person,
including a skater, who is not in or on a snowmobile; within 100 feet of a
fishing shanty or shelter, except at the minimum speed required to maintain
forward movement of the snowmobile; or in an area that has been cleared of snow
for pedestrian or festival purposes, unless the area is necessary for the
access of public water;
      (2)   On or across a cemetery or burial grounds;
      (3)   On Iron Street from Pioneer Street to Tobin Street;
      (4)   On any public sidewalk;
      (5)   Any city-owned park unless otherwise designated; or
      (6)   On any public parking lot unless otherwise posted.
   (H)   Revocation of snowmobile designation. The Negaunee City Council may,
from time to time, by resolution, prohibit snowmobile use upon any roadway,
street, or alley under its jurisdiction or any part or section thereof, with or
without cause, when such action is deemed appropriate by the City Council, and
same shall become effectively immediately upon the passage of said resolution.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.13 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.
   (A)   Route. Unless specifically designated otherwise herein, all highways,
city streets and alleys within the city are hereby designated to be access
routes upon which ATVs and side-by-side vehicles may be operated for the
purpose of providing access to and from areas where ATV and side-by-side
vehicle operation is permitted. Such access routes do not include or involve
state or federal highways.
   (B)   Map. The city shall maintain a map of all highways and streets under
its jurisdiction, upon which shall be indicated all such highways and streets
and parts or sections thereof upon which the operation of ATVs and side-by-side
vehicles are prohibited. Copies of such map shall be maintained and made
available to the public upon payment of the cost of reproduction thereof.
   (C)   Prohibited areas of operation. No ATV and/or side-by-side vehicle
shall be operated on any highway, street, alley, or any part or section thereof
under the jurisdiction of the city where the operation of ATVs and side-by-side
vehicle has been specifically prohibited by resolution of the City Council.
Prohibited areas include:
      (1)   On the part of a highway normally occupied by ditches, front
slopes, back slopes, or utilities, such areas being more specifically defined
as those parts of the highway between the outside shoulder point and the right
of way boundary line;
      (2)   Within a city-owned park, any natural area, or cemetery properties
within the city;
      (3)   Upon, along, or within federal or state highways;
      (4)   On those shoulders specifically designated as non-motorized
facilities;
      (5)   Upon any city sidewalk;
      (6)   In violation of any of the provisions of M.C.L.A. §§ 324.81101 et
seq. and the various subsections thereof, as amended, as well as all other
statutes, rules, regulations, and ordinances applicable to such ATV and side-
by-side vehicle operations; or
      (7)   On Iron St. from Pioneer St. to Tobin St.
   (D)   Areas of operation. An ATV and side-by-side vehicle operated on a
highway, street or alley pursuant to this chapter shall always be operated:
      (1)   For the purpose of gaining access to or from areas where ATV and
side-by-side vehicles operation are permitted, using the most direct route;
      (2)   On the outermost five feet of the shoulder or, in situations where
no delineated shoulder exists, on the outermost right side of the roadway, but
not on grassy areas or areas not normally used for vehicular travel;
      (3)   In single file, with the flow of traffic;
      (4)   At a speed not to exceed ten mph, unless otherwise posted on a
designated ATV and side-by-side vehicle trail; and
      (5)   Only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
   (E)   Exceptions. An ATV and side-by-side vehicle may be operated on a
street or alley under the jurisdiction of the city, whether or not such
operation has been prohibited, only:
      (1)   In a life-threatening emergency; or
      (2)   By crossing such street at right angles, for the purpose of getting
from one area to another if the operation can be done in safety. The operator
shall bring the ATV and side-by-side vehicle to a complete stop prior to
crossing the street and shall yield the right-of-way to oncoming traffic.
   (F)   Revocation of ATV and side-by-side vehicle designation. The Negaunee
City Council may, from time to time, by resolution, prohibit, to the extent
permitted, ATV and side-by-side vehicle use upon any roadway, street, or alley
under its jurisdiction or any part or section thereof, with or without cause,
when such action is deemed appropriate by the City Council, and same shall
become effective immediately upon the passage of said resolution.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.14 BUS STOPS.
   The City Manager or designee may cause for a public bus stop(s) to be
created within the city, to provide for safe pick-up and drop-off sites within
the city and to promote public transportation. When such designation is
applied, such space shall be clearly marked upon the pavement, curb, and be
signed for such, indicating what restrictions may apply for this designation.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.15 CAMPERS/TRAILERS/MOTOR HOMES ON-STREET PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Prohibition. To preserve the lives and properties of individuals from
the risks associated with fires, preserve the line of sight associated with
police duties and pedestrian foot and bike traffic, and to enable the duties of
utility agencies or other officers, or personnel in discharge of official
duties of the city, all campers, trailers, and motor homes shall be prohibited
from parking upon any city street unless otherwise permitted by this Traffic
Code.
   (B)   Exceptions. No person shall, within the limits of the city, park any
camper, trailer or motor home on any street, alley or highway, or other public
way or public place, except as provided:
      (1)   Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any
street, alley or highway for not longer than seven days, subject to any other
prohibition, regulation or limitation imposed by this Traffic Code for that
street, alley or highway. Any emergency or temporary stopping or parking of a
camper, trailer or motor home requires immediate notice to the Negaunee City
Police Department.
      (2)   Boats that are less than 16 feet in length, beginning from the
tongue of the boat trailer to the furthest point from either the tailgate of
the trailer or motor propeller, and/or being less than four feet in height from
the lowest point of the tread of the trailer tires of the trailer to the top
boat hull, are permitted.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.16 PARKING, STORAGE AND USE OF TRAILERS, CAMPERS, MOTOR HOMES AND OTHER
VEHICLES OFF-STREET.
   (A)   Parking and storage of trailers, campers, and motor homes. No person
shall park or store, or permit to be parked or stored, upon any public or
private premises in the city that are owned, leased, rented, occupied or
possessed by such person, any trailer, camper, or motor home, or any
agricultural vehicle, unless one or more of the following conditions exist:
      (1)   Such parking or storage is located within a fully enclosed
building; or
      (2)   With respect to such parking or storage, all of the following are
true:
         (a)   Such parking or storage does not occur in the front yard area of
any premises; and
         (b)   Such parking or storage as might occur in the side yard or rear
yard of any premises shall maintain a five foot perimeter on all sides of the
trailer for storage purposes, and said must be wholly parked on a single parcel
owned by the owner of the trailer; and
         (c)   Subject to the requirements of division (A)(2)(b) above, the
parking or storage of campers, trailers and motor homes is permitted in
industrial and commercial districts, unless otherwise prohibited by any other
ordinance in effect within the city; the commercial use, parking or storage of
a camper, trailer or motor home in B1 Zoning Districts is prohibited.
   (B)   Use of trailers, campers and motor homes as a dwelling. A trailer,
camper or motor home may be used as a temporary dwelling between Memorial Day
and Labor Day only each year, and only as follows, unless permitted by the
Negaunee City Manager pursuant to §
70.08(D):
      (1)   In zoning districts classified as B2 and IND:
         (a)   As a temporary dwelling during the construction and installation
of a dwelling;
         (b)   As a temporary dwelling for commercial sales; or
         (c)   As a temporary dwelling for security purposes;
      (2)   In zoning districts classified as R1, R2, or RR by the owner or
immediate family member of the owner of the trailer, camper or motor home only;
      (3)   No trailer, camper or motor home may be used as a temporary
dwelling within a zoning district classified as MIN or B1, or on Negaunee city
property not designed for such activities, unless authorized by special land
use permit or as a temporary campground;
      (4)   The location of all trailers, campers and motor homes used as
temporary dwellings shall maintain at least five feet on all sides from any
other structure or lot line, and are limited to one trailer, camper or motor
home per lot at any one time; and
      (5)   All trailers, campers and motor homes used as temporary dwellings
must have an operational and fully charged fire extinguisher and a working
smoke alarm and are subject to an inspection by the City Manager or designee or
the Negaunee City Police Department to ensure compliance. Refusal to permit a
requested inspection shall result in: prohibition of the use of the trailer,
camper or motor home as a temporary dwelling; a citation; fines; and/or the
impounding of the trailer, camper or motor home at the owner's expense.
   (C)   Parking and storage of other vehicles. No person shall park or store,
or permit to be parked or stored, upon any public or private premises in the
city that are owned, leased, rented, occupied or possessed by such person, any
agricultural vehicle, boat/watercraft, electronic propelled vehicle, inoperable
vehicle, unlicensed vehicle, or salvage, junk or scrap vehicle, unless one or
more of the following conditions exist:
      (1)   Such parking or storage is located within a fully enclosed
building; or
      (2)   Such vehicle is, where subject to a license requirement, currently
and validly licensed for operation upon the public streets, is not inoperable
and has all of its main component parts properly attached; or
      (3)   Such vehicle or parts are located in a duly licensed and properly
zoned junk yard, salvage yard or new or used car dealer's lot or storage yard,
where such uses or operations are legally authorized under the Zoning Code and
are conducted in conformance therewith; or
      (4)   Such vehicle is awaiting repairs or delivery to owners at an
authorized service station, garage, paint shop or body shop legally authorized
under the Zoning Code and registered with the state; is locked; is currently
and validly licensed for operation upon the public streets where subject to a
license; and is not a public nuisance; or
      (5)   Such vehicle, although temporarily inoperable because of minor
mechanical failure, has substantially all of its main component parts attached,
is not in any manner a dismantled vehicle, and, where subject to a license, is
currently and validly licensed for operation upon the public streets; provided,
however, that the premises shall not contain any such vehicle for longer than
30 days, in any one calendar year, calculated on a cumulative basis for the
same or different vehicles, and notwithstanding the fact that no one such
vehicle remains upon the premises for more than the aforesaid 30-day period; or
      (6)   Such vehicle is a modified vehicle in a fully operational
condition, such as a vehicle that is stock-modified, redesigned or
reconstructed for a purpose other than that for which it was manufactured,
provided that any such vehicle shall comply with both of the following
restrictions:
         (a)   No such vehicle shall be parked or stored in the front yard area
of any premises; and
         (b)   Any such vehicle parked or stored in a side yard or rear yard
area shall maintain at least five feet on all sides from any other structure or
lot line; or
      (7)   Such vehicle is what is commonly referred to as a "classic car" or
an "antique car" or a similar type of vehicle which is in the process of
engine, mechanical or body restoration, provided that any such vehicle shall
comply with both of the following restrictions:
         (a)   No such vehicle shall be parked or stored in the front yard area
of any premises; and
         (b)   Any such vehicle parked or stored in the side yard or rear yard
area shall maintain a five foot setback from all lot lines and structures; or
         (c)   Such vehicle:
            1.   Is in operating condition; and
            2.   Has all its main component parts properly attached; and
            3.   Is for sale by the owner or occupant of the premises; and
            4.   Is posted with a "for sale" sign. This provision shall be
limited to authorizing the outdoor storage of one such vehicle per lot or
parcel at any one time and shall authorize the storage of such vehicle for not
more than 30 days; or
      (8)   Such vehicle is an agricultural vehicle which is operable, and
which is used or useable for agricultural purposes on the premises where
located.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.17 TRUCK ROUTES AND WEIGHT LIMITS.
   (A)   Purpose. The intent and purpose of this section is to protect the
surfacing and paving of public streets and other publicly owned infrastructure,
to protect residential property located near such streets, to protect the
public safety and to protect the city residents from excess noise and dust.
   (B)   Travel on designated route. Through truck traffic is prohibited,
except trucks weighing more than ten tons gross weight are permitted to travel
the following designated truck route:
      Teal Lake Avenue, between U.S. Route 41 and Main Street; Main Street,
between Teal Lake Avenue and Jackson Street; Jackson Street, between Main
Street and Silver Street; Silver Street, between Jackson Street and County
Road; County Road between Silver Street and the Ishpeming city limits.
   (C)   Exceptions. This section and the designated truck route contained
herein shall not be interpreted to prohibit:
      (1)   The operation of emergency vehicles on city streets;
      (2)   The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city while engaged
in repair, maintenance or construction of street, street improvements, or
public utilities.
      (3)   The operation of trucks on any official detour in any case where
such trucks could lawfully be operated upon the street for which the detour is
established;
      (4)   The operation of trucks while engaged in one or more local pick-ups
or deliveries along any city street, provided that such trucks shall use only
those streets as may be reasonably necessary to reach the pick-up or delivery
location, and that following the final pick-up or delivery, such trucks will
return by the shortest route to the nearest street upon which they are normally
permitted to operate; and
      (5)   The operation of trucks on U.S. Route 41 or M-28 in the city.
   (D)   Signed truck route. The city shall cause signs to be posted at all
entrances of the city, giving notice of the restrictions on truck traffic. The
city shall also post signs on all appropriate streets, designating them as a
truck route.
   (E)   Temporary permit(s). Temporary permits authorizing the temporary use
of roadways outside the designated route may only be issued for emergency
purposes or construction agreements between federal, state, and local agencies.
All permits shall be issued by the City Manager's office, and temporary permits
must identify an effective start and end date and may be no longer than one
year. One six-month extension may be granted for a temporary permit.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.18 BICYCLES, ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS, ELECTRONIC PROPELLED DEVICES AND
OTHER SIMILAR DEVICES.
   (A)   Operation. Bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, coasters, electronic
propelled devices, and similar devices may be operated upon all city sidewalks
unless otherwise prohibited. No more than one person shall operate or ride on a
skateboard at one time.
   (B)   Prohibited areas of operation. Bicycles, skateboards, roller skates,
coasters, electronic propelled devices, and similar devices are prohibited to
operate on city sidewalks in the area designated a business district unless
otherwise permitted. Skateboarding and in-line skating shall be prohibited on
any surface that deviates from the adjacent sidewalk elevation or roadway
elevation, including, but not limited to, ramps, steps, retention walls,
handrails, planters, curb or gutter edges, barriers and barricades, benches and
picnic tables, and monument or sculpture surfaces located on all property owned
or operated by the city, except within designated skate parks.
   (C)   Sidewalks/right-of-way. Notwithstanding their status as pedestrians,
skateboard operators and in-line skaters on sidewalks shall yield the right-of-
way to all other pedestrian (non-skateboarder or in-line skater) traffic upon
the sidewalk.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.19 FOOD TRUCKS AND MOBILE FOOD VENDING UNITS.
   (A)   Permit required. No vendor or operator of a food truck or mobile food
vending unit shall engage in mobile food vending on public property without a
permit issued by the City of Negaunee authorizing such vending. The Negaunee
City Council shall prescribe the form of such permits, the application for such
permits, and set the fee for same as prescribed in the current City of Negaunee
fee schedule. No permit shall be issued if the vendor or operator is in arrears
to the City of Negaunee or in violation of any local, state or federal statute,
code or regulation.
   (B)   Displaying permit. All permits shall be prominently displayed on the
mobile food vending unit.
   (C)   Duration of permit. Any food truck or mobile food vending unit permit
is valid for one calendar year from the date of issuance.
   (D)   Requirements. Any vendor engaging in mobile food vending shall comply
with the following requirements:
      (1)   Vendor shall provide appropriate waste receptacles at the site of
the unit and remove all litter, debris, and other wastes attributable to the
vendor and/or customers on a daily basis.
      (2)   Vendors shall comply with all applicable city laws, regulations,
and ordinances, including, but not limited to those regulating noise, signage,
nuisances and loitering.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)    Violations separate. Unless otherwise provided herein, each violation
of any provision of this chapter may be charged as separate violation. Each
violation shall be considered a separate count on the complaint or citation.
Upon conviction in a court of law, the defendant shall be sentenced separately
on each count.
   (B)   Penalties and sentencing.
      (1)   A person who fails to answer a citation or a notice to appear in
court for a violation of this chapter, or for any matter pending, or who fails
to comply with an order or judgment issued for violation of a traffic offense
designated as a civil infraction, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (2)   Except as otherwise specifically provided for herein, any violation
of this chapter shall constitute a civil infraction which shall be processed
pursuant to the terms of the Michigan Vehicle Code, as amended; and any person
found to have committed a civil infraction may be ordered to pay a civil fine
of not more than $500, as detailed in the fee schedule adopted by the City
Council, and amended from time-to-time, plus the costs of prosecution for each
offense as detailed in division (C) below. A court of competent jurisdiction
shall, when justice so requires and as applicable, order a defendant to bring
property subject to this chapter into compliance with the terms herein and to
prevent further violations, or permit the City of Negaunee to remediate the
non-compliant condition and assess the costs of same to offending party(s).
   (C)   City costs. Upon a conviction for any violation(s) of any provision(s)
of this Traffic Code, the court shall order the defendant to reimburse the city
for all of the costs of enforcement of this Traffic Code attributable to the
violations for which the defendant was convicted, including but not limited to,
the costs of investigation, prosecution and administration. If such condition
is not imposed, the city may file a civil action against the defendant and may,
upon proof of the defendant's conviction, recover all the costs referred to
above.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2023)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   FIRE PREVENTION CODE
      
91.   NEGAUNEE CEMETERY
      
92.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
93.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
      
94.   TREE AND FORESTRY MANAGEMENT
      
95.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
96.   ANIMALS
CHAPTER 90: FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Section
   
90.01   Fire Prevention Code
   
90.02   Application of code
   
90.03   File and distribution copies
   
90.04   Conflict of laws
   
90.05   Violations
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of technical codes by reference, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k)
   Arson, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.71 et seq.
   Construction or possession of explosive devices, see M.C.L.A. § 750.211a
   Fires and fire protection generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 29.1 et seq.
§ 90.01 FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing fire and explosion
hazards, that certain document marked and designated as the BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code, 2000 edition, as promulgated by Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention
Code of the city, save and except for such portions thereof as may be amended
or repealed in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1610.01)
§ 90.02 APPLICATION OF CODE.
   The BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, as adopted in §
90.01, shall be applicable to all industrial, storage, business, residential,
institutional, commercial, and public buildings, and improvements in the city.
(Prior Code, § 1610.02)
§ 90.03 FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   Printed copies of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, as adopted in §
90.01, shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk, available for inspection
by and distribution to the public at all times.
(Prior Code, § 1610.03)
§ 90.04 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   (A)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of the BOCA
National Fire Prevention Code, as adopted in §
90.01, and a provision of this chapter or any ordinance, resolution, rule, or
regulation of the city, or between any of the provisions of such code, the more
restrictive provision, or the stricter standard, shall control.
   (B)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of such code
and any provision of state law, the state law shall control.
(Prior Code, § 1610.05)
§ 90.05 VIOLATIONS.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of the BOCA
National Fire Prevention Code, as adopted in §
90.01, or any order issued under authority of the same, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 1610.06)
CHAPTER 91: NEGAUNEE CEMETERY
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Prohibited conduct generally
   
91.03   Misuse of grounds
   
91.04   Liability of city
   
91.05   Traffic control
   
91.06   Hours
Conditions and Regulations
   
91.20   Lot planting, decorating, and improvements   
   
91.21   Monuments; corner posts
   
91.22   Markers
   
91.23   Monument and marker materials
   
91.24   Foundations
   
91.25   Funerals
   
91.26   Interment
   
91.27   Responsibility of city; opening of graves; delivery of materials
   
91.28   Disinterment and removal
   
91.29   Exceptions
   
91.30   Use of receiving vaults
   
91.31   Purchases, transfers, or assignments
   
91.32   Purchase of lots, niches, crypts, and graves
   
91.33   Transfer or assignment of lots
   
91.34   Use of concrete rough boxes or vaults
Financial Provisions
   
91.45   Rates and charges
   
91.46   Perpetual Care Fund
   
91.47   Violations
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city regarding cemeteries, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4f
   Municipal cemeteries, see M.C.L.A. §§ 128.1 et seq.
   Vacation of cemeteries, see M.C.L.A. §§ 128.41 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LOT. Parcel of land for the burial of one or more persons.
   MARKER. A singular stone of granite or marble, or a bronze plaque, with the
name of the individual identification appearing thereon.
   MONUMENT. A memorial consisting of granite or marble bearing the name or
names of a family or families, consisting of a base and the upper portion or
main section known as a die.
(Prior Code, § 1062.01)
§ 91.02 PROHIBITED CONDUCT GENERALLY.
   (A)   Visitors to the cemetery are reminded that the grounds are sacredly
devoted to the interment of the dead, and that strict observance of the decorum
which should characterize the place will be required.
   (B)   No person shall:
      (1)   Enter the cemetery except through an established entrance;
      (2)   Deposit rubbish or debris on a walk or drive or on any part of the
cemetery grounds;
      (3)   Pick or mutilate any flowers, either wild or domestic, or disturb
any tree, shrub, or other plant material, or remove the same from the grounds;
      (4)   Kill, wound, or trap any bird, fish, or animal, or feed or
otherwise disturb them, or remove the eggs of any bird from the cemetery
grounds. This provision shall not apply to authorized city officials for
purposes of protecting cemetery grounds;
      (5)   Permit any domestic animals to enter or remain in the cemetery;
      (6)   Consume refreshments or liquors on the cemetery grounds, or carry
the same on the premises;
      (7)   Use any form of advertising on the cemetery premises;
      (8)   Carry or discharge firearms upon the premises, except when
authorized to do so at a military burial service;
      (9)   Deface, mutilate, or otherwise injure or commit damage to any
monument, enclosure, or burial lot owned by others;
      (10)   Peddle or solicit for flowers, plants, or monuments within the
cemetery grounds; and/or
      (11)   Erect signs, notices, or advertisements of any kind within the
cemetery grounds, unless authorized by city authorities.
(Prior Code, § 1062.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.03 MISUSE OF GROUNDS.
   No person shall run at will through the cemetery grounds without a
legitimate purpose therefor or use the same in any way as a playground or for
recreational purposes.
(Prior Code, § 1062.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.04 LIABILITY OF CITY.
   The city shall not be liable for any loss or damage caused by an act of God,
the common enemy, thieves, vandals, malicious mischief makers, unavoidable
accidents, riots, or an order of any military or civil authority, to any lots
or structures or objects thereon, or the flowers or articles removed from any
lot or grave, nor for any loss or damage or bodily injuries sustained by any
person or persons, except as a result of negligence on the part of the city or
its employees. All claims against the city must be made in accordance with the
provisions of the City Charter relative to the procedure for making claims.
(Prior Code, § 1062.04)
§ 91.05 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   All traffic laws of the city that are applicable to the operation of
vehicles in the cemetery and not inconsistent herewith shall be strictly
observed. Any person driving in the cemetery, and the owner of the vehicle so
driven, shall be liable and responsible for any injury or damage done by the
vehicle in the driver’s charge.
   (B)   In addition, no person shall:
      (1)   Drive a vehicle in excess of 15 mph on any cemetery road;
      (2)   Drive off the established roads unless permission to do so is given
by the Sexton;
      (3)   Use a cemetery road as a public thoroughfare;
      (4)   Park or allow an automobile to come to a full stop in front of an
open grave unless such automobile is attending a funeral;
      (5)   Drive all-terrain vehicles or snowmobiles within the cemetery
grounds, except on official business;
      (6)   Make any unnecessary noise, such as loud talking, yelling, blowing
of horns, whistles, and the like; and/or
      (7)   Cause any vehicle to be within the cemetery grounds, except during
the hours established for the cemetery grounds to be open.
(Prior Code, § 1062.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.06 HOURS.
   The entrances of the cemetery shall be open from 8:00 a.m. to one-half hour
after sunset, and no person shall be permitted to enter the cemetery grounds
other than during such hours, except by special permission of the Sexton.
(Prior Code, § 1062.06)
CONDITIONS AND REGULATIONS
§ 91.20 LOT PLANTING, DECORATING, AND IMPROVEMENTS.
   To create and preserve the maximum beauty of the entire cemetery, the
following rules shall be observed.
   (A)   The city reserves to itself the sole right to plant and maintain all
permanent plantings within the cemetery. Lot owners desiring special permanent
plantings on their lots, if in the sections permitting monuments, may make
their request to the Sexton, who may permit such planting to be done at the lot
owner’s expense, and such planting shall immediately become the property of the
cemetery. All plantings so installed shall be in conformance with a prepared
and approved plan and subject to the satisfaction and approval of the Sexton.
Lot owners desiring re-seeding or re-sodding of lots must furnish all
materials, including seed, sod, and fertilizer, and must pay for all labor and
special equipment used for such work. The city’s responsibility for the
successful maturing of such sod and/or seed shall cease upon installation of
such materials. Watering shall be the responsibility of the owner.
   (B)   Seasonal and perennial plants will be limited to the width of the
monument (or markers, if there is no family monument) and will not exceed ten
inches in depth. Permanent urns will not be permitted. Failure to maintain urns
presently installed will be cause for removal thereof.
   (C)   Receptacles for cut flowers will be permitted if installed flush with
the surface of the lawn. Flush marker areas of the cemetery are restricted to
floral displays that can be moved to facilitate lawn mowing and to receptacles
that are recessed flush to the ground and which may be moved for mowing
purposes.
   (D)   Winter decorations may be maintained on graves until May 1, at which
time they may be removed by cemetery employees. Rubbish, refuse and unused
containers shall not be left on lots, but shall be placed at the edge of the
nearest accessible road. The city reserves the right to remove all floral
designs, flowers, trees, shrubs, plants or herbage of any kind from the
cemetery as soon as, in the judgment of the Sexton or his or her assistants,
they become unsightly, dangerous, detrimental, diseased, or when they do not
conform to established standards.
(Prior Code, § 1062.07)
§ 91.21 MONUMENTS; CORNER POSTS.
   (A)   Monuments shall be designed with reference to the topography and
location of the monument to the surrounding area. No more than one monument
shall be erected on a lot platted for less than two graves. Monuments erected
on two grave lots shall not exceed 38 inches in length or 14 inches in width,
and those erected on three grave lots shall not exceed 48 inches in length or
14 inches in width. On lots of four graves or more, the area of the base of any
monument shall not occupy more than 6% of the lot area.
   (B)   Except where otherwise permitted at the time of the sale of a lot, no
monument shall be placed upon any lot unless such lot has been paid for in
full.
   (C)   No corner post shall be permitted unless it is flush with the surface
of the ground.
(Prior Code, § 1062.08)
§ 91.22 MARKERS.
   (A)   Single non-flush markers shall consist of one piece and shall not be
less than 14 inches nor more than 24 inches in length, nor less than eight
inches nor more than 12 inches in width.
   (B)   Upright markers shall not exceed 16 inches in height.
(Prior Code, § 1062.09)
§ 91.23 MONUMENT AND MARKER MATERIALS.
   (A)   No material except granite, a good grade of white marble, cut stone
from recognized monument quarries, or standard bronze, shall be used for
markers or monuments. Bronze may be used for markers extending above the grade
only if attached to a granite base. The use of two or more kinds of materials
varying in color or texture shall not be permitted on any one lot. No materials
except granite or standard bronze shall be used for flush markers.
   (B)   Duplication of markers as to materials, size, and finish is permitted.
But unless such duplication is made, only flush markers may be installed, which
shall conform in width and length to the marker to be replaced.
(Prior Code, § 1062.10)
§ 91.24 FOUNDATIONS.
   (A)   All monuments and markers shall be placed on foundations of solid
masonry of not less in width and length than the base of the monument or marker
to be installed thereon, and at a depth of not less than five feet or as deep
as possible thereunder.
   (B)   Foundations for upright markers or monuments will be left no more than
two inches below the grade of the lot, and shall have at the top thereof a
collar extending outward from the top of the foundation four inches bordering
the entire top of the foundation.
   (C)   (1)   All materials used in the construction of any foundation,
monument, or headstone must be inspected by the Sexton.
      (2)   All construction and installation relative to foundation,
headstones, or monuments must be performed during the regular city working
hours, and all such construction and installation must be performed under the
supervision of the Sexton.
(Prior Code, § 1062.11)
§ 91.25 FUNERALS.
   (A)   The Sexton, or one of his or her assistants, is expected to attend
every interment and to see that the rules, regulations, and strict proprieties
of the place are observed.
   (B)   No burials shall be made on Sundays and legal holidays, except by
order of the county’s Health Officer.
   (C)   No interment equipment, except that provided or approved by the city,
shall be used.
   (D)   Workers engaged in the vicinity of a burial shall suspend their labors
during services at the grave.
(Prior Code, § 1062.12)
§ 91.26 INTERMENT.
   No interment shall take place without a burial permit, nor until all laws,
codes, rules, and regulations relative to burials have been complied with. The
city shall not be liable for such burial permit or responsible for the accuracy
of the data contained therein, or for the identity of the person to be interred
or entombed. No grave shall be opened unless the grave space has been paid for,
with the exception of indigent cases, or unless the funeral director assumes
the responsibility of payment for such grave space. Funeral directors making
arrangements for burials shall be responsible for all interment charges if not
paid by the owner or his or her agent. If the deceased to be interred is not
the owner or is not a member of the owner’s immediate family, written consent
of the owner, owners, or authorized agent must be filed with the City Clerk
before interment may be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 1062.13)
§ 91.27 RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY; OPENING OF GRAVES; DELIVERY OF MATERIALS.
   The city or its agents or employees shall not be held responsible for errors
in the location of graves on lots, arising from improper instructions by lot
owners. Orders from funeral directors shall be construed as orders from lot
owners. Under no circumstances shall the city assume responsibility for errors
in opening graves when orders are given by telephone. No graves shall be opened
except by workers employed by the cemetery management. No vaults or other
materials shall be delivered to the cemetery on Sundays or city observed legal
holidays, except by order of the county’s Health Officer. Funeral directors
shall arrange the time of a funeral so that cemetery workers can complete
interment by 3:00 p.m., except in cases of emergency.
(Prior Code, § 1062.14)
§ 91.28 DISINTERMENT AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   Disinterment and removal of a body shall not be made without a
disinterment permit, notice in writing to the Sexton, and the permission in
writing of the lot owner and next of kin of the deceased. Graves shall not be
opened for inspection, except for official investigation by proper legal
proceedings.
   (B)   After the close of any funeral service at the grave and after the
placing of a body in the receiving vault, it shall not be permissible for
anyone to open the casket or to touch the body therein without the consent in
writing of the legal representative of the deceased or a court order for that
purpose.
   (C)   The city shall exercise due care in making a disinterment and/or
removal, but it shall assume no liability for any damage to any casket or
burial case incurred in making the disinterment and/or removal.
(Prior Code, § 1062.15)
§ 91.29 EXCEPTIONS.
   None of the provisions of this chapter are intended to violate any burial
customs of any religious organization, and where any contradictions exist,
exceptions to this chapter shall be permitted by the City Manager if they are
not in violation of any codes, health regulations, or laws.
(Prior Code, § 1062.16)
§ 91.30 USE OF RECEIVING VAULTS.
   Receiving vaults are for temporary use only and on a rental basis to non-
residents of the city and under no circumstances shall a body be considered as
interred or buried by reason of being placed therein. However, the same permits
must be procured for placing bodies in the receiving vaults as for burials, and
the burial order will be issued the same as for immediate interment in a grave.
A deposit sufficient to cover the cost of opening and closing a grave, and
purchase of a single grave plus a rental charge for use of the receiving vault
by non-residents of the city, shall be required at the time of placing the
remains in the vault. Upon failure to make suitable arrangements for the final
disposition of the remains, within a reasonable time, or upon failure to pay
rental when required, the city may, in its discretion, remove the body and
inter it in a single grave, after first having mailed a certified letter,
return receipt requested, to the last known address of the person who made the
placement, stating its intention of making said removal, and shall then retain
said deposit as liquidated damages. In extremely cold weather or after a heavy
snow, all bodies will be placed in the receiving vault and retained there until
the cemetery management can make suitable arrangements for burial, and
arrangements must be made for their removal at as early a date as possible
thereafter. From May to November, bodies will be placed in the receiving vault
only on special written order from the Sexton, and, if they are to remain for
over three days, must be enclosed in hermetically sealed boxes as approved by
the county’s Health Officer. The remains of any person who has died of an
infectious and/or contagious disease shall not be allowed to be deposited in
the receiving vault, except on a special permit from the county’s Health
Officer stating that the rules and regulations of the Department of Health
regarding such cases have been complied with. Under no circumstances shall
visitors be admitted to the vaults.
(Prior Code, § 1062.17)
§ 91.31 PURCHASES, TRANSFERS, OR ASSIGNMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   All lots shall be sold subject to the provisions of this
chapter, or those hereafter adopted, and the muniment of title shall so state.
      (2)   No lot shall be used for any purpose other than the burial of human
remains and the placing of appropriate memorials.
      (3)   Interment of the remains of any person other than the owner of a
lot or any member of the immediate family will be permitted only after written
consent by the owner, owners, or authorized agent has been filed with the City
Clerk.
      (4)   In the case of a minor, the guardian or authorized agent thereof
shall give such consent upon proof of authority to act.
      (5)   Burial lots are exempt from ordinary taxes and cannot be seized on
execution.
      (6)   The city may impose specific charges against lots.
   (B)   No deceased paupers or indigents buried at public expense shall be
buried in any lot unless such paupers or indigents shall be residents of the
city, Negaunee Township, Richmond Township, or unless such paupers or indigents
or their families shall own a lot in the city cemetery, in which the said
indigents or paupers can be buried.
   (C)   The interment of any body on the lot owned by someone other than the
deceased, for remuneration, is hereby prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 1062.18)
§ 91.32 PURCHASE OF LOTS, NICHES, CRYPTS, AND GRAVES.
   All arrangements for the purchase of lots, niches, crypts, and graves must
be made at the cemetery office, and when the full purchase price has been paid
to the City Treasurer, the purchaser will receive an exclusive license and
privilege of burial in such form as the city may approve, and will be issued a
certificate of ownership. Lots, niches, crypts, and grounds shall be sold at
prices fixed by Council.
(Prior Code, § 1062.19)
§ 91.33 TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT OF LOTS.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   A transfer or assignment of any lot, or of an interest
therein, may only be made to the city, by the surrender of the certificate of
burial rights, with the assignment, duly executed, attached thereto or endorsed
thereon.
         (b)   The transferee or assignee, in such case, shall be entitled to
be reimbursed only for the amount paid for such lot or interest therein, as
shown on the certificate of burial rights.
         (c)   In the event of a transfer or assignment of a portion of any
such lot not used for burial purposes, such amount shall be the proportion of
such payment as the unused portion of the lot bears to the entire lot.
         (d)   Such transfer or assignment shall thereafter be recorded on the
books of the cemetery, and if only a portion of a lot is so transferred or
assigned, a new certificate shall be issued to the owner of the lot for the
portion of the lot retained.
      (2)   If any indebtedness remains on any such lot due the city from the
owner at the time of such transfer or assignment, such indebtedness shall first
be deducted from the amount of the payment to the owner for the transfer or
assignment.
   (B)   Upon such transfer or assignment, such lot or interest therein shall
become the sole property of the city and subject to resale by it to others at
such price therefor as may be deemed equitable, consistent with current
schedules of rates and charges therefor.
   (C)   Prices may be revised at any time by Council as conditions require.
(Prior Code, § 1062.20)
§ 91.34 USE OF CONCRETE ROUGH BOXES OR VAULTS.
   (A)   The use of concrete rough boxes or vaults shall be compulsory for all
burials requiring a five foot or larger opening.
   (B)   These boxes shall be constructed of concrete of proper mix and
properly reinforced to withstand a minimum compressive force of 4,500 pounds
per square inch.
(Prior Code, § 1062.21)
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.45 RATES AND CHARGES.
   Rates and charges for the operation and use of the city cemetery shall be as
established from time to time by resolution of Council.
(Prior Code, § 1062.22)
§ 91.46 PERPETUAL CARE FUND.
   A Perpetual Care Fund shall be established for the sale of lots. 30% of the
effective sale price of each lot shall be placed in such fund.
(Prior Code, § 1062.23)
§ 91.47 VIOLATIONS.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 1062.24) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 92: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
Teal Lake
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Purpose and intent
   
92.03   Use of absolute control area
   
92.04   Limited control area
   
92.05   Permissible activities in the absolute control area
   
92.06   Permissible activities in the limited control area
   
92.07   Construction within the absolute control area
   
92.08   Litter
   
92.09   Non-electric motors prohibited on lake
   
92.10   Launching of non-electric watercraft from public property prohibited
   
92.11   Promulgation of rules for use of beach area
   
92.12   Parks
TEAL LAKE
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABSOLUTE CONTROL AREA. The area designated in this subchapter, or
subsequently designated by resolution of Council, in which there is located the
water intake or other facilities related to the city water supply system.
   ENCLOSURE. A shanty, windbreak, fishing house, tent, or other enclosure or
shield of any kind.
   LIMITED CONTROL AREA. All portions of the waters of Teal Lake not designated
as being within the absolute control area.
(Prior Code, § 1064.01)
§ 92.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The waters of Teal Lake have been used as a water supply for the residents
of the city for drinking and other human consumption. Although the city is now
supplied with water from underground sources through the Negaunee-Ishpeming
Water Authority, it is the purpose and policy of the city to retain the
capability of resuming the use of Teal Lake as its water supply in the event of
emergency or other unusual circumstances. It is the intention of this
subchapter to ensure the continued purity of the waters of Teal Lake for said
purposes.
(Prior Code, § 1064.02)
§ 92.03 USE OF ABSOLUTE CONTROL AREA.
   The portion of Teal Lake lying within a radius of 300 feet from the westerly
end of the city water system intake pipe shall be an absolute control area and
may not be used by any person for any purpose except to row, paddle, or sail a
boat or other watercraft over said area for the purpose of gaining access to a
limited control area or to the shoreline, without first securing a written
permit therefor from the City Manager or his or her designated representative.
The City Manager shall, in the spring of each year, cause a marker buoy to be
installed over the end of said water supply intake pipe.
(Prior Code, § 1064.03)
§ 92.04 LIMITED CONTROL AREA.
   The portion of Teal Lake not designated as an absolute control area in §
92.03 is hereby designated to be a limited control area.
(Prior Code, § 1064.04)
§ 92.05 PERMISSIBLE ACTIVITIES IN THE ABSOLUTE CONTROL AREA.
   (A)   Prior to issuing a permit for any kind of use within an absolute
control area, the City Manager or his or her designated representative shall
first ascertain that the intended use shall not, in any way, endanger the
continued purity of the waters of Teal Lake.
   (B)   The City Manager or his or her designated representative may issue a
permit for the use of an absolute control area for the following purposes:
      (1)   Treatment or repair of the municipal water supply system or any
part thereof;
      (2)   The enforcement of municipal or state laws by authorized law
enforcement agencies;
      (3)   Public safety purposes involving activities performed by public
safety personnel and authorized law enforcement agencies;
      (4)   The trapping and removal of fish or other wildlife from Teal Lake
by the Department of Natural Resources or other governmental agencies for fish
and wildlife management purposes, as authorized by the state; and/or
      (5)   Such other purposes as, in the opinion of the City Manager or his
or her designated representative, are reasonably necessary to assure the
maintenance of the purity of the waters of Teal Lake.
(Prior Code, § 1064.05)
§ 92.06 PERMISSIBLE ACTIVITIES IN THE LIMITED CONTROL AREA.
   No person shall use the waters of the limited control area of Teal Lake in
anyway, except as hereinafter specified:
   (A)   Fishing or swimming from the shore or shorelines;
   (B)   Winter fishing through the ice;
   (C)   Fishing or swimming from a boat propelled by oars, paddles, sails or
electric motors; and/or
   (D)   Sailing, canoeing, or other pleasure riding in watercraft not
propelled by any type of motor, other than an electric motor.
(Prior Code, § 1064.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.07 CONSTRUCTION WITHIN THE ABSOLUTE CONTROL AREA.
   (A)   The shoreline within the absolute control area shall not be used for
the construction of docks or wharfs, or for the storage or launching of boats
or other watercraft, or for the storage or construction of any kind of
enclosure or building for any other use, without first obtaining a permit for
such use from the City Manager.
   (B)   Before granting such a permit, the City Manager shall make a
determination that the proposed use for which the permit is being sought shall
not be detrimental to the continued purity of the waters of Teal Lake and shall
not conflict with the purpose and intent of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 1064.07)
§ 92.08 LITTER.
   No litter of any kind shall be placed or left upon the surface and/or the
shoreline of Teal Lake.
(Prior Code, § 1064.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.09 NON-ELECTRIC MOTORS PROHIBITED ON LAKE.
   No watercraft, vehicle, or machine of any kind, having or containing a motor
or engine of any kind, other than an electric motor or engine, shall be used in
or upon the waters of Teal Lake.
(Prior Code, § 1064.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.10 LAUNCHING OF NON-ELECTRIC WATERCRAFT FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   No person shall launch into Teal Lake from public property any watercraft,
vehicle, or machine of any kind, having or containing a motor or engine of any
kind, other than an electric motor or engine.
(Prior Code, § 1064.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.11 PROMULGATION OF RULES FOR USE OF BEACH AREA.
   The City Council may designate any portion of city-owned property adjacent
to Teal Lake as a city park and may promulgate rules for said park as provided
in §
92.12.
(Ord. 2010-1, passed 3-11-2010)
§ 92.12 PARKS.
   (A)   The City Council may, by resolution, designate any city-owned parcel
of land or any portion thereof to be a city park. City-owned property shall not
be considered open to public access or use unless designated as a public park
or otherwise specifically allowed.
   (B)   The City Council may, by resolution, adopt or change rules for any
city park. Said rules shall be maintained and made available to the public by
the City Clerk and may be posted at an entrance to the park. Violation of any
such rule constitutes a violation of this subchapter.
   (C)   Violations of this subchapter shall be considered civil infractions
pursuant to state statutes, and shall be subject to penalties as provided in
this subchapter. Law enforcement officers shall enforce all park rules.
Officers shall have the power to order any individual to immediately leave a
park, in addition to all other enforcement powers provided by law.
   (D)   The City Council may allow individuals to reserve any portion of a
park or park structure for exclusive use for a designated period of time. The
Council may, by resolution, adopt procedures and requirements for park
reservations and may require a fee for said reservations.
(Ord. 2010-1, passed 3-11-2010)
CHAPTER 93: STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
Sidewalk Construction and Repair
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   Compliance
   
93.03   Resolution of necessity and intention
   
93.04   Notice to property owner
   
93.05   Plans and specifications
   
93.06   Permission required; exception
   
93.07   Construction by city; costs
   
93.08   Collection of costs by city
   
93.09   Division of costs
   
93.10   Modification of aprons
Statutory reference:
   Failure of property owner to keep sidewalks free of obstructions, see
M.C.L.A. § 103.4
   Sidewalks generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 691.1401 et seq.
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSTRUCT. To construct, repair or rebuild.
   FRONTAGE. Either:
      (1)   For residences, which are construed to include premises used and
occupied exclusively for residential purposes, and for unimproved lots,
FRONTAGE means that portion of the sidewalk that is parallel to the main or
principal entrance to the dwelling or improvement thereon. When a residence is
located on a corner, FRONTAGE shall be deemed to include that portion of the
lot which does not front on the main entrance of the premises; or
      (2)   For commercial properties, which are construed to include all
improved properties, any portion of which is used for non-residential purposes,
FRONTAGE means all portions of sidewalk that abut thereon. For commercial
properties located on corners, FRONTAGE shall be deemed to include that portion
of the lot which does not front on the main entrance of the premises.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The owner of the lot adjoining the sidewalk to be
constructed, provided that if the owner of the lot improved has issued a mine
lease on said lot, then PROPERTY OWNER shall mean the lessee or owner of said
leasehold interest.
   SIDEWALK. The part of a public highway set aside and used for pedestrians,
and it shall always mean the curb and gutter customarily built in connection
with such sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 1020.01)
§ 93.02 COMPLIANCE.
   All sidewalks hereafter constructed in the city shall be in compliance with
the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 1020.02)
§ 93.03 RESOLUTION OF NECESSITY AND INTENTION.
   Council, by resolution or motion, shall determine the necessity of
constructing sidewalks in any street in the city and shall therein declare the
intention of the city to make said improvement. Such improvement shall be made
in accordance with the procedures for making special assessments provided for
in
Article X of the City Charter.
(Prior Code, § 1020.03)
§ 93.04 NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNER.
   The City Manager shall give notice, either by personal service or by
newspaper publication, to the property owner or owners adjoining the sidewalk
which is proposed to be constructed, of the intention of the city to make such
improvement and of the portion thereof to be assessed, such assessment to be
made in accordance with the provisions of Article X of the City Charter.
(Prior Code, § 1020.04)
§ 93.05 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   All sidewalks shall be constructed in compliance with the plans
therefor and with the standard specifications of the city.
   (B)   All concrete used in sidewalk construction shall, 28 days after
placement, be capable of resisting pressure of 2,500 pounds per square inch,
without failure.
(Prior Code, § 1020.05)
§ 93.06 PERMISSION REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   No sidewalk shall be constructed in the city by any sidewalk builder,
other than the city, without permission being obtained from the City Manager or
his or her designee. This permission shall be secured by the property owner who
shall in writing agree to construct the sidewalk in compliance with the grade
and specifications attached to such permission. The property owner shall be
responsible for the condition of the sidewalk.
   (B)   No such permission shall be required for the repair of any sidewalk
involving less than 50 square feet in area.
(Prior Code, § 1020.06)
§ 93.07 CONSTRUCTION BY CITY; COSTS.
   If the property owner shall fail or neglect to construct said sidewalk, for
20 days after the notice provided for in §
93.04 is given to him or her, then the City Manager shall cause said sidewalk
to be built and the City Manager shall prepare a detailed statement of all
expense involved in such construction. The statement shall be delivered by the
City Manager to the City Assessor who shall cause an assessment to be made
against the property owner in accordance with the procedures for making special
assessments provided for in Article X of the City Charter.
(Prior Code, § 1020.07)
§ 93.08 COLLECTION OF COSTS BY CITY.
   (A)   The cost of repairs to be charged against the property owner, as set
forth in §
93.07, shall be payable at the office of the City Treasurer on or before 60
days after said cost is billed to said property owner. If payment in full is
not made within such period, then the portion of the cost thereof for which the
property owner is liable shall constitute an assessment in accordance with the
procedures for making special assessments provided for in Article X of the City
Charter.
   (B)   The assessment, when confirmed by the City Manager, shall constitute a
lien against the interest of the property owner in the premises and shall have
the status of a special assessment. The Assessor of the city shall keep and
maintain a special assessment book in which he or she shall inscribe all
special assessments levied under these codified ordinances. Such special
assessments shall be collected according to the law in the same manner as other
city taxes, or the city may collect such assessment from the property owner in
an action of assumpsit brought in the name of the city after the City Manager
has authorized the same.
(Prior Code, § 1020.08)
§ 93.09 DIVISION OF COSTS.
   Whenever any sidewalk is constructed in the city under this subchapter, all
or a portion of the entire cost of labor and materials shall be billed to the
owner of the property benefitted, in accordance with the provisions of
Article X of the City Charter, which benefit shall be computed according to the
frontage of the property. The city shall pay out the remaining cost arising
from said improvement. The cost assumed by the city shall be limited to that
arising from sidewalk construction, and the city shall not participate in cost
arising from unusual land conditions or from the need to reinforce the
foundation of any sidewalk or from special or unusual situations.
(Prior Code, § 1020.09)
§ 93.10 MODIFICATION OF APRONS.
   The modification of the apron of any driveway using concrete, blacktopping,
or gravel, without written authority from the City Council, is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 1020.10)
CHAPTER 94: TREE AND FORESTRY MANAGEMENT
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Administration
   
94.03   Duties and responsibilities
   
94.04   Public tree care
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the
public has free access as a park.
   STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on
public right-of-way within the city.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
§ 94.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   The city’s Parks and Recreation Director or designee of the City Manager
shall be responsible for routine administrative duties related to this chapter.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
§ 94.03 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Parks and Recreation Commission to
study, investigate, counsel, and develop and/or update every ten years, and
administer a written comprehensive city tree and forestry management plan for
the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition
of trees and shrubs in parks, within public rights-of-way and in other public
areas, as well as tracts of tree covered public lands within the city that are
greater than three square acres. Such plan will be presented annually to the
City Council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the
official comprehensive city tree and forestry management plan for the city. The
Parks and Recreation Commission shall make all reasonable and necessary efforts
to facilitate the city achieving and maintaining “Tree City USA” status through
the Arbor Day Foundation, and when requested by the City Council, shall
consider, investigate, make finding, report, and recommend upon any special
matter or question coming within the scope of its work.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
§ 94.04 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove trees,
plants, and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes,
squares, and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to
preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds guided by
the standards found within the “Tree Owner's Manual for North Eastern and
Midwestern United States,” published by the United States Department of
Agriculture, Forestry Service, November, 2008. The city may remove, or cause or
order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition
or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines,
gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any
injurious fungus, insect, or other pest.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019; Ord. passed 2-8-2024)
CHAPTER 95: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
Public Nuisances
   
95.01   Purposes
   
95.02   Definitions
   
95.03   Nuisance defined and prohibited
   
95.04   Specific nuisances
   
95.05   Administration, inspections, enforcement, and notice
   
95.06   Time for correction, costs
   
95.07   Immediate action, expense, emergency orders, and abatement of
emergencies
   
95.08   Change in ownership
   
95.09   Removal of posted sign or notice
   
95.10   Existing remedies
Safety, Sanitation, and Health
   
95.25   Throwing objects
   
95.26   Holding on to motor vehicles
   
95.27   Hitchhiking
   
95.28   Expectorating, defecating, or urinating in public places
   
95.29   Discarding of garbage
   
95.30   Open burning; incinerators
 
   
95.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Health and sanitation generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.466 et seq.
   Health and sanitation in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.3, 117.4i
   Nuisance abatement; damages and expenses, see M.C.L.A. § 600.2940
   Nuisance generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 600.3801 et seq.
   Public safety generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.493 et seq.
   State housing law, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.401 et seq.
PUBLIC NUISANCES
§ 95.01 PURPOSES.
   Consistent with the letter and spirit of the provisions of M.C.L.A. § 117.3,
as amended, which authorize and direct home rule cities to enact ordinances and
to provide for the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and
property, the purposes of this subchapter are to prevent, reduce, or eliminate
nuisances, nuisance factors, or causes of nuisance within the city, thereby
providing for the public peace and health and for the safety of persons and
property within said city; to provide for the enforcement of this subchapter;
to provide a means by which such nuisances, nuisance factors or causes of
nuisance may be abated; and to provide penalties for the violation of this
subchapter.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
§ 95.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDON. The failure to continue the exercise of care, custody, and control
of property owned by a person, or that meets at two or more of the following
categories:
      (1)   Is open to entry;
      (2)   Is fire damaged to an extent which prohibits safe occupancy;
      (3)   Is the site of loitering or vagrancy;
      (4)   Has criminal activity on the premises;
      (5)   Demonstrates a lack of property maintenance and upkeep;
      (6)   Is under notice for being in violation of city ordinances;
      (7)   Is boarded for at least 30 days;
      (8)   Has taxes in arrears for a period of time exceeding 365 days;
      (9)   Is under condemnation notice or legal order to vacate;
      (10)   Is structurally unsound; and/or
      (11)   Is a potential hazard or danger to persons.
   ABANDONED VEHICLES. Any vehicle or trailer left for more than 72 hours on
any street, highway, alleyway, right-of-way, municipal parking lot, or
municipal easement that is unlicensed.
   APPROVED. Acceptable to the Code Official or other designee of the City
Manager or other designee.
   BUILDING. Any structure upon a property, presently or formerly used or
intended to be used in whole or in part for the purpose of commerce, trade,
manufacture, business, government, worship, education, office, medical,
storage, or any other purpose.
   CODE OFFICIAL or OTHER DESIGNEE OF THE CITY MANAGER. The official who is
charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly
authorized representative. THE CODE OFFICIAL or OTHER DESIGNEE OF THE CITY
MANAGER may be the Chief of Police and/or the Building Inspector, the Zoning
Administrator, or any duly authorized representative of the City Manager or
Chief of Police.
   CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy or use.
   COST OF ABATEMENT. The actual costs of the demolition or repair of the
structure less revenue obtained if salvage was conducted prior to demolition or
repair. COSTS shall include, but not be limited to, expenses incurred or
necessitated related to demolition or emergency repairs, such as asbestos
survey and abatement if necessary; costs of inspectors, testing agencies, or
experts retained relative to the demolition or emergency repairs; costs of
testing; surveys for other materials that are controlled or regulated from
being dumped in a landfill; title searches; mailing(s); postings; recording;
and attorney fees expended for recovering of the cost of emergency repairs or
to obtain or enforce an order of demolition made by a Code Official or other
designee of the City Manager, or designee of the City Manager.
   DANGEROUS. A menace to the health, safety, or well-being of the public.
   DAY. A 24-hour period.
   DETERIORATION. To weaken, disintegrate, corrode, rust, or decay and lose
effectiveness.
   EASEMENT. The portion of land or property reserved for present or future use
by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The
EASEMENT shall be permitted to be for use under, on, or above a said lot or
lots.
   EMERGENCY. A condition which is a violation of this subchapter and which
constitutes an imminent danger calling for immediate action in order to avoid
death, injury, or illness to a human or the destruction or severe damaging of
real or personal property.
   EXTERIOR. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the
control of owners or operators of such premises.
   GARBAGE. Any spoiled or discarded animal or vegetable material resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food for humans or
animals, as well as other organic waste material subject to rapid
decomposition, including trash to which such material has adhered.
   GRAFFITI. Any mark or marks on any surface or structure made without prior
permission of the property owner and made in any manner, including but not
limited to, writing, inscribing, drawing, tagging, sketching, spray-painting,
painting, etching, scratching, carving, engraving, scraping, or attaching.
Chalk marks on sidewalks are not GRAFFITI.
   HAZARDOUS. A condition which has been determined to be likely to result in
the death, injury, or illness of a human or result in severe damage to real or
personal property.
   IMMINENT DANGER. Any condition which could cause serious or life-threatening
injury or death at any time.
   INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises
of insects, rodents, vermin, or other pests.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle, camper, or ORV which cannot be driven
upon the public streets for reason including but not limited to being
unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being
moved under its own power.
   JUNK. An accumulation of garbage, scrap lumber, wood, plastic, metal, old
furniture, mattresses, appliances, building materials, equipment, inoperable
motor vehicles, or vehicle parts that are unsightly and/or promote infestation,
that are new, old, or discarded articles that are considered useless or of
little value.
   MISCELLANEOUS DEBRIS. Those things or conditions existing on property in the
city which create hazards to the public and to children from a health or fire
standpoint, including conditions which by their unsightly appearance can result
in depressing the values of other property in the immediate area.
   NEGLECT. The lack of proper maintenance for a building or structure.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. Any rental unit, commercial, industrial, or any
property occupied by someone other than the owner.
   NUISANCE. All property conditions that are prohibited by this subchapter.
   OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized
or occupied.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm, corporation, or entity having
legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official
records of the state, county, or municipality as holding title, including the
guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of
the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a
court.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, or any other group acting
as a unit.
   PEST ELIMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that serve as their food or water; by other approved PEST ELIMINATION
methods.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement, or public way, including
any structures thereon.
   PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated, or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
   RECURRENT VIOLATION. Any identical or substantially similar violation of
this subchapter within one calendar year of the last noticed violation.
   RUBBISH. Any combustible and non-combustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust, and other similar materials.
   SALVAGE, JUNK, OR SCRAP VEHICLE. Any vehicle, camper, ATV, ORV, or trailer
that is partially disassembled, missing doors, windows, wheels and/or tires,
and other parts.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
   TRASH. Waste materials and items which are not in good repair or are
discarded and which are of little or no value, including, but not limited to
plaster, paper, wrappings, plant cuttings, household furnishings, building
materials, packing and clothing, appliances, equipment, machinery, or parts
thereof.
   UNLICENSED VEHICLE. Any vehicle, camper, ATV, ORV, or trailer that does not
maintain current license plate, tags, and/or registration as issued by the
Secretary of State or other appropriate licensing agency or bureau.
   VACANT. Any residential building that has not been inhabited for more than
90 days.
   WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level,
square, in line, undamaged, and without marring adjacent work.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
§ 95.03 NUISANCE DEFINED AND PROHIBITED.
   A PUBLIC NUISANCE is whatever unreasonably annoys, injures, or endangers the
safety, health, comfort, or repose of the public; violates any city ordinance;
offends public decency, interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous any
street, highway, navigable waterway, lake, or stream; or in any way renders the
public insecure in life or property. Public nuisances shall include, but not be
limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this subchapter. No
person shall maintain or permit to be maintained any nuisance, nuisance factor,
or cause of nuisance upon any property in the city which is owned, leased,
rented, occupied, or otherwise under the control of such person.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 SPECIFIC NUISANCES
   The following non-exhaustive list of uses, buildings, structures, premises,
and activities are hereby specifically deemed to be nuisances, nuisance
factors, or causes of nuisance and are hereby prohibited:
   (A)   Buildings, structures, and premises:
      (1)   That present imminent danger or an emergency;
      (2)   That have been deemed dangerous, hazardous, unfit for occupancy, or
condemned pursuant to the provisions by any local, state, or federal Code
Official;
      (3)   That are used for unlawful purposes or itself/themselves unlawful
or in violation of local, state, or federal law, in whole or in part;
      (4)   That are vacant or abandoned;
      (5)   That lack workmanlike construction, demonstrate significant
exterior deterioration, neglect, or graffiti, or that has an infestation and/or
need pest elimination;
      (6)   That infringe on any public way or public easement without
permission; and/or
      (7)   That cause excessive noise, odor, vibrations, light, air borne
contaminants, pollution, smoke, or other condition negatively affecting the
general welfare of the city and its residents.
   (B)   Any property or premises with noxious or poisonous weeds or an
unmaintained lawn/grass in excess of eight inches;
   (C)   Any property or premises with dead trees, branches, shrubs, leaves, or
other organic matter that present a fire danger or other health or safety
hazard;
   (D)   Any storage or accumulation of trash, junk, garbage, rubbish, or
miscellaneous debris of any kind, without a landfill construction or operation
permit, except for:
      (1)   The storage or accumulation of domestic garbage, rubbish, junk, or
miscellaneous debris in such a manner as not to create a health or safety
hazard; and/or
      (2)   The maintenance for non-commercial purposes of a compost pile in
such a manner as not to create a health or safety hazard.
   (E)   The storage or accumulation of abandoned vehicle(s), salvage, junk or
scrap vehicles, inoperable motor vehicles, and unlicensed vehicles; and
   (F)   Any other use, building, structure, premises, and/or activity that
substantially meets the definition of a nuisance as defined in §
95.03.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.05 ADMINISTRATION, INSPECTIONS, ENFORCEMENT, AND NOTICE.
   (A)   Application. The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all
buildings, structures, and properties located in the city.
   (B)   Enforcement. The city may, but shall not be required to, bring a
violation of the standards established in this subchapter to the attention of
the property owner or other responsible person.
   (C)   Inspections authorized. The standards of this subchapter are to be
enforced by inspections of buildings, structures, premises, property, and uses
by a Code Official(s) or other duly appointed or empowered individuals.
   (D)   Notice. The police, Code Official, City Manager, or other duly
appointed representative shall serve a written notice of violation of any
nuisance, which will include identification of the property, a statement of the
violation and why the notice is being issued, an order of correction allowing
time to abate the nuisance and make the repairs and improvements, the right to
appeal the violation, and a statement indicating that the city may abate the
violation, charge such costs to the property owner, and/or file a lien against
the property, and/or the city may take any other action necessary to ensure the
abatement of the nuisance and recoupment of costs associated therewith. The
notice shall be served by personal delivery to the owner, or sent first-class
mail to the last known address of the owner.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
§ 95.06 TIME FOR CORRECTION, COSTS.
   (A)   Time to correct. Any notice of violation shall provide a specified
time for achieving compliance in relation to the seriousness of the violation.
If a notice of violation is issued, the following time limits shall be used:
      (1)   Not more than 24 hours for an emergency;
      (2)   Not more than ten days for correcting hazardous conditions;
      (3)   Not more than 30 days for all other violations, except as stated
otherwise below; and/or
      (4)   The Code Official or other designee of the City Manager may approve
an extension of time to correct a violation provided in a written notice when
there are documented extenuating circumstances beyond the control of the
responsible person and/or where the responsible person has made a substantial
documented effort to correct violations.
   (B)   Costs of abatement. Costs of abatement of nuisance(s) are the sole
responsibility of the property owner.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
§ 95.07 IMMEDIATE ACTION, EXPENSE, EMERGENCY ORDERS, AND ABATEMENT OF
EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   Immediate action. The City Manager may take immediate, reasonable
measures to abate any nuisance, nuisance factor, or cause of nuisance, without
prior approval or order of Council, if, in the opinion of the City Manager, the
public health or safety requires immediate action, or if the responsible person
cannot be contacted or refuses or fails to correct an emergency condition
within the time ordered. In circumstances where the public health or safety
does not require immediate action, the City Manager may take reasonable
measures to abate any nuisance, nuisance factor, or cause of nuisance after
prior approval or order of Council.
   (B)   Expenses. Any expense incurred by the city for the purpose of abating
a nuisance, nuisance factor or cause of nuisance, pursuant to the provisions of
this subchapter, shall be:
      (1)   Assessed as a lien upon the property involved;
      (2)   Placed on the tax roll for the property;
      (3)   Sought from the responsible through three special assessment on the
property; and/or
      (4)   Sought from the responsible party through a nuisance or other
appropriate court action at law or equity in a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   Emergency orders. If the Code Official or other designee of the City
Manager, or designee of the City Manager determines that a condition exists or
is likely to exist which is an emergency, the city shall immediately attempt to
verbally inform the responsible person and all occupants of the building of the
nature of the condition. The city shall immediately attempt to give verbal
notice to the responsible person to correct the condition. Such an order shall
be effective immediately. A written notice of the violation as called for by
this subchapter shall also be prepared and mailed and/or personally served to
the responsible person as soon as practicable. If notice is attempted to be
served in good faith, but cannot be completed prior to having to take action
necessary to abate an emergency condition, such notice shall be posted upon the
subject property in a prominent location. Failure to comply with an emergency
notice or order is a violation of this subchapter.
   (D)   Emergency entry. When an emergency is believed to exist within a
property, building, or accessory building subject to this subchapter, the city
shall have the right to enter immediately and at any time thereafter, without a
warrant or without requesting permission. Entry must be for the sole purpose of
public safety and determining that an emergency exists or to abate an emergency
condition known to exist.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
§ 95.08 CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP.
   An owner or responsible person of a property who has received a notice
regarding a violation of a provision of this subchapter shall notify the city
by writing the Code Official or other designee of the City Manager within ten
days of transferring ownership of the cited property to another person or
entity. The notice to the city shall include the name, address, and telephone
number of the new owner and the effective date of the transfer of ownership.
The city shall issue a new notice of violation to any new person or entity
assuming the ownership or the status of responsible person for any property
which has been cited in a notice of violation. An owner or responsible person
who has failed to comply with a notice of violation shall remain responsible
for any violations cited in a notice of violation and shall not be relieved of
the responsibility of having violated any provision of this subchapter by
transferring ownership or responsible person status.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
§ 95.09 REMOVAL OF POSTED SIGN OR NOTICE.
   No person shall remove, damage, deface, interfere with, move, or conceal any
notice or sign posted in accordance with the provision of this subchapter
without first obtaining permission of the city or having first abated the
nuisance.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.10 EXISTING REMEDIES.
   The provisions in this subchapter shall not be construed to abolish or
impair existing remedies of the city or its officers or agencies relating to
the removal or demolition of any structure that is dangerous, unsafe, or
insanitary.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
SAFETY, SANITATION, AND HEALTH
§ 95.25 THROWING OBJECTS.
   (A)   No person shall cast, throw, or propel any object from, over, or onto
any public place in such a manner as to obstruct vehicle or pedestrian traffic
or endanger lives or property.
   (B)   No person shall place any structure, objects, or items for sale,
storage, donations, or otherwise upon any city property including a street or
alley right-of-way, parking lot, or public place. Trash cans, trash bags, and
items for curbside recycling may be placed for collection from 3:00 p.m. the
day before the collection day until 9:00 p.m. on the day of collection,
pursuant to §
53.04(C). Any containers, items, or debris placed outside of these hours shall
be considered a violation of this subchapter. Where a mailbox or marker light
is required by the United States Postal Service, said mailbox or marker light
shall not be considered in violation of this subchapter. In event of a
violation of this subchapter, the city may remove and dispose of any such
structure, object, or item without consideration for damaging the item nor
determining its rightful owner.
(Prior Code, § 682.01) (Ord. passed 9-8-2011) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.26 HOLDING ON TO MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person shall grab or otherwise hang on to the exterior portion of any
motor vehicle for the purpose of obstructing or hindering the free passage of
said motor vehicle or for the purpose of being pulled along by said motor
vehicle, provided that this subchapter shall not be construed to prohibit the
normal operation of a motorcycle, bicycle, or other similar motor vehicle or
the towing of one motor vehicle by another.
(Prior Code, § 682.02) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.27 HITCHHIKING.
   No person shall request, ask for, or solicit, either orally or physically, a
ride from the operator of any motor vehicle while said solicitor is located on
a highway or street.
(Prior Code, § 682.03) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.28 EXPECTORATING, DEFECATING, OR URINATING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall expectorate, defecate, or urinate on or in any public place,
provided that this subchapter shall not be construed to prohibit such activity
in bathrooms or restrooms designated and maintained for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 682.04) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.29 DISCARDING OF GARBAGE.
   No person shall throw away or discard any garbage in any public place, other
than in a container designed and placed for the purpose.
(Prior Code, § 682.05) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.30 OPEN BURNING; INCINERATORS.
   (A)   Burning prohibited. No person shall cause or permit, except as herein
provided, any burning in an open fire or in an incinerator, of garbage or other
combustible refuse, waste material or yard clippings, including by way of
description, but not by way of limitation, paper, leaves, tree trimmings,
grass, weeds, oil, gasoline, solvents of any kind, plastic, vinyl, nylon, or
other similar artificial or human-made substances.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Fires of charcoal or non-ash producing fuels shall be permitted
when used on private property or in public recreation areas relative to
consumption of food.
      (2)   Small recreational fires shall be permitted if they are approved by
the Fire Chief.
   (C)   Conflict of laws. This subchapter is to be interpreted in conjunction
with all other applicable laws. Whenever a provision of this subchapter imposes
more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions, or limitations than are
imposed or required by a provision of any other law or ordinance, then the
provision of this subchapter shall govern. Conversely, whenever a provision of
any other law or ordinance imposes more stringent requirements, regulations,
restrictions, or limitations than are imposed by this subchapter, then the
provisions of such other law or ordinance shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 682.06) (Ord. passed 2-20-2006) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this subchapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Violations separate. Each violation of any provision of §§
95.01 through
95.10 may be charged as separate violation. Each violation shall be denominated
as a separate count on the complaint or citation. Upon conviction in a court of
law, the defendant shall be sentenced separately on each count.
      (2)   Penalties and sentencing. Upon conviction for violation of any
provision of §§
95.01 through
95.10, the court shall sentence the defendant to pay a fine not less than $50,
but not more than up to $500. The court shall, when justice so requires, from
requiring a defendant to bring property subject to §§
95.01 through
95.10 into compliance with the terms herein and to prevent further violations.
      (3)   Fines and fees. Fines shall reflect the seriousness of each offense
as well as the history of the person convicted. Fines shall not be less than
the following amounts for each separate offense:
         (a)   At least $150 for each failure to comply with an emergency order
or correct a hazardous condition; and
         (b)   At least $50 for each failure to comply with any other provision
of §§
95.01 through
95.10 or any order or notice issued in accordance with the provisions of §§
95.01 through
95.10.
      (4)   Fines doubled. In cases of recurrent violations, which shall be
defined as any cited violation not remediated or cured within 15 after the
initial citation is issued, any applicable fine will be doubled up to $500
maximum fine.
      (5)   City costs. Upon conviction for violation of any provision of §§
95.01 through
95.10, the court shall order the defendant to reimburse the city for all of the
costs of enforcement of §§
95.01 through
95.10 attributable to the violations for which the defendant was convicted,
including but not limited to, the costs of inspection, prosecution, and
administration. If such condition is not imposed, the city may file a civil
action against the defendant and may, upon proof of the defendant’s conviction,
recover all of the costs referred to above.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
CHAPTER 96: ANIMALS
Section
   
96.01   Purpose
   
96.02   Definitions
   
96.03   Animal Control Officer
   
96.04   Licenses for dogs
   
96.05   Kennels
   
96.06   Enclosures
   
96.07   Animal bites and procedures
   
96.08   Impounding; fees
   
96.09   Seizing animals
   
96.10   Livestock or poultry in non-agricultural areas
   
96.11   Violations
   
96.12   Enforcement
   
96.12   Preservation of certain rights
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to secure and maintain the public health,
safety, and welfare of the residents and property owners of the city by
providing for the control, conduct, and care of animals within the city.
(Ord. passed 3-11-2021)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADEQUATE CARE. The provision of sufficient food, water, shelter, sanitary
conditions, exercise, and veterinary medical attention in order to maintain an
animal in a state of good health.
   ANIMAL. Birds; fish; reptiles; amphibians; poultry; ornamental and/or game
birds; arachnids and insects; and all non-human mammals, male, female or
sexually altered, and offspring thereof, including dogs, cats, livestock, and
poultry.
   ANIMAL BITES. A penetration of the skin caused by an animal.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. A person or persons whose duty it is to enforce this
chapter and other laws and regulations pertaining to animal welfare and control
within the boundaries of the city.
   BUSINESS DAY. Days when the city offices are open, not including Saturdays,
Sundays or holidays.
   CALENDAR DAY. All days on a calendar, including Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays.
   CITY. The City of Negaunee, Michigan.
   COUNTY. The County of Marquette, Michigan.
   DISPOSE. To donate, sell, reclaim, or to destroy an animal in a humane and
lawful manner.
   DOG. Male, female, offspring or a sexually altered animal of the
domesticated canine family.
   ENCLOSURE. A structure or fencing used to immediately restrict one or more
animals to a limited amount of space.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL. Any animal not identified in the definition of "animal"
provided in this part that is native to a foreign country or of foreign origin
or character, is not native to the United States, or was introduced from
abroad. This term specifically includes animals such as, but not limited to,
lions, leopards, elephants, camels, antelopes, anteaters, kangaroos and water
buffalo, and species of foreign domestic cattle such as Ankole, Gayal and yak.
   HOLIDAY. A day of the year city offices are officially closed as approved
annually by the Negaunee City Council.
   IMPOUND FACILITY. A designated location for the purpose of holding and
caring for impounded or confined animals.
   KENNEL. An establishment where dogs are kept for pay for purposes of
breeding, board or sale; or a premises where four or more dogs are kept.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any person employed or elected by the people of the
state, or by any municipality, county, or township, whose duty it is to
preserve peace or to make arrests or to enforce the law.
   LIVESTOCK. Animals used for human food and fiber of animals used for service
to human beings. This includes, but is not limited to, cattle, swine, llamas,
goats, bison, horses and rabbits. LIVESTOCK does not include dogs or cats.
   NUISANCE ANIMAL. Any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the
life or health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with
the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to the enjoyment of life or
property. The term NUISANCE ANIMAL shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Any animal that is repeatedly found running at large;
      (2)   Any animal that damages, soils, defiles or defecates on any
property other than that of its owner;
      (3)   Any animal that makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited
to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances
causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or
others in close proximity to the animal or the premises where the animal is or
harbored;
      (4)   Any animal in season that is not confined so as to allow attraction
or contact with other animals;
      (5)   Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner, that
without provocation, molests, attacks, or otherwise interferes with the freedom
of movement of persons in a public right-of-way or otherwise;
      (6)   Any animal that is offensive or dangerous to the public health,
safety or welfare by virtue of having attacked, bitten, or physically injured
human beings or other animals, without provocation; and
      (7)   Any exotic animal.
   OWNER. Any person or persons having a right of property in an animal, every
person who keeps or harbors an animal, or has an animal in his or her care or
control, and every person who knowingly permits an animal to remain at or about
any premises occupied by the person.
   POULTRY. Domesticated fowl (such as chickens, turkeys, ducks or geese) or
any other fowl raised for meat or eggs.
   REASONABLE CONTROL. An animal that is leashed or obedient to the commands or
restraint of the owner or person having custody or control of the animal.
   REPEAT OFFENSE. A second, or any subsequent, municipal civil infraction
violation of the requirements or provisions of this chapter committed by a
person within any 24-month period, and for which the person admits
responsibility or is determined to be responsible.
   RUN AT LARGE. An animal that is free of its enclosure and is unrestrained
and is not under reasonable control.
   SERVICE DOG. Any dog that is individually trained to do work or perform
tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including a physical,
sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, and/or mental disability.
   STATE. The State of Michigan.
   SUSPECTED RABID ANIMAL. Any animal that bites or scratches, causing
penetration of the skin or an animal that exhibits apparent symptoms of rabies.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal in the process of threatening any person or
property, or any animal that in the opinion of a law enforcement agency or
officer repeatedly threatens persons or destroys or property.
(Ord. passed 3-11-2021)
§ 96.03 ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   (A)   The designated Animal Control Officer(s) shall be employed by the City
Police Department, and is deputized to enforce this chapter and the laws and
regulations of the state pertaining to animals, and to make complaint(s) to the
District Court or other appropriate court in regard to any violations.
   (B)   The Animal Control Officer(s) are authorized and empowered to enter
upon any property, but not in a dwelling without a warrant, where animals are
for purpose of an investigation or making inquiries about any animals on the
property if there is probable cause to believe that this chapter is being
violated.
   (C)   The Animal Control Officer shall investigate incidents involving any
animal reported or seen running at large, reported animal bites, alleged
dangerous animals, complaint of cruelty to animals, or other alleged violations
of this chapter or statutes of the state.
   (D)   Based on the officer’s investigation, the involved animal(s) may be
seized, transported and impounded at the impound facility in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter or the statutes of the state, and/or a citation
(s) may be issued to any person in violation of this chapter or statutes of the
state.
(Ord. passed 3-11-2021)
§ 96.04 LICENSES FOR DOGS.
   (A)   All dogs six months old or older in the city must be properly licensed
and have proof of a current rabies vaccination, unless the dog is properly
licensed under procedures established by the state and the county. Current dog
licenses issued by other jurisdictions within the state prior to residence in
the city shall be honored and valid for the remainder of the calendar year in
which they were issued.
   (B)   Any dog not confined in an enclosure, or not immediately engaged in
hunting, must wear or have affixed to itself proof of licensure and rabies
vaccination.
   (C)   No dog shall be exempt from a rabies vaccination, unless a registered
and practicing veterinarian of the state certifies in writing that such
vaccination would be detrimental to the health of the dog.
   (D)   No license or license tag issued for one dog shall be transferable to
another dog. Whenever ownership or possession of any dog is permanently
transferred from one person to another within the same county, the license of
such dog may likewise transfer, upon written notice given by the last
registered owner to the County Treasurer who shall note such transfer upon the
Treasurer records. This chapter does not require procurement of a new license
or the transfer of a license already secured where the possession of a dog is
temporarily transferred for the purpose of boarding, hunting, trial, or show.
(Ord. passed 3-11-2021)
§ 96.05 KENNELS.
   (A)   Any person(s) owning, keeping or operating a kennel within the city
shall possess an appropriate license from the County Treasurer or other
appropriate county-authorized agent.
   (B)   Any owner who is required to obtain a county kennel license shall post
a valid copy on the premises in a conspicuous location.
   (C)   Any person or persons owning, keeping or operating a kennel within the
city shall maintain such kennel pursuant to the requirements of this chapter,
and the laws and regulations of the state, including, but not limited to, the
Dog Law of 1919, being M.C.L.A. §§ 287.261 et seq.
(Ord. passed 3-11-2021)
§ 96.06 ENCLOSURES.
   (A)   All animal enclosures shall be structurally sound and maintained in
good repair to protect the animals from injury, to shield them from the sun and
adverse weather conditions, to contain them and to keep predators out.
   (B)   All enclosures shall be constructed and maintained so as to enable the
animals to remain dry and clean.
   (C)   All enclosures shall be constructed and maintained so as to provide
sufficient space to allow each animal to turn about freely and to easily stand,
sit and lie in a comfortable, normal position.
   (D)   The floors of an enclosure shall be constructed so as to protect the
animal’s feet and legs from injury.
   (E)   Each enclosure shall be provided with a solid resting surface which,
in the aggregate, shall be of an adequate size to comfortably hold all
occupants of the enclosure at the same time.
   (F)   If a house with a chain or another device is used as an enclosure for
an animal kept outdoors, the chain or other device used shall be placed or
attached so that the animal cannot become entangled with the chains or devices
of other animals or with objects. The chain or other device shall be the type
commonly used for the size of animal involved and shall be attached to the
animal by means of a well fitted collar or other appropriate means. The chain
or other device shall be at least three times the length of the animal as
measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail and shall allow the
animal convenient access to the animal house. The chain or device shall not be
of such length as to allow the animal off the premises or to access the public
right-of-way.
(Ord. passed 3-11-2021)
§ 96.07 ANIMAL BITES AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any owner of an animal kept as a pet that bites or scratches a person
or other animal penetrating the skin, shall be required to secure and confine
the animal inside an appropriate building or enclosure for a period of ten
calendar days. The owner shall also immediately report the bite or scratch to
the Animal Control Officer/City Police Department or the County Health
Department, as well as report any unusual behavior or appearance change in the
animal during the ten-calendar-day period. In the event the Animal Control
Officer has reason to believe the owner will not comply with this section, the
Animal Control Officer shall take custody of the animal and confine it at the
impound facility for ten business days at the expense of the owner.
   (B)   Upon a report of a bite or scratch of a person or other animal,
penetrating skin, the Animal Control Officer shall investigate and, if there is
human exposure, search out and attempt to discover the animal involved, the
owner of the animal, and proceed as described in this chapter.
   (C)   Any animal running loose after biting or scratching a person or other
animal, causing penetration of the skin, and whose owner cannot be determined,
shall be confined for ten business days at the city impoundment facility or
another local facility.
   (D)   Any wild animal that bites or scratches a person causing penetration
of the skin shall be immediately destroyed according to state-defined suspected
rabid animal procedures.
   (E)   Any animal, domestic or wild, which has bitten or scratched a person
or other animal causing penetration of the skin that cannot be apprehended may,
at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer, be immediately destroyed
according to state-defined suspected rabid animal procedures.
   (F)   Any animal, as previously described in any of the above sections, that
should die or become ill during the time of confinement will be suspected as
rabid and treated according to state-defined suspected rabid animal procedures.
(Ord. passed 3-11-2021)
§ 96.08 IMPOUNDING; FEES.
   (A)   (1)   Any animal observed to be in immediate danger by a law
enforcement officer or Animal Control Officer may be removed from the situation
by the quickest and most reasonable means available and placed in the impound
facility.
      (2)   Any animal found running at large may be seized by a law
enforcement officer and if the owner of the animal cannot be located in
accordance with the statutes of the state, the animal will be placed in the
impound facility.
      (3)   Upon impoundment of an animal, the law enforcement officer or
Animal Control Officer shall make reasonable effort to notify the owner of the
animal and inform the owner of the location of the animal and how custody can
be regained in accordance with the regulations of the city and the impound
facility.
      (4)   Any animal not redeemed within seven days shall be disposed of in
accordance with the provisions of the impoundment facility.
      (5)   Impound fees shall be posted at the impound facility and the fees
must be paid prior to redeeming the animal.
      (6)   Impound fees will be set annually by the city and posted in the
city’s adopted, current Fee Schedule.
      (7)   Any owner who willfully fails to redeem the impounded animal after
notification of impoundment may be cited for cruelty by neglect of said animal
under the cruelty statutes of the state, including, but not limited to,
M.C.L.A. §§ 750.50 et seq.
   (B)   Impoundment fees for animals (cats and dogs):
      (1)   Day one: $25/day;
      (2)   Each day after: $15/day;
      (3)   Transporting animals to UPAWS: $60; and
      (4)   Euthanasia: actual cost incurred.
(Ord. passed 3-11-2021)
§ 96.09 SEIZING ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be lawful for any person to seize an animal at large upon his
or her property in violation of this chapter or the statutes of the state and
to turn the animal over to the law enforcement officer.
   (B)   In no event shall the provisions of this chapter exonerate a person
from compliance with the criminal laws of the state, including the safe
discharge of firearms.
(Ord. passed 3-11-2021) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.10 LIVESTOCK OR POULTRY IN NON-AGRICULTURAL AREAS.
   The keeping of chickens shall be subject to the following requirements.
   (A)   Chicken owner(s), in R1 and R2, may not keep more than six chicken
hens on the premises at any one time. Hens are for personal use only and not
for any business or commercial use. In RR Districts, chickens will be
considered for approval upon application for up to six chickens, plus three
additional chickens per acre over two acres.
   (B)   Any selling of chickens or eggs must comply with §
156.147 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Roosters are prohibited.
(Ord. passed 3-11-2021) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.11 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or owner to allow any animal of
any age, licensed, or unlicensed, wearing or not wearing a collar to:
      (1)   Run at large, except working farm dogs and hunting dogs while they
are trained and under the direction of the owner. An animal need not be
physically restrained, but must be under reasonable control of the responsible
person;
      (2)   Be within the confines of any public park that prohibits animals. A
service dog accompanied by its owner shall be exempt;
      (3)   Destroy or deface property, real or personal;
      (4)   Soil or pollute with solid body waste the property of a person
other than the owner, unless promptly removed;
      (5)   Attack or bite a person;
      (6)   Show vicious habits or harass passers-by, when such person(s) are
lawfully in a public place; and
      (7)   Cause serious annoyance by loud and/or frequent noise.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Remove a collar or tag from any animal without the permission of
the owner;
      (2)   Decoy or entice any animal out of an enclosure off of the property
of the owner; and
      (3)   Seize, harass or tease any animal while held or led by any person
or while on the property of the owner.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal on any property
located within the city when the keeping of such animal constitutes a public
nuisance or menace to public health or safety.
(Ord. passed 3-11-2021) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.12 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   This chapter shall be enforced by the City Animal Control Officer(s),
by the City Police Department, or by such a person or persons the City Manager
may designate.
   (B)   In the event of any violation of any provision of this chapter or the
laws or regulations of the state, an Animal Control Officer or law enforcement
officer may take such measures as may be necessary to initiate and pursue
enforcement action against such violator.
   (C)   The court, upon a finding of guilty, shall assess the penalties in
accordance with the penalty provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-11-2021)
§ 96.13 PRESERVATION OF CERTAIN RIGHTS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the owner of an
animal from being responsible in an action against the law brought by any law
enforcement officer.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting the statutory
or common law liability of the owner of an animal for damages committed by said
animal.
(Ord. passed 3-11-2021)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
responsible for a civil infraction, and upon an admission of responsibility or
a finding of responsibility shall be subject to payment of a civil fine of not
less than $50, or more than $300, plus costs and other sanctions, including but
not limited to injunction relief, for each infraction.
   (B)   Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines in accordance with
this section.
   (C)   The increased fine for a repeat offense under this section shall be as
follows.
      (1)   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be
no less than $75, or more the $300, plus costs and other sanctions.
      (2)   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $100, or more than $300, plus
costs and sanctions.
(Ord. passed 3-11-2021)
Cross-reference:
   Impoundment fees for animals, see §
96.08(B)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
      
111.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
112.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS
      
113.   MARIJUANA SALES
CHAPTER 110: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Ownership, operations, maintenance, and advertising restrictions
Statutory reference:
   Indecency and immorality, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.335 et seq.
   Intoxicating liquors generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1101 et seq.
   Municipal police regulations regarding theaters and shows, see M.C.L.A. §§
431.201, 431.202
   Prostitution, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.448 et seq.
   Sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays and municipal election days, see
M.C.L.A. §§ 436.2111 et seq.
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment wherein more than 20% of its stock in
trade is comprised of books, magazines, and other periodicals having, as their
dominant theme, matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, as defined in this chapter, or
an establishment with a segment or chapter devoted to the sale or display of
such material.
   ADULT THEATER. An enclosed building used for live performances or presenting
material by means of motion pictures, video tapes or receivers, photographic
slides, or other similar means of projection or display, which performances or
material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities, as defined in this chapter, for observation by patrons therein.
   CABARET. Any place wherein food or any type of alcoholic beverage is sold or
given away on the premises, the operator of which place holds a yearly license
to sell such beverages by the glass.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Either:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or a human
pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areola; and/or
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Either:
      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; and/or
      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals or a human
pubic region, buttock, or female breast.
(Prior Code, § 804.01)
§ 110.02 OWNERSHIP, OPERATIONS, MAINTENANCE, AND ADVERTISING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall, within a Residential District, or within 1,000 feet
of a school, day-care facility, church, or other place of worship in any other
zoning district in the city, own, operate, or maintain, or permit to be owned,
operated, or maintained, an adult bookstore or adult theater, as defined in
this chapter.
   (B)   No person owning, operating, managing, or employed by or within a
cabaret shall dance, perform, serve food, beverages, or alcoholic beverages
while displaying or allowing to be visible specified anatomical areas, as
defined in this chapter, or allow any other person to do so.
   (C)   No person owning, operating, managing, or employed by or within a
cabaret shall, by means of dancing, acting, or otherwise moving about, perform
specified sexual activities, as defined in this chapter, or allow any other
person to do so.
   (D)   No person owning, operating, managing, or employed by or within a
cabaret shall have, own, or possess within said cabaret any type of radio
receiver equipment containing police radio frequency bands or capable of
receiving police radio communications, or allow any other person to do so.
   (E)   No person owning a cabaret, or his or her agent or employee, shall
knowingly permit any exhibition or advertising, in connection with any
establishment prohibited under this chapter, to be displayed in any manner
which is visible from any public street or highway, which exhibition or
advertising depicts, describes, or relates to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined in this chapter.
   (F)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 804.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
[Reserved]
CHAPTER 112: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Purpose
   
112.02   Conflict
   
112.03   Definitions
   
112.04   Compliance
   
112.05   Reservation of police powers
   
112.06   Authorized city officials
   
112.07   Municipal civil infraction
Conditions and Licensing
   
112.20   Permit required
   
112.21   Issuance of permit
   
112.22   Construction/engineering permit
   
112.23   Conduit or utility poles
   
112.24   Route maps
   
112.25   Repair of damage
   
112.26   Establishment and payment of maintenance fee
   
112.27   Modification of existing fees
   
112.28   Use of funds
   
112.29   Annual report
   
112.30   Cable television operators
   
112.31   Existing rights
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use of
public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101 et seq.),
(“Act”), and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for
distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and
complying with the Act.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
§ 112.02 CONFLICT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict
with the Act or other applicable law.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
§ 112.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight
Act (Public Act 48 of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101 et seq.), as amended
from time to time.
   AUTHORITY. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Authority created pursuant to § 3 of the Act.
   CITY. The City of Negaunee.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Negaunee or its designee. This
definition does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is
required by law to be made by the City Council.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager or his or her designee.
   MPSC. The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer
and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term “Commission”
in the Act.
   PERMIT. A non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this chapter
to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city
for its telecommunications facilities.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, alley, easement, or waterway. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include a
federal, state, or private right-of-way.
   TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES.
      (1)   The equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber
cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to
or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide
telecommunication services or signals.
      (2)   TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES do not include antennas,
supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any
ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally
licensed commercial mobile service as defined in § 332(d) of part I of title
III of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, being 47 U.S.C. § 332(d),
and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. § 20.3, and
service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER, and TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.
      (1)   Those terms as defined in § 102 of the state’s Telecommunications
Act, Public Act 179 of 1991, being M.C.L.A. § 484.2102.
      (2)   TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDER does not include a person or an
affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile
radio service as defined in § 332(d) of part I of the Communications Act of
1934, chapter 652, being 47 U.S.C. § 332(d), and further defined as commercial
mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. § 20.3, or service provided by any wireless,
two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this chapter only,
a PROVIDER also includes all of the following:
         (a)   A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications
service;
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns
telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way; and
         (c)   A person providing broadband internet transport access service.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
§ 112.04 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this
chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions
hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose.
   (B)   The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the
Act, including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act,
Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in §
112.20(C);
      (2)   Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit
requirements hereof, in accordance with §
112.20(F);
      (3)   Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an
application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500 application
fee, in accordance with §
112.20(G);
      (4)   Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days
from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit
for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance
with §
112.21(A);
      (5)   Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in
accordance with §
112.21(A);
      (6)   Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance
with §
112.21(A) of this chapter;
      (7)   Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in §
112.21(B);
      (8)   Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the
telecommunications provider’s access and usage of the public right-of-way, in
accordance with §
112.21(C);
      (9)   Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds
the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its
original condition during and after the telecommunication provider’s access and
use, in accordance with §
112.21(D);
      (10)   Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees
for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with §
112.22;
      (11)   Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city’s
right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with §
112.27;
      (12)   Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with §
112.29; and/or
      (13)   Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure
to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with §
112.30.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
§ 112.05 RESERVATION OF POLICE POWERS.
   Pursuant to §
112.30(2) of the Act, this chapter shall not limit the city’s right to review
and approve a telecommunication provider’s access to and ongoing use of a
public right-of-way, or limit the city’s authority to ensure and protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
§ 112.06 AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.
   The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the
authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations
(directing alleged violators to appear in court), or municipal civil infraction
violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the Municipal
Chapter Violations Bureau) for violations under this chapter as provided by the
city code.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
§ 112.07 MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION.
   A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or
conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. Nothing
in this chapter shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city
in the event of a violation by a person of this chapter or a permit.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002) Penalty, see §
10.99
CONDITIONS AND LICENSING
§ 112.20 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the
city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on
an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with § 6(1) of the Act,
being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(1). A telecommunications provider shall file one copy
of the application with the City Clerk, one copy with the City Manager, and one
copy with the City Attorney. Upon receipt, the City Clerk shall distribute a
copy to Department of Public Works and the Electrical Department. Applications
shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including
without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider’s existing
and proposed facilities in accordance with § 6(5) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. §
484.3106(5).
   (C)   Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that
any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application
contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt
from the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§
15.231 through 15.246, pursuant to § 6(5) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106
(5), the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face
of each map.
   (D)   Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the
application shall be accompanied by a one-time, non-refundable application fee
in the amount of $500.
   (E)   Additional information. The City Manager may request an applicant to
submit such additional information which the City Manager deems reasonably
necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in
compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information
established by the City Manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on
the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or
the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in § 6(2) of the Act, being
M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(2).
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
§ 112.21 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application
for a permit is hereby delegated to the City Manager. Pursuant to § 15(3) of
the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3115(3), the City Manager shall approve or deny
an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications
provider files an application for a permit under § 5(1) of the Act, being
M.C.L.A. § 484.3105(1), for access to a public right-of-way within the city.
Pursuant to § 6(6) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.106(6), the City Manager
shall notify the MPSC when the City Manager has granted or denied a permit,
including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and
the date on which permit was granted or denied. The City Manager shall not
unreasonably deny an application for a permit.
   (B)   Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the City
Manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or
without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with §§ 6(1), 6(2),
and 15 of the Act, being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3106(1), 484.3106(2), and 484.3115,
respectively.
   (C)   Conditions. Pursuant to § 15(4) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3115
(4), the City Manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which
conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider’s access and
usage of the public right-of-way.
   (D)   Bond requirement. Pursuant to § 15(3) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. §
484.3115(3), and without limitation on division (C) above, the City Manager may
require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition
of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost
to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition
during and after the telecommunications provider’s access and use.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
§ 112.22 CONSTRUCTION/ENGINEERING PERMIT.
   A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over,
across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a
construction or engineering permit as required under this chapter, as amended,
for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for
such a construction or engineering permit.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
§ 112.23 CONDUIT OR UTILITY POLES.
   Pursuant to § 4(3) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3104(3), obtaining a
permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this chapter does not
give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
§ 112.24 ROUTE MAPS.
   (A)   Pursuant to § 6(7) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(7), a
telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial
completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city,
submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to
both the MPSC and to the city.
   (B)   The route maps should be in paper or electronic format unless and
until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with § 6(8) of the Act,
being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(8).
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
§ 112.25 REPAIR OF DAMAGE.
   Pursuant to § 15(5) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3105(5), a
telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction,
installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way, or
temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a
permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all
installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall
promptly restore the public right-of-way to its pre-existing condition.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
§ 112.26 ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE FEE.
   In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set forth
in §
112.20(D), a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in
the city’s public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the
Authority pursuant to § 8 of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3108.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
§ 112.27 MODIFICATION OF EXISTING FEES.
   In compliance with the requirements of § 13(1) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. §
484.3113(1), the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees
charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective
date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to
an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act,
which shall be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the requirements of §
13(4) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3113(4), the city also hereby approves
modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in
public rights-of-way within the city’s boundaries, so that those providers pay
only those fees required under § 8 of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3108. The
city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a
copy of this chapter, in compliance with the requirement of § 13(4) of the Act,
being M.C.L.A. § 484.3113(4). To the extent any fees are charged
telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act,
or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby
declared to be contrary to the city’s policy and intent, and upon application
by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having
been charged in error.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
§ 112.28 USE OF FUNDS.
   Pursuant § 10(4) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3110(4), all amounts
received by the city from the Authority shall be used by the city solely for
rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds
received by the city from the Authority shall be deposited into the major
street fund and/or the local street fund maintained by the city under the State
Trunk Line Highway System Act, Public Act 51 of 1951, being M.C.L.A. §§ 247.651
et seq.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
§ 112.29 ANNUAL REPORT.
   Pursuant to § 10(5) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3110(5), the City
Manager shall file an annual report with the Authority on the use and
disposition of funds annually distributed by the Authority.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
§ 112.30 CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS.
   Pursuant to § 13(6) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3113(6), the city shall
not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its
failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the
effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of
gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem
services provided through broadband internet transport access services.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
§ 112.31 EXISTING RIGHTS.
   Pursuant to § 4(2) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3104(2), except as
expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect
any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have
under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a
telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2002-2, passed 12-12-2002)
CHAPTER 113: MARIJUANA SALES
Section
   
113.01   Purpose
   
113.02   Scope
   
113.03   Definitions
   
113.04   Registration and selection of marijuana establishments
   
113.05   Minimum standards
   
113.06   Operation, limitations, and locations
   
113.07   Signage
   
113.08   Fire safety
   
113.09   Rules and regulations
   113.10   Location map
§ 113.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The city recognizes a compelling interest in establishing standards
and procedures for the operation of medical and adult-use marijuana
establishments within the city.
   (B)   Such standards are an important factor supportive of the general
health, safety, and welfare of all of the citizens of the city.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
§ 113.02 SCOPE.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to any properties that are licensed to
conduct marijuana cultivation, processing, transporting, or any other licensed
marijuana establishment activity within the city limits.
   (B)   This chapter does not apply to personal use and cultivation of
marijuana as allowed by state law.
   (C)   (1)   This chapter shall be enforced by the City Manager or his or her
authorized representatives.
      (2)   The City Manager may utilize additional personnel to assist with
the enforcement including individuals with specialized technical training or
experience necessary to evaluate the condition of marijuana properties and
determine compliance with this chapter.
   (D)   (1)   By enacting this chapter, the city does not intend to encourage
or promote the establishment of any business or operation, or the commitment of
any act, that constitutes or may constitute a violation of federal law.
      (2)   As of the date of the enactment of this chapter, the use,
possession, distribution, and sale of marijuana is illegal under federal law
and those who engage in such activities do so at their own risk of criminal
prosecution.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
§ 113.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A subordinate building or portion of a main
building or structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the main
building or structure. The ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE shall be located on
the same property as the main building or structure.
   BUILDING. Any structure used, designed, or intended for the protection,
shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property.
   CULTIVATE. To propagate, breed, grow, harvest, dry, cure, or separate parts
of the marijuana plant by manual or mechanical means.
   DEPARTMENT. The Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs
(LARA).
   ERECTED. Built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical
operation on the premises required for a building. Excavations, fill, drainage,
and the like shall be considered part of ERECTION.
   INDUSTRIAL ZONE. The City of Negaunee Industrial District.
   LICENSEE. Any person holding a state license from the State of Michigan
Marijuana Agency.
   LOT.
      (1)   Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory
buildings, including such open spaces as are required under the Zoning Code,
and having its frontage upon a public street or any private way used for street
purposes.
      (2)   LOT shall also mean a parcel of land.
   MARIJUANA. All parts of the plant of the genus cannabis, growing or not; the
seeds of the plant; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant
or its seeds or resin, including marijuana concentrate and marijuana-infused
products. For purposes of this chapter, MARIJUANA does not include:
      (1)   The mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks,
oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the
resin extracted from those stalks, fiber, oil, or cake, or any sterilized seed
of the plant that is incapable of germination;
      (2)   Industrial hemp; or
      (3)   Any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or
oral administrations, food, drink, or other products.
   MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES. Any equipment, product, material, or combination of
equipment, products, or materials, which is specifically designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing marijuana into the human body.
   MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT. A marijuana grower, marijuana safety compliance
facility, marijuana processor, marijuana microbusiness, marijuana retailer,
marijuana secure transporter, or any other type of marijuana-related business
licensed by the Department.
   MARIJUANA GROWER. A person licensed to cultivate marijuana and sell or
otherwise transfer marijuana to marijuana establishments.
   MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCT. A topical formulation, tincture, beverage, edible
substance, or similar product containing marijuana and other ingredients and
that is intended for human consumption.
   MARIJUANA MICROBUSINESS. A person licensed to cultivate not more than 150
marijuana plants; process and package marijuana; and sell or otherwise transfer
marijuana to individuals who are 21 years of age or older or to a marijuana
safety compliance facility, but not to other marijuana establishments.
   MARIJUANA PROCESSOR. A person licensed to obtain marijuana from marijuana
establishments; process and package marijuana; and sell or otherwise transfer
marijuana to marijuana establishments.
   MARIJUANA RETAILER. A person licensed to obtain marijuana from marijuana
establishments and to sell or otherwise transfer marijuana to marijuana
establishments and to individuals who are 21 years of age or older.
   MARIJUANA SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITY. A person licensed to test marijuana,
including certification for potency and the presence of contaminants.
   MARIJUANA SECURE TRANSPORTER. A person licensed to obtain marijuana from
marijuana establishments in order to transport marijuana to marijuana
establishments.
   MMFLA. The Michigan Medical Facilities Licencing Act, Public Act 281 of
2016, being M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27101 et seq.
   MRTRA. The Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marijuana Act, Initiated Law
1 of 2018, being M.C.L.A. §§ 333.27951 et seq.
   MUNICIPALITY. The City of Negaunee, Michigan.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, multi-level
ownership enterprise, partnership of any type, trust, or other legal entity.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Negaunee.
   PROCESS or PROCESSING. To separate or otherwise prepare parts of the
marijuana plant and to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or
prepare marijuana concentrate or marijuana-infused products.
   RESIDENTIAL ONE, R-1. The City of Negaunee Residential Single-Family
District.
   SCHOOL. Any public or private building that is primarily used for academic
education.
   SPECIAL LAND USES. Those uses of land which are essentially compatible with
the uses permitted in a zoning district, but which possess characteristics or
locational qualities which require individual review and restriction in order
to avoid incompatibility with the character of the surrounding area, public
services and facilities, and adjacent uses of land.
   STATE LICENSE. A license issued by the Department that allows a person to
operate a marijuana establishment.
   STRUCTURE. Any thing constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground.
   UNREASONABLY IMPRACTICABLE. The measures necessary to comply with the rules
or ordinances adopted pursuant to this chapter subject licensees to
unreasonable risk or require such a high investment of money, time, or any
other resource or asset that a reasonably prudent businessperson would not
operate the marijuana establishment.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
§ 113.04 REGISTRATION AND SELECTION OF MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   Registration of marijuana establishments with the city is required in
order to ensure compliance with this chapter, MRTRA, and the rules set forth by
LARA.
   (B)   (1)   Registration will be required after a special land use permit
has been reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved, and all appeals, if
any, have been exhausted.
      (2)   A copy of the proposed marijuana establishment plan must be
included in a special land use permit application.
   (C)   (1)   The cost of registration shall be no more than $5,000 and will
be set by the City Council at an amount that will not be unreasonably
impracticable and shall be established by the City Council and placed on the
fee schedule.
      (2)   Any such fees may be adjusted from time to time as the City Council
deems fit by way of resolution.
   (D)   The city will begin to accept registration applications on January 1,
2020.
   (E)   Upon denial or revocation of a state license for a marijuana
establishment which has been issued a license under these regulations, the
local registration shall immediately be revoked.
   (F)   If a state license is suspended or revoked, the licensee shall
immediately cease operation of the marijuana establishment within the city
until the state license is reinstated during the term of a valid local
registration.
   (G)   (1)   Municipal registration is non-transferable and will be active
for two years from the date of approval, and must be renewed no more than 90
days prior to expiration.
      (2)   All license renewal applications must be submitted to the Planning
and Zoning Administrator.
   (H)   The city shall create a selection process if multiple establishments
apply for a limited number of registrations.
   (I)   (1)   Registrations for microbusiness and provisioning centers are
limited by population. Registration for microbusinesses and provisioning
centers are each limited to one per every 2,500 city residents (e.g., zero-
2,500 residents=one registration available; 2,501-5,000 residents=two
registrations available; 5,001-7,500 residents=three registrations available;
and the like).
      (2)   Grower, transport, processing facility, and safety compliance
registrations are not subject to this population limitation.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
§ 113.05 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   (A)   Except where the provisions expressly set forth in this chapter are
inconsistent with or conflict with the MMFLA and MRTRA, or the state
administrative regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, all the provisions of
the state’s code promulgated pursuant thereto, each as they are amended from
time-to-time, are adopted herein by this reference and apply to all
applications received and registration by the city with respect to marijuana
establishments.
   (B)   Compliance with all of the guidelines set forth within the MRTRA,
MMFLA, and the rules set by LARA is required.
   (C)   A state license pre-qualification letter must be received and
presented to the city before a site plan review will be conducted by the city.
No building, structure, or accessory building shall be erected without prior
approval of a site plan by the Planning Commission of the city, and all
appeals, if any, have been exhausted.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
§ 113.06 OPERATION, LIMITATIONS, AND LOCATIONS.
   (A)   All proposed recreational and medical marijuana establishments are
considered special land uses, as defined by §
156.002 of this code of ordinances, and subject to review and approval of the
city’s Planning Commission, and as detailed in §
156.065 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Except as provided herein, recreational and medical marijuana
establishments shall be permitted within the Industrial (I) Zoning Districts
identified on the zoning map attached to the ordinance codified herein as
Exhibit A and available on the city’s website, except as provided here.
   (C)   (1)   No recreational or medical marijuana establishments shall be
permitted to operate at a location that is within 1,000 feet from any school,
and must be no less than 250 feet from any Residential One R-1 Zoning District.
      (2)   The permissibility of a location for the marijuana establishment
shall be determined at the time of the submittal of the first completed
application to the city.
   (D)   The distances referred to herein are to be computed by direct
measurement from the nearest property line of the land used for the school to
the nearest property line of the land used by the marijuana establishment(s) to
conduct operations.
   (E)   Hours for on-site retail sales of marijuana are limited to 8:00 a.m.
to 12:00 a.m. ET.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
§ 113.07 SIGNAGE.
   All signage must comply with the city’s sign ordinance, §§
156.175 through
156.185.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
§ 113.08 FIRE SAFETY.
   All recreational and medical marijuana establishments must comply with all
rules and guidelines regarding fire safety and compliance as set forth in the
rules published by LARA, and as required by the city’s ordinances and zoning.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019)
§ 113.09 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Administrator of Planning and Zoning is hereby empowered to
promulgate such rules and regulations as shall be necessary for the enforcement
of this subject, however, to the approval of the City Manager and City Council
prior to becoming effective.
   (B)   When the rules and regulations made hereunder have been promulgated,
adopted, and approved, they shall be deemed incorporated herein, as if fully
stated in this chapter; and the violation of any of said regulations shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Copies of such rules and regulations, relevant maps, and any
amendments or additions, shall be on file in the office of the Planning and
Zoning Administrator for inspection by interested parties by appointment, as
well as available on the city website.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.10 LOCATION MAP.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0738dcf21f421e8d115b2bbb273306d0573c6511/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1587.png]
 
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Weapons and explosives
   
130.02   Alcoholic beverages
   
130.03   Defacing, injuring, or destroying property
   
130.04   Noise
   
130.05   False alarms
   
130.06   Disturbing lawful assemblages
   
130.07   Police order to depart or disperse
   
130.08   Responsibility for minors
Statutory reference:
   Arson, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.71 et seq.
   Construction or possession of explosive devices, see M.C.L.A. § 750.211a
   Disorderly conduct generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.167 et seq.
   Explosives generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.200 et seq., 750.327 et seq.
   Firearms generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 28.421 et seq., 750.222 et seq.
   Gambling, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.301 et seq.
   Intoxicating liquors generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1101 et seq.
   Malicious destruction of property by minors, see M.C.L.A. § 600.2913
   Malicious destruction of property, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.377a, 750.377b
   Prostitution, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.448 et seq.
   Real estate generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 554.1 et seq.
   Sales on Sundays and municipal election days, see M.C.L.A. § 436.2111 et
seq.
   Storage and transportation of explosives, see M.C.L.A. § 29.5a
   Theft generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 750.356 et seq.
   Weapons generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 28.421 et seq., 750.222 et seq.
§ 130.01 WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES.
   No person shall discharge any rifle, shotgun, pistol, or other firearm, or
any air gun or BB gun capable of projecting lead or any other object, except on
ranges previously approved by the Chief of Police, provided that this section
shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law, dog warden, or
animal enforcement officer from discharging a rifle, shotgun, pistol, or other
firearm, or an air gun or BB gun capable of projecting lead or any other
object, in the performance of his or her duty, nor shall this section be
construed to prohibit any citizen from discharging a rifle, shotgun, pistol, or
other firearm, or any air gun or BB gun capable of projecting lead or any other
object, when lawfully defending a person or property.
(Prior Code, § 694.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.02 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   No person shall consume alcoholic beverages or possess open containers of
alcoholic beverages on or in any public place, provided that this section shall
not be construed to prohibit the consumption of alcoholic beverages or the
possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages within those public places
licensed by the state’s Liquor Control Commission to allow the consumption of
alcoholic beverages on premises.
(Prior Code, § 604.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.03 DEFACING, INJURING, OR DESTROYING PROPERTY.
   No person shall deface, injure, or destroy, or aid in defacing, injuring, or
destroying, any public or private property, or cause to be posted to or stuck
upon any public or private building, fence, tree, pole, or other public or
private property, any handbill or placard without first obtaining the
permission of the owner or occupant of such building, fence, tree, pole, or
other public or private property.
(Prior Code, § 668.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.04 NOISE.
   (A)   In general. No person shall unreasonably make or continue, or cause to
be made or continued, any noise disturbance. Non-commercial public speaking and
public assembly activities conducted on any public space or public right-of-way
shall be exempt from operation under this section.
   (B)   Radios, musical instruments, and similar devices. No person shall
operate or play, or permit the operation or playing of, any radio, television,
phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or similar device which
produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound in such a manner as to:
      (1)   Noise disturbances. Create a noise disturbance across a real
property boundary or within a noise sensitive zone. If such a device is plainly
audible on the property of another or within a building other than that within
which the device is located, and if a complaint is made to the Chief of Police
or his or her designee regarding annoyance or disturbance as a result of such
device, this shall serve as primafacie evidence of a violation; and
      (2)   Motor vehicles. Create a noise disturbance or result in an
unreasonable sound level from such device, when operated in or on a motor
vehicle on a public right-of-way, public space or space open to the general
public, or in a boat on public waters.
   (C)   Loudspeakers. No person shall use or operate for any non-commercial
purpose any loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device between 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day so that the sound therefrom creates a
noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise
sensitive zone. No person shall use or operate for any commercial purpose any
loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device so that the sound
therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a real property boundary or within
a noise sensitive zone, or between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following
day on a public right-of-way or public space.
   (D)   Construction. No person shall erect (including excavate), demolish,
alter, or repair any building, excavate any street or highway, or operate any
machine or equipment on public or private property, except between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., or in case of urgent necessity in the interest of
public health and safety, and when approval has been obtained from the City
Clerk.
   (E)   Stationary non-emergency signaling devices. No person shall sound or
permit the sounding, from any place, of any electronically amplified signal
from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device intended
primarily for non-emergency purposes. Such devices, when used in conjunction
with places of religious worship, shall be exempt from this division (E).
   (F)   Miscellaneous noises. Each of the following acts is hereby prohibited,
but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
      (1)   Horns and signal devices in vehicles. Between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, the sounding of any horn or signal
device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle while not in
motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently
out of control, or to give warning of intent to get under motion, or, if in
motion, only as a danger signal after brakes have been applied, or as brakes
are being applied, and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by
means of any such horn or signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh
sound, and the sounding of such a horn or device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time;
      (2)   Racing of motors. The racing of motors while the same are being
tuned up, or the backfiring of engines in automobiles during tune-ups or warm-
ups, creating any unreasonably loud or harsh sound between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day;
      (3)   Shouting and whistling. Unnecessary or unreasonably loud shouting
and whistling at any time or place in the city;
      (4)   Hawking. The hawking of goods, merchandise, and newspapers in a
loud and boisterous manner;
      (5)   Animal and bird noises. The keeping of any animal or bird which,
because of frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or
repose of any person;
      (6)   Whistles or sirens. The blowing of any whistle or siren, except to
give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or
danger;
      (7)   Devices to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker,
amplifier, or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting
attention, without first having obtained a permit therefor from the City Clerk;
and
      (8)   Sound trucks. To operate, or cause to be operated, a sound truck
with radio or amplifier, within the city, without first having obtained a
permit therefor from the City Clerk.
   (G)   Exceptions. None of the prohibitions set forth in divisions (A)
through (F) above shall apply to or be enforced against:
      (1)   Emergency vehicles. Any authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to an emergency call; and
      (2)   Amplifiers. The reasonable use of stationary amplifiers or
loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are non-commercial in
character.
(Prior Code, § 672.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.05 FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   No person shall start or spread any false alarm of fire, riot,
explosion, civil disturbance, or other breach of the peace.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 672.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.06 DISTURBING LAWFUL ASSEMBLAGES.
   (A)   No person shall disturb any lawful assemblage or gathering.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 672.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.07 POLICE ORDER TO DEPART OR DISPERSE.
   (A)   Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing any
activity prohibited by this section or by any other provision of this chapter,
any police officer may order that person to leave such public place.
   (B)   No person shall refuse to leave a public place after being ordered to
do so by a police officer or otherwise resist such an order.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 672.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.08 RESPONSIBILITY FOR MINORS.
   (A)   No person shall assist, aid, abet, allow, permit, or encourage any
minor to violate any of the provisions of this section or any other provision
of this chapter.
   (B)   No parent shall assist, aid, abet, allow, permit, or encourage any
minor over which he or she has care and custody to violate any of the
provisions of this section or any other provision of this chapter.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 672.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   PLANNING AND LAND DIVISION
      
152.   TRAILER AND TOURIST CAMPS
      
153.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
      
154.   RENTAL CODE
      
155.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
156.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Adoption of 2000 edition of BOCA Building Code
   
150.02   Enforcement; fees
   
150.03   Building permit required
   
150.04   Compliance with other codes; fees
   
150.05   Stop work orders
   
150.06   Certificates of occupancy
   
150.07   Limitation of authority of Building Inspector
   
150.08   Slum and blighted area
Appeals
   
150.20   Board of Zoning Appeals to hear Building Code appeals
   
150.21   Procedure; exception
   
150.22   Modifications and variations
   
150.23   Decisions of the Board of Appeals
   
150.24   Appeals from the decisions of the Board of Appeals
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of technical codes by reference, see M.C.L.A. § 117.3(k)
   State Construction Code, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 ADOPTION OF 2000 EDITION OF BOCA BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   The regulations of the 2000 abridged edition of the BOCA Building
Code, recommended and published by the Building Officials Conference of
America, Inc. published in book form, excepting §§ 104.5 through 104.68 thereof
relating to violations and the Board of Appeals, are hereby adopted as the
regulations governing the construction of buildings and other structures in the
city, and it shall be unlawful to erect or construct any building or structure
in the city in violation of, or without complying with, such regulations, the
same being hereby adopted by reference and made a part of these codified
ordinances with the same effect as if said BOCA Building Code were repeated
herein, word for word.
   (B)   The BOCA Building Code, as adopted in division (A) above, shall be
published by providing to the public in the office of the City Clerk printed
copies in book form available for inspection by and distribution at cost to the
public at all times, and the public is hereby notified that a complete copy or
copies thereof are available for public use and inspection at the office of the
City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 1420.01)
§ 150.02 ENFORCEMENT; FEES.
   (A)   The Building Inspector shall have the power and duty to enforce the
provisions of this subchapter; and all fees provided herein shall be paid to
the City Clerk. All permits shall be issued by the Building Inspector.
   (B)   The term “ Building Inspector,” as used in this subchapter, means the
Building Inspector or any other officer of the city designated by the City
Manager having the duty to enforce the building regulations of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1420.02)
§ 150.03 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall construct any building or structure, other than a
fence, in the city, where the cost of such construction exceeds $100, or alter
or remodel any building or structure so as to change the bearing walls, beams,
supports, or the roof thereof, without having first secured a permit therefor,
or in violation of the terms of such permit or of the terms of this subchapter.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or
structure, or for remodeling or repairs affecting bearing walls, roofs, other
than resurfacing, or chimneys, or for moving a building onto premises in the
city, unless the application is accompanied by a plat or sketch of the proposed
location showing lot boundaries and by plans and specifications showing work to
be done. Such plans shall bear the signature of a licensed architect,
recognized contractor, or the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 1420.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.04 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER CODES; FEES.
   All work undertaken pursuant to any permit issued hereunder shall be in full
compliance with the Zoning Code and other codes pertaining to water and street
excavation. In addition to the fees for permits herein provided for, the
applicant shall pay the fees prescribed in any applicable code. Fees for
permits under this subchapter shall be charged and collected in accordance with
the schedule thereof fixed by Council by resolution from time to time. Such
fees shall be sufficient to pay for the cost of administration and inspections
required by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 1420.04)
§ 150.05 STOP WORK ORDERS.
   Whenever any work is being done in violation of the provisions of this
subchapter, or at variance with the terms of any permit issued for such work,
the Building Inspector may order all work on the job stopped until such time as
any violation or variance is eliminated and any work or installation made in
violation of this subchapter corrected. Such stop order, if oral, shall be
followed by a written stop order within 24 hours of the issuance of the verbal
stop order (excluding Saturday, Sunday, or holidays). No person shall do or
perform any work in violation of such stop order, except as may be necessary to
prevent injury or damage to persons or property. Such stop order may be revoked
by the Building Inspector or Council.
(Prior Code, § 1420.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.06 CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure erected, altered,
or repaired after the adoption of this subchapter shall be issued unless such
building or structure was erected, altered, or repaired in compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 1420.06)
§ 150.07 LIMITATION OF AUTHORITY OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   Wherever in the building regulations it is provided that anything must be
done subject to the approval or direction of the Building Inspector or any
other officer of the city, it shall be construed to give such officer only the
discretion of determining whether the rules and standards established by the
subchapter have been complied with. No such provision shall be construed as
giving any officer discretionary powers as to what such regulations or
standards shall be, the power to require conditions not prescribed by the code
or the authority to enforce code provisions in an arbitrary or discriminatory
manner.
(Prior Code, § 1420.07)
§ 150.08 SLUM AND BLIGHTED AREA.
   (A)   The following definition of a SLUM AND BLIGHTED AREA is adopted for
purposes of designating areas, making application for funds, and expenditure of
funds for the improvement, preservation, conservation, or redevelopment of such
areas as may be identified by resolution of Council describing the area and
identifying the conditions which meet the standards in the definition.
   (B)   In accordance with state law, a SLUM AND BLIGHTED AREA means any
improved or vacant area within identified boundaries located within the
territorial limits of the municipality, which meets state law and the following
CDBG definition: Public improvements are in a general state of deterioration in
the designated area, or a substantial number of buildings in the designated
area are deteriorated or deteriorating, and at least 25% of properties in the
area have one or more of the following characteristics:
      (1)   Physical deterioration of buildings or improvements;
      (2)   Abandonment of properties;
      (3)   Chronic high turnover or vacancy rates in commercial/industrial
buildings;
      (4)   Significant decline in property values or abnormally low property
values in relation to other areas in the community; or
      (5)   Known or suspected environmental contamination.
   (C)   Locations:
      (1)   201 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, high vacancy;
      (2)   202 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, deteriorating wood,
dilapidated addition, high vacancy;
      (3)   205 Iron Street, deficient electrical;
      (4)   208 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, deteriorating wood,
abandoned (no utilities), dilapidated facade;
      (5)   211 Iron Street, deficient electrical, deteriorated masonry, high
vacancy;
      (6)   212 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, deteriorating wood,
dilapidated facade;
      (7)   220 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, paint, facade, and
stucco;
      (8)   230 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, deteriorating wood,
deteriorating facade;
      (9)   300 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, paint, deteriorating
facade;
      (10)   304 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, paint, and facade;
      (11)   305 Iron Street, deficient electrical;
      (12)   308 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, deteriorating wood,
deteriorating facade;
      (13)   309 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, deteriorating steel entry
doors;
      (14)   318 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, paint, high vacancy;
      (15)   319 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, paint;
      (16)   320 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, and paint;
      (17)   323 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, and paint;
      (18)   324 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, deteriorating wood,
abandoned (no utilities), dilapidated facade, structural concerns;
      (19)   327 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, and paint;
      (20)   331 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, and paint;
      (21)   332 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, and paint;
      (22)   334 Iron Street, Deteriorating masonry, wood, and paint;
      (23)   400 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, and paint, facade
damage (many years);
      (24)   403 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, and paint;
      (25)   405 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, and paint;
      (26)   426 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, paint, high vacancy;
      (27)   428 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, and paint;
      (28)   432 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, and paint;
      (29)   440 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, paint, high vacancy;
      (30)   442 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, paint, high vacancy;
      (31)   501 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, stucco, and paint;
      (32)   511 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, and paint;
      (33)   521 Iron Street, partially collapsed building, abandoned (no
utilities);
      (34)   216 Jackson Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, paint, high
vacancy;
      (35)   224 Jackson Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, stucco, paint,
high vacancy;
      (36)   401 Jackson Street, deteriorating masonry, wood, paint, high
vacancy; possibly abandoned (no utilities);
      (37)   319 Case Street, City Hall, deteriorating masonry;
      (38)   200 South Pioneer Avenue, city’s Fire Department, deteriorating
masonry, wood, and paint;
      (39)   207 South Pioneer, deteriorating masonry, deteriorating wood
structure, deteriorating facade; and
      (40)   334 Iron Street, deteriorating masonry, deteriorating facade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0738dcf21f421e8d115b2bbb273306d0573c6511/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1572.png]
 
(Ord. 1428, passed 11-8-2018)
APPEALS
§ 150.20 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS TO HEAR BUILDING CODE APPEALS.
   The Board of Appeals, as established in the Zoning Code heretofore adopted,
shall constitute the Board of Appeals to pass upon matters pertaining to
building construction under the terms of this subchapter. Provisions relating
to terms of office, quorum, meetings, records, and procedures shall be the same
as provided in the Zoning Code for such Board of Appeals.
(Prior Code, § 1420.02)
§ 150.21 PROCEDURE; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved, or the head of any agency of the municipality,
may take an appeal to the Board of Appeals from any decision of the Building
Inspector.
   (B)   (1)   An appeal may be taken within 30 days from the date of the
decision being appealed by filing with the Building Inspector and with the
Board of Appeals notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof.
      (2)   However, in the case of a building or structure which, in the
opinion of the Building Inspector, is unsafe or dangerous, the Building
Inspector may, in his or her order, limit the time for such appeal to a shorter
period. The Building Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Appeals
all the papers upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(Prior Code, § 1420.02)
§ 150.22 MODIFICATIONS AND VARIATIONS.
   (A)   The Board of Appeals, when so appealed to and after a public hearing,
may vary the application of any provision of this subchapter to any particular
case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice,
and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this subchapter or public
interest, or when, in its opinion, the interpretation of the Building Inspector
should be modified or reversed.
   (B)   A decision of the Board of Appeals to vary the application of any
provision of this subchapter, or to modify an order of the Building Inspector,
shall specify in what manner such variation or modification is to be made, the
conditions upon which it is to be made, and the reasons therefor.
(Prior Code, § 1420.02)
§ 150.23 DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   The Board of Appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without
unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall
be in writing and shall indicate the vote upon the decision. Every decision of
the Board shall be promptly filed in the office of the Building Inspector and
shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy shall be sent by first-
class U.S. mail to the appellant and a copy shall be kept for public inspection
in the office of the Building Inspector for two weeks after filing.
   (B)   If a decision of the Board of Appeals reverses or modifies a refusal,
order, or disallowance of the Building Inspector, or varies the application of
any provision of this subchapter, the Building Inspector shall take action
immediately in accordance with such decision.
(Prior Code, § 1420.02)
§ 150.24 APPEALS FROM THE DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS.
   A person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Appeals, whether previously
a party to the proceeding or not, or an officer or Board, may, within 15 days
after the filing of such decision in the office of the Building Inspector,
apply to the appropriate court to correct errors of law in such decisions.
(Prior Code, § 1420.02)
CHAPTER 151: PLANNING AND LAND DIVISION
Section
Planning Commission
   
151.01   Definitions
   
151.02   Establishment
   
151.03   Composition
   
151.04   Appointments; terms; compensation
   
151.05   Vacancies
   
151.06   Regular meetings
   
151.07   Special meetings
   
151.08   Officers
   
151.09   Powers and duties; annual report
Division of Land
   
151.20   Title
   
151.21   Purpose
   
151.22   Definitions
   
151.23   Prior approval requirement for land divisions
   
151.24   Application for land division approval
   
151.25   Procedure for review of application for land division approval
   
151.26   Standards for approval of land divisions
   
151.27   Non-compliance; injunctive relief; forfeiture
 
   
151.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Approval of plats; street system, see M.C.L.A. § 125.3871
   Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect, see M.C.L.A. § 125.3871
   Certification of city plats, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.51 et seq.
   County planning commissions, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3815 et seq
   Municipal planning commissions, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 et seq.
   Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations, see M.C.L.A. § 125.3871
   Zoning and planning generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.11 et seq., 125.3801 et
seq., 125.3101 et seq.
   Zoning and planning in home rule cities, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 151.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHAIRPERSON. The Chairperson of the Planning Commission as provided for in
this subchapter.
   CITY. The City of Negaunee.
   COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city as established by this
subchapter.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1220.01)
§ 151.02 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A Planning Commission is hereby established in and for the city.
(Prior Code, § 1220.02)
§ 151.03 COMPOSITION.
   The Commission shall consist of five members who shall be representative of
the public as a whole.
(Prior Code, § 1220.03) (Ord. passed 8-8-2019)
§ 151.04 APPOINTMENTS; TERMS; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   All of the members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to the approval of Council.
   (B)   The term of each of the appointed members of the Commission shall be
three years or until his or her successor takes office, except that of the
members first appointed three shall have terms of one year, three of two years,
and three of three years.
   (C)   The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation unless
otherwise decreed by Council.
(Prior Code, § 1220.04)
§ 151.05 VACANCIES.
   Vacancies occurring on the Planning Commission shall be filled for the
unexpired term by appointment by the Mayor, subject to the advice and consent
of Council.
(Prior Code, § 1220.05)
§ 151.06 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The Planning Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month.
The time and date of said meeting shall be established by order of the
Commission itself.
(Prior Code, § 1220.06)
§ 151.07 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings of the Planning Commission may be called by the Chairperson
or any three members of the Commission. Written notice of all special meetings
shall be given to all members.
(Prior Code, § 1220.07)
§ 151.08 OFFICERS.
   The Planning Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among the appointed
members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The
term of the Chairperson shall be for one year, with eligibility for re-
election.
(Prior Code, § 1220.08)
§ 151.09 POWERS AND DUTIES; ANNUAL REPORT.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of
business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings,
and determinations, which record shall be a public record.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to preside over all meetings
of the Commission. In his or her absence, a Chairperson pro tempore may be
elected to preside.
   (C)   Except as may be otherwise provided in this subchapter or by the
authority of Council, the powers and duties of the Commission are to be of an
advisory nature only, and the Commission shall not have any powers or duties
which conflict with or supersede the powers and duties of Council or other city
commissions or boards.
   (D)   Neither the Commission nor any member thereof shall incur any
financial liability in the name of the city.
   (E)   The Commission shall annually render a full report of its work to
Council.
(Prior Code, § 1220.09)
DIVISION OF LAND
§ 151.20 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Negaunee
Land Division Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 1230.01)
§ 151.21 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to carry out the provisions of the state’s
Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, Public Act 591 of 1996, and Public
Act 87 of 1997, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq., as amended, known as the
Land Division Act, to prevent the creation of parcels of property which do not
comply with applicable ordinances and said Act, to minimize potential boundary
disputes, to maintain orderly development of the community, and otherwise to
provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the residents and property
owners of the city by establishing reasonable standards for prior review and
approval of land divisions within the city.
(Prior Code, § 1230.02)
§ 151.22 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSIBLE. In reference to a parcel, means that the parcel meets one or
both of the following requirements:
      (1)   Has an area where a driveway provides vehicular access to an
existing road or street and meets all applicable location standards of the
state’s Transportation Department or County Road Commission under the Public
Act 200 of 1969, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 247.321 to 247.329, and
standards of the city, or has an area where a driveway can provide vehicular
access to an existing road or street and meet all such applicable location
standards; and/or
      (2)   Is served by an existing easement that provides vehicular access to
an existing road or street and that meets all applicable location standards of
the state’s Transportation Department or County Road Commission under the
Public Act 200 of 1969, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 247.321 to 247.329, and
standards of the city, or can be served by a proposed easement that will
provide vehicular access to an existing road or street and that will meet all
such applicable location standards.
   APPLICANT. A person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or
combination of any of them who or that holds an ownership interest in land,
whether recorded or not, and who or that applies for city approval of a
proposed land division.
   DEVELOPMENT SITE. Any parcel or lot on which exists, or which is intended
for, building development.
   DIVISION. The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the
proprietor or by his or her heirs, legal representatives, successors, or
assigns, for the purpose of sale or lease of more than one year, or of building
development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the
equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of §§ 108 and 109 of the
state’s Land Division Act. DIVISION does not include a property transfer
between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is
added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a
building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the state’s
Land Division Act, or the requirements of other applicable city ordinances.
   EXEMPT SPLIT. The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by
the proprietor, or by his or her hers legal representatives, successors, or
assigns, that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or
the equivalent. For a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels,
if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, any
resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel
conforms to the requirements of the State Land Division Act or the requirements
of an applicable city ordinance.
   FORTY ACRES OR THE EQUIVALENT. Forty acres, a quarter-quarter section
containing not less than 30 acres, or a government lot containing not less than
30 acres.
   GOVERNING BODY. The City Council.
   PROPRIETOR. A natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation,
or combination of any of them that holds an ownership interest in land whether
recorded or not.
   STATE LAND DIVISION ACT. Public Act 288 of 1967, Public Act 591 of 1996, and
Public Act 87 of 1997, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq., as amended.
   SUBDIVIDE OR SUBDIVISION. The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract
of land by the proprietor or by his or her heirs, legal representatives,
successors, or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year,
or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40
acres or the equivalent, and that is not exempted from the platting
requirements of the state’s Land Division Act and by §§ 108 and 109 of that
Act. SUBDIVIDE OR SUBDIVISION does not include a property transfer between two
or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an
adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building
site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the Act or the
requirements of an applicable local ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 1230.03)
§ 151.23 PRIOR APPROVAL REQUIREMENT FOR LAND DIVISIONS.
   Land in the city shall not be divided without the prior review and approval
of the City Assessor, or other official designated by resolution of the City
Council, in accordance with this subchapter and the state’s Land Division Act;
provided that the following shall be exempted from requirements of this
subchapter:
   (A)   A parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat pursuant to
the state’s Land Division Act and §§
155.001 through
155.003,
155.015 through
155.019,
155.030 through
155.034, and
155.045 through
155.049 of these codified ordinances;
   (B)   A lot in a recorded plat proposed to be divided in accordance with the
state’s Land Division Act and §§
155.015 through
155.019 of these codified ordinances; and
   (C)   An exempt split as defined in this subchapter, or other partitioning
or splitting that results in parcels of 20 acres or more if each is not
accessible and the parcel was in existence on March 31, 1997, or resulted from
exempt splitting under the state’s Act.
(Prior Code, § 1230.04)
§ 151.24 APPLICATION FOR LAND DIVISION APPROVAL.
   An applicant shall file all of the following with the City Assessor or other
official designated by the City Council for review and approval of a proposed
land division before making any division by deed, land contract, or lease for
more than one year, or for building development:
   (A)   A completed application form on such form as may be approved by
resolution of the governing body of the city;
   (B)   A tentative parcel map drawn to scale including a legal description of
each proposed division, and showing the boundary lines, approximate dimensions,
and the accessibility of each division for vehicular access and for development
sites showing adequate easements for public utilities;
   (C)   A statement that all standards of the state’s Land Division Act and
this subchapter will be met by the proposed division;
   (D)   If a transfer of division rights is proposed in the land transfer,
detailed information about the terms and availability of the proposed division
rights transfer; and
   (E)   A filing fee to cover the costs of review of the application and
administration of this subchapter and the State Land Division Act as set by
resolution of the City Council. The fee shall be adjusted from time to time to
reflect changes in cost to the city of administering this subchapter and state
law.
(Prior Code, § 1230.05)
§ 151.25 PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATION FOR LAND DIVISION APPROVAL.
   (A)   The City Assessor or other designee shall approve or disapprove the
land division applied for within 45 days after receipt of a complete
application conforming to the requirements of this subchapter and the state’s
Land Division Act, and shall promptly notify the applicant of the decision, and
if denied, the reasons for denial.
   (B)   Any person or entity aggrieved by the decision of the Assessor or
other designee may, within 30 days of said decision, appeal the decision to the
City Council or such other body or person designated by the City Council, which
shall consider and resolve such appeal by a majority vote of the Council or by
the appellate designee at its next regular meeting or session affording
sufficient time for a 20-day written notice to the applicant of the time and
date of said meeting and appellate hearing.
   (C)   The Assessor or other designee shall maintain an official record of
all approved and accomplished land divisions or transfers.
   (D)   Approval of a division is not a determination that the resulting
parcels comply with other ordinances or regulations, including, but not limited
to, zoning ordinances, Building Codes, Health Department Codes, or similar
ordinances or regulations, or that the resulting parcels are suitable for
building or development.
   (E)   The city and its officers and employees shall not be liable for
approving a land division if the building permits for construction on the
parcels are subsequently denied because of inadequate water supply, sewage
disposal facilities, non-compliance with zoning ordinances or otherwise, and
any notice of approval shall include a statement to this effect.
(Prior Code, § 1230.06)
§ 151.26 STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL OF LAND DIVISIONS.
   (A)   A proposed land division shall be approved upon satisfaction of all of
the following requirements:
      (1)   The application for approval contains all of the information
described in §
151.24;
      (2)   Each resulting parcel is accessible to an existing street or road
by an existing or proposed driveway or access easement. If a driveway or access
easement does not exist at the time a division is proposed, the applicant shall
also comply with the requirements of division (B) below;
      (3)   The proposed division, together with any previous division(s) of
the same parent parcel or parent tract, shall not result in a number of
resulting parcels that is greater than that permitted under § 108 of the
state’s Land Division Act;
      (4)   Each resulting parcel that is a development site (as defined in the
Act) shall have adequate easements for public utilities from the resulting
parcel to existing public utility facilities;
      (5)   Each resulting parcel which is ten acres or less in size shall have
a depth which is not more than four times the width of a parcel. If the width
of the parcel is irregular, the average width of the parcel shall be calculated
and used for purposes of this provision. This depth to width ratio shall not
apply to the remainder of the parent parcel or parent tract retained by the
applicant; and
      (6)   All resulting parcels to be created by the proposed land division
(s) shall comply with the applicable lot area and dimension requirements of the
city’s Zoning Code for the zoning district(s) in which the resulting parcels
are located.
   (B)   If a means of vehicular access to a resulting parcel does not exist at
the time a land division is applied for, the proposed division shall not be
approved unless the following requirements are satisfied:
      (1)   If a private driveway is proposed as a means of access, each
resulting parcel shall have an area where a driveway or easement will provide
vehicular access;
      (2)   If a private easement is proposed as a means of access, the
proposed easement shall be in writing and signed by the owner of the parcel(s)
within which the easement is to be located. Such easement shall provide a means
of access over and across such parcel(s); and
      (3)   If a new public street is proposed as a means of access, the
application shall provide proof that the proposed street or road complies with
layout and construction design standards of the city as contained in §§
155.060 through 
155.066,
155.080 through
155.086, and
155.100 through
155.105 of these codified ordinances or other city ordinances relating to
public streets, roads, utility easements, and drainage facilities.
   (C)   If a parcel resulting from a division is less than one acre in size,
pursuant to the state’s Land Division Act, a building permit shall not be
issued unless the parcel has all of the following:
      (1)   Public water, or Health Department approval for suitability of an
on-site water supply; and
      (2)   Public sewer, or Health Department approval for suitability of on-
site sewage disposal. The city, and its officers and employees, shall not be
liable for approving a division resulting in a parcel less than one acre if a
building permit is not issued for the parcel for reasons set forth in this
subchapter, and the notice of approval of the division shall so state.
(Prior Code, § 1230.07)
§ 151.27 NON-COMPLIANCE; INJUNCTIVE RELIEF; FORFEITURE.
   (A)   Any division of land in violation of any provision of this subchapter
shall not be recognized as a land division on the city tax roll. The city may
also initiate injunctive or other relief to prevent any violation or
continuance of any violation of this subchapter.
   (B)   An unlawful division or split shall also be voidable at the option of
the purchaser and shall subject the seller to the forfeiture of all
consideration received or pledged therefor, together with any damages sustained
by the purchaser, recoverable in an action at law.
(Prior Code, § 1230.08)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of §
151.20 through
151.27 is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be fined not
more than $100 for a first offense and not more than $500 for a subsequent
offense, in the discretion of the court, in addition to all other remedies
provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 1230.99)
CHAPTER 152: TRAILER AND TOURIST CAMPS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Definitions
   
152.02   Enforcement; Board of Investigators
   
152.03   Parking or occupancy of trailers outside of camps
   
152.04   Permanent occupancy
   
152.05   License required; application; issuance; consent of neighbors
   
152.06   Zoning of trailer and tourist camps
   
152.07   Camp plan
   
152.08   Water supply
   
152.09   Service building and accommodations
   
152.10   Liquid and solid waste disposal
   
152.11   Limitation on number of occupants
   
152.12   Applicability of building, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes
Administrative Provisions
   
152.25   Management; duties of attendant and license; record keeping
   
152.26   Revocation of licenses
   
152.27   Hearing on granting, denying, renewing, or revoking a license
   
152.28   Judicial review
   
152.29   Conflict of laws
Statutory reference:
   Mobile Home Commission Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.230 et seq.
   Uniform Mobile Homes Warranty Act, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.991 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTOMOBILE TRAILER, TRAILER COACH, AND TRAILER. Any vehicle or structure
designed and constructed in such manner as will permit occupancy thereof as
sleeping quarters for one or more persons, or the conduct of any business,
profession, occupation, or trade (or use as a selling or advertising device);
and so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance
on highways or city streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive
power, excepting a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   CABIN PLOT. A section of ground not less than 800 square feet in area, upon
which only one camp cottage or cabin is located.
   TOURIST CAMP. Any privately owned park, tourist park, tourist court, camp,
court site, lot, parcel, or tract of land upon which one or more camp cottages
or cabins are located and maintained for the accommodation of transients by the
day, week, or month, whether a charge is made or not.
   TRAILER CAMP. Any park, trailer park, trailer court, court, camp site, lot,
parcel, or tract of land designated, maintained, or intended for the purpose of
supplying a location or accommodations for any trailer coach or trailer coaches
and upon which any trailer coach or trailer coaches are parked. The term
includes all buildings used or intended to be used as part of the equipment
thereof, whether a charge is made for the use of the trailer camp and its
facilities or not. TRAILER CAMP shall not include automobile or trailer sales
lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of inspection and
sale.
   UNIT. A section of ground in a trailer camp of not less than 800 square feet
of unoccupied space in an area designated as the location for only one
automobile and one trailer.
(Prior Code, § 876.01)
§ 152.02 ENFORCEMENT; BOARD OF INVESTIGATORS.
   (A)   A Board of Investigators, consisting of a county Health Officer, the
Chief of the Fire Department, the Chief of Police, and the City Manager, is
hereby established, with the City Manager as Chairperson. The Chairperson
shall, with the approval of the members of the Board, appoint a Secretary for
the Board from among the employees of the city.
   (B)   The Board shall enforce all provisions of this chapter. For the
purpose of securing such enforcement, any member of the Board, or his or her
duly authorized representatives, shall have the right and are hereby empowered
to enter upon any premises on which any automobile trailer or camp cottage or
cabin is located, or is about to be located, and inspect the same and all
accommodations connected therewith at any reasonable time. The Board is further
empowered to issue orders granting, renewing, and revoking such licenses as are
provided for in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 876.02)
§ 152.03 PARKING OR OCCUPANCY OF TRAILERS OUTSIDE OF CAMPS.
   (A)   No person shall, within the limits of the city, park any trailer on
any street, alley, highway, or other public way or public place, or on any
tract of land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied, except as provided
in this chapter.
   (B)   Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street,
alley or highway for not longer than seven days, subject to any other
prohibition, regulation, or limitation imposed by the Traffic Code for that
street, alley, or highway.
   (C)   No person shall park or occupy any trailer on the premises of any
occupied dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of the premises of any
occupied dwelling, either of which is situated outside an approved trailer
camp, except that the parking or storage of one trailer in an accessory private
garage building, or in a rear yard of any district, or in a side yard of any
district, provided the setbacks thereof can be maintained, is permitted,
provided, however, that not less than ten feet clear and unimpeded space exists
on all sides thereof and the users thereof have free access to all sanitary
facilities, as approved by the Board of Investigators.
(Prior Code, § 876.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.04 PERMANENT OCCUPANCY.
   Automobile trailers shall not be used as a permanent place of abode or as a
permanent dwelling or for indefinite periods of time, provided that any such
trailer properly connected with an approved water supply and sanitary sewer
system and constructed and located in compliance with all requirements of the
Building, Plumbing, Sanitary, Health, Zoning, and Electrical Codes of the city,
and not inhabited by a greater number of occupants than that for which it was
designed, may be permitted on any premises under permits properly secured as
provided for in said Building, Plumbing, Sanitary, Health, Zoning, and
Electrical Codes.
(Prior Code, § 876.04)
§ 152.05 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE; CONSENT OF NEIGHBORS.
   (A)   No person shall establish, operate, or maintain, or permit to be
established, operated or maintained, upon any property owned or controlled by
him or her, a trailer camp or tourist camp or combination of the two, within
the limits of the city, without having first secured a license for each of them
from the Board of Investigators, granted and existing in compliance with the
terms of this chapter. Such license shall expire one year from the date of
issuance, but may be renewed under the provisions of this chapter for
additional periods of one year.
   (B)   (1)   The application for such license or the renewal thereof shall be
filed with the Chairperson of the Board of Investigators and shall be
accompanied by a fee of $2 for each calendar year or portion thereof for each
unit and cabin plot in the existing or proposed camp, said payment not to
exceed $30.
      (2)   The application for a license or renewal thereof shall be made on
forms furnished by the Board of Investigators and shall include the name and
address of the owner in fee of the tract.
      (3)   If the fee is vested in some person other than the applicant, a
duly verified statement from that person, that the applicant is authorized by
him or her to construct or maintain the trailer or tourist camp and to make the
application, shall be required.
      (4)   The application shall also include such legal description of the
premises upon which the trailer or tourist camp is or will be located, as will
readily identify, and definitely locate the premises.
      (5)   The application shall be accompanied by four copies of the camp
plan showing the following, either existing or proposed:
         (a)   The extent and area used for camp purposes;
         (b)   Roadways and driveways;
         (c)   The location of sites or units for trailer coaches or cabins;
         (d)   The location and number of sanitary and utility rooms to be used
by occupants of units or cabins (in cases where cabins do not have all
facilities in proper conformance with City Building and Plumbing Codes, and
other codes);
         (e)   The method and plan of sewage disposal;
         (f)   The method and plan of garbage removal;
         (g)   The plan for water supply; and
         (h)   The plan for electrical lighting of units and cabins.
   (C)   (1)   Before such license may be issued, there must be attached to the
application the written consent of 65% of the city residents of the area within
600 feet of the proposed court.
      (2)   The premises must be inspected and approved by each of the members
of the Board of Investigators or his or her duly authorized representative, as
complying with all the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable
ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 876.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.06 ZONING OF TRAILER AND TOURIST CAMPS.
   (A)   No trailer or tourist camp shall be located within the limits of the
city, unless approved water and sewer connections, and fire protection
facilities are available therefor.
   (B)   No occupied trailer, camp cottage, cabin cottage, cabin, or other
building shall be located within the city limits within the recognized setback
line for the zoning district in which such trailer or cabin is located nor less
than ten feet from any other building or vehicle or the boundary line of the
tract on which it is located.
(Prior Code, § 876.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.07 CAMP PLAN.
   (A)   Every trailer or tourist camp shall be located on a well drained area,
and the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of
storm or other waters.
   (B)   Units and cabin plots shall be clearly designated and the camp so
arranged that all units and cabin plots shall face or abut on a driveway of not
less than 20 feet in width, giving easy access from all units to a public
street. Such driveway shall be maintained in good condition, shall be well
lighted at night, and shall not be obstructed.
   (C)   The camp shall be so laid out that no unit or cabin shall be located
farther than 200 feet from the toilets and service buildings provided for in
this chapter, and walkways to such buildings shall be well lighted at night.
   (D)   Every trailer unit shall be furnished with electric service.
(Prior Code, § 876.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.08 WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   An adequate supply of pure water, furnished through a pipe
distribution system, and connected directly with an approved water supply, with
supply faucets located not more than 200 feet from any trailer or cabin, shall
be furnished for drinking and domestic purposes.
   (B)   No common drinking vessels shall be permitted, nor shall any drinking
water faucets be placed in any toilet room or water closet compartment.
(Prior Code, § 876.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.09 SERVICE BUILDING AND ACCOMMODATIONS.
   (A)   Every trailer or tourist camp shall have erected thereon, at a
distance not greater than 200 feet from any unit or cabin it is designed to
serve, a suitable building for housing toilets, showers, and laundry facilities
as required by this chapter, such building to be known as the service building.
   (B)   Separate toilet rooms shall be provided for each sex. Flush toilets
provided with an adequate water supply shall be enclosed in separate
compartments having a minimum width of three feet, six inches, and shall be
provided for each sex in the ratio of one toilet for each eight units or cabins
or fraction thereof. Every male toilet room shall have one urinal for each 16
units or cabins, but in no case shall any male toilet be without one urinal.
Toilet rooms shall contain lavatories with running water in the ratio of one
lavatory to every two or less water closets.
   (C)   Separate bathing facilities for each sex shall be provided with one
shower enclosed in a compartment at least four feet square, for each eight
units of cabins or fraction thereof. Each shower compartment shall be
supplemented by an individual dressing compartment of at least 12 square feet.
   (D)   The above accommodations shall be based on the total camp capacity
according to accepted plans.
   (E)   Floors of toilets, showers, and the laundry shall be of concrete,
tile, or similar material impervious to water and easily cleaned and pitched to
a floor drain.
(Prior Code, § 876.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.10 LIQUID AND SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   All waste from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets, and lavatories
shall be discharged into a sewer system that extends from and is connected to
an approved sewer system.
   (B)   All sanitary facilities that are not connected to an approved sewer
system by means of rigid pipe connections shall be sealed, and their use is
hereby declared unlawful.
   (C)   Each faucet site shall be equipped with facilities for drainage of
waste and excess water into the sewer. In no case shall any wastewater be
thrown or discharged upon the surface of the ground or disposed of by any other
means than as hereby provided.
   (D)   Every unit shall be provided with a substantial fly-tight metal
garbage depository from which the contents shall be removed by the city garbage
collection service.
(Prior Code, § 876.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.11 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF OCCUPANTS.
   No trailer or cabin may be inhabited by a greater number of occupants than
that for which it was designed.
(Prior Code, § 876.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.12 APPLICABILITY OF BUILDING, PLUMBING, ELECTRICAL, AND MECHANICAL CODES.
   All building, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical work on or at any camp
licensed under this subchapter shall be in accordance with the county’s
Building, Plumbing, Electrical, and Mechanical Codes, with state law and with
any other applicable code or law, unless said codes and laws are specifically
made inapplicable under the terms of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 876.13)
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
§ 152.25 MANAGEMENT; DUTIES OF ATTENDANT AND LICENSE; RECORD KEEPING.
   (A)   In every trailer or tourist camp, there shall be an office building in
which shall be located the office of the person in charge of said camp. A copy
of the camp license and this chapter shall be posted therein and the camp
register shall at all times be kept in said office.
   (B)   It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge of the
camp, together with the licensee, to:
      (1)   Keep at all times a register of all guests (which shall be open at
all times to inspection by state and federal officers and officers of the city)
showing:
         (a)   Names and addresses;
         (b)   Dates of entrance and departure;
         (c)   License numbers of all trailers and towing or other automobiles;
         (d)   State where such license was issued; and
         (e)   Place of last location and length of stay.
      (2)   Maintain the camp in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition at
all times;
      (3)   See that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and
enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any violations of this
subchapter or any other violations of law which may come to his or her
attention;
      (4)   Report to the county’s Health Officer all cases of persons or
animals infected or suspected of being infected with any communicable disease;
      (5)   Prevent the running at large of dogs, cats or other animals or
pets;
      (6)   Maintain in convenient places, approved by the Fire Department,
hand fire extinguishers in the ratio of one to eight units or cabins;
      (7)   Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises; and
      (8)   Prohibit the use of any trailer or cabin by a greater number of
persons than that which it is designed to accommodate.
(Prior Code, § 876.12)
§ 152.26 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   The Board of Investigators is hereby authorized to revoke any license issued
pursuant to the terms of this chapter if, after due investigation, it
determines that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter or that any trailer, trailer camp, or tourist camp is being maintained
in an unsanitary or unsafe manner or is a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 876.14)
§ 152.27 HEARING ON GRANTING, DENYING, RENEWING, OR REVOKING A LICENSE.
   Any person aggrieved by an order of the Board of Investigators granting,
denying, renewing, or revoking a license for a trailer camp or tourist camp,
under this chapter, may file a written request for a hearing before the Board
within ten days after issuance of such an order. The Board shall give notice of
a public hearing upon this request to be held in not less than five days after
service of the notice on the person requesting the hearing. The Board may also
give notice of the hearing to other persons directly interested in the order in
question. At such hearing, the Board shall determine whether the granting,
denying, renewing, or revoking of the license was in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and shall issue written findings of fact,
conclusions of law, and an order to carry out its findings and conclusions.
These findings of fact, conclusions of law and order shall be filed with the
Secretary of the Board and served by the Board upon all parties appearing or
represented at said hearing.
(Prior Code, § 876.15)
§ 152.28 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   An order granting, denying, renewing, or revoking any license under the
provisions of this chapter may be appealed to a court of competent
jurisdiction. Appeal from such orders must be taken within ten days after the
order is issued. Upon any such appeal, the findings in fact of the Board of
Investigators, if supported by substantial evidence, shall be conclusive.
(Prior Code, § 876.16)
§ 152.29 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   All codes or parts of codes inconsistent with or contrary hereto are hereby
repealed, except that nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as to
conflict with state housing laws, state legislation regulating trailers,
trailer camps, or tourist camps or any of the requirements of any code of the
city not made inapplicable by the express terms of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 876.17)
CHAPTER 153: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Title
   
153.02   Findings and determination of necessity
   
153.03   Purpose
   
153.04   Applicability
   
153.05   Existing remedies
   
153.06   Definitions
   
153.07   Property maintenance standards
   
153.08   Court orders, penalties, and fines and fees
   
153.09   Appeal
Administration and Enforcement
   
153.20   Inspection authorized
   
153.21   Applicability
   
153.22   Enforcement process
   
153.23   Violations
   
153.24   Notice
   
153.25   [Reserved]
   
153.26   [Reserved]
   
153.27   [Reserved]
   
153.28   [Reserved]
   
153.29   [Reserved]
   
153.30   Time to correct violations
   
153.31   Emergency orders
   
153.32   Abatement of emergency
   
153.33   Authorization to condemn
   
153.34   Emergency entry authorized
   
153.35   [Reserved]
   
153.36   Change in ownership
   
153.37   Removal of posted sign or notices
 
   
153.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the
city, hereinafter referred to as the “this code.”
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018)
§ 153.02 FINDINGS AND DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY.
   The City Council finds and concludes there are non-residential buildings in
the city which are poorly maintained and neglected. These buildings adversely
affect citizens who own or occupy nearby buildings and dwellings by lowering
property values and rental values. These buildings also pose health and safety
concerns, as many of these poorly maintained and neglected buildings have
become so dilapidated that occupancy is no longer economically feasible, and
this increases the incidence of vandalism and fire. The City Council finds that
the elimination and prevention of these conditions is necessary and is in the
best interest of the city and its citizens.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018)
§ 153.03 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to maintain, preserve and improve the
stock of non-residential buildings in the city.
   (B)   To accomplish this, the following minimum standards for the exterior
maintenance of all non-residential buildings are set forth herein.
   (C)   It is the intention of the City Council to exercise its full powers to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare, whether the powers so exercised
are derived from the Constitution, state law, or the City Charter.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018)
§ 153.04 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person or entity owning,
occupying, managing, and/or controlling any non-residential property in the
city as identified by this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018)
§ 153.05 EXISTING REMEDIES.
   The provisions in this chapter shall not be construed to abolish or impair
existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to
the removal or demolition of any structure that is dangerous, unsafe, or
insanitary.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018)
§ 153.06 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDON. The failure to continue the exercise of care, custody, and control
of property owned by a person, or that meets at two or more of the following
categories:
      (1)   Is open to entry;
      (2)   Is fire damaged to an extent which prohibits safe occupancy;
      (3)   Is the site of loitering or vagrancy;
      (4)   Has criminal activity on the premises;
      (5)   Demonstrates a lack of property maintenance and upkeep as evidenced
by one or more violations of this subchapter;
      (6)   Is under notice for being in violation of city ordinances;
      (7)   Is boarded for at least 30 days;
      (8)   Has taxes in arrears for a period of time exceeding 365 days;
      (9)   Is under condemnation notice or legal order to vacate;
      (10)   Is structurally unsound; and
      (11)   Is a potential hazard or danger to persons.
   ABANDONED VEHICLES. Any vehicle left for more than 72 hours on any street
that is unlicensed.
   APPROVED. Acceptable to the Code Official or other designee of the City
Manager or other designee.
   BUILDING. Any structure upon a property, presently or formerly used or
intended to be used in whole or in part for the purpose of commerce, trade,
manufacture, business, government, worship, education, office, medical,
storage, or any other purpose.
   CAMPER. A class or type of vehicle or trailer that people can live in or
sleep in when they are traveling or camping.
   CODE OFFICIAL OR OTHER DESIGNEE OF THE CITY MANAGER. The official who is
charged with the administration and enforcement of this subchapter, or any duly
authorized representative. The CODE OFFICIAL or OTHER DESIGNEE OF THE CITY
MANAGER may be the Chief of Police and/or the Building Inspector, the Zoning
Administrator, or any duly authorized representative of the City Manager or
Chief of Police.
   CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
   COST OF SUCH DEMOLITION OR EMERGENCY REPAIRS. The costs shall include the
actual costs of the demolition or repair of the structure less revenue obtained
if salvage was conducted prior to demolition or repair. Costs shall include,
but not be limited to, expenses incurred or necessitated related to demolition
or emergency repairs, such as asbestos survey and abatement if necessary; costs
of Inspectors, testing agencies, or experts retained relative to the demolition
or emergency repairs; costs of testing; surveys for other materials that are
controlled or regulated from being dumped in a landfill; title searches;
mailing(s); postings; recording; and attorney fees expended for recovering of
the cost of emergency repairs or to obtain or enforce an order of demolition
made by a Code Official or other designee of the City Manager, or designee of
the City Manager.
   DETERIORATION. To weaken, disintegrate, corrode, rust or decay, and lose
effectiveness.
   EASEMENT. The portion of land or property reserved for present or future use
by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The
EASEMENT shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot or
lots.
   EMERGENCY. A condition which is a violation of this chapter and which
constitutes an imminent danger calling for immediate action in order to avoid
death, injury, or illness to a human or the destruction or severe damaging of
real or personal property.
   EXTERIOR. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the
control of owners or operators of such premises.
   GARBAGE. Any spoiled or discarded animal or vegetable material resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food for humans or
animals, as well as other organic waste material subject to rapid
decomposition, including trash to which such material has adhered.
   HAZARDOUS. A condition which is a violation of this chapter and which has
determined to be likely to result in the death, injury, or illness of a human
or in severe damage to real or personal property.
   HISTORIC BUILDING. Any building or structure that is one or more of the
following:
      (1)   Listed or certified as eligible for listing, by the state’s
Historic Preservation Officer or the Keeper of the National Register of
Historic Places, in the National Register of Historic Places;
      (2)   Designated as historic under an applicable state or local law; or
      (3)   Certified as a contributing resource within a National Register or
state or locally designated Historic District.
   IMMINENT DANGER. Any condition which could cause serious or life-threatening
injury or death at any time.
   INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises
of insects, rodents, vermin, or other pests.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle, camper, or ORV which cannot be driven
upon the public streets for reason including but not limited to being
unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being
moved under its own power.
   JUNK. An accumulation of garbage, scrap lumber, wood, plastic, metal, old
furniture, mattresses, appliances, building materials, equipment, inoperable
motor vehicles or vehicle parts that are unsightly and/or promote infestation,
that of new, old, or discarded articles that are considered useless or of
little value.
   NEGLECT. The lack of proper maintenance for a building or structure.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. Any rental unit, commercial, industrial, or any
property occupied by someone other than the owner.
   NUISANCE. All property conditions that are prohibited by this chapter.
   OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized
or occupied.
   OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.
   ORV. Any class of motor-driven recreation vehicle designed for off-road use
and capable of cross-country travel without benefit of road or trail.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm, corporation, or entity having
legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official
records of the state, county, or municipality as holding title, including the
guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of
the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a
court.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, or any other group acting
as a unit.
   PEST ELIMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that serve as their food or water; by other approved PEST ELIMINATION
methods.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement, or public way, including
any structures thereon.
   PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley, or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated, or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
   RUBBISH. Any combustible and non-combustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust and other similar materials.
   SALVAGE, JUNK, OR SCRAP VEHICLE. Any vehicle, camper, or ORV partially
disassembled, missing doors, windows, wheels, and/or tires and other parts.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
   TRASH. Waste materials and items which are not in good repair or are
discarded and which are of little or no value, including, but not limited to
plaster, paper, wrappings, plant cuttings, household furnishings, building
materials, packing and clothing, appliances, equipment, machinery, or parts
thereof.
   UNLICENSED VEHICLE. Any vehicle, camper, or ORV that does not maintain
current license plate and tags as issued by the Secretary of State or other
appropriate licensing agency or bureau.
   VACANT. Any non-residential building that has not been inhabited for more
than 90 days.
   WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level,
square, in line, undamaged, and without marring adjacent work.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018)
§ 153.07 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Property maintenance required. All property, regulated by this
chapter, whether occupied or unoccupied and all property, including vacant
property and/or formerly occupied property, shall meet or exceed the standards
set forth herein.
   (B)   Structural integrity. Basic structural elements, foundations,
foundation walls, and supporting columns shall be in good repair.
   (C)   Exterior surfaces. All exterior finish surfaces shall be weather-tight
and in good repair and shall not have holes, cracks, or deterioration which
allow water or vermin to reach any basic structural element or to enter the
interior of any building.
   (D)   Protection of exterior surfaces. All exterior surfaces of a building
or structure made of iron, wood, steel, masonry, or other materials which may
deteriorate from exposure to weather shall be protected from the weather by a
properly applied weather-resistant paint, stain, or other water-proof finish.
Primers shall be properly covered with a water-resistant finish coating.
   (E)   Exterior windows and doors. All exterior windows and doors shall be
weather-tight and in good repair, intact, and functioning as originally
intended and designed, or shall be secured against weather by boarding which is
painted a color matching that of the adjacent exterior siding, but in no
instance shall boarding of windows or doors be permitted for more than 30 days.
Boarding shall be done in a manner and with materials as specified in this
chapter. All exterior openings suitable for human or animal entry shall be
secured by use of exterior grade plywood, of at least three-eighths inch
thickness, cut to the size of the opening, and secured by use of Phillips
headed two-inch long screws on all first story or ground accessible points of
entry or by use of 16d common nails which are permitted only on entry points
being secured above the first story or where not accessible from ground level.
Boards shall be placed over all points of entry.
   (F)   Exterior attachments. Exterior attachments to basic structural
elements, including but not limited to gutters, downspouts, screening, vents,
antennas, tanks, awnings, canopies, marquees, signs, lighting fixtures,
handrails, guardrails, and utility connections shall be in good repair.
   (G)   Accessory improvements. All accessory improvements located on a
property, including but not limited to walkways, driveways, parking areas,
storm drains, parking bumpers, steps, handrails, guardrails, signs, lighting
fixtures, poles, fences, walls, tanks, antennas, and all other freestanding or
made structures shall be in good repair.
   (H)   Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage of materials of value shall be stored
in a safe and sanitary manner, shall not be scattered about, and shall not have
openings nor be stacked in a manner which may provide harborage for vermin,
garbage, rubbish, or infestation.
   (I)   Trees and shrubs. No trees, shrubs, or other vegetation shall be
allowed to damage a building or block safe vision of a sidewalk, drive, or
street. No dead tree, trees, or parts thereof shall be permitted on any
property regulated by this chapter.
   (J)   Health and sanitation. All exterior areas shall be sanitary and free
of trash, rubbish, garbage, junk, and hazardous materials.
   (K)   Pest elimination. Structures shall be kept free from insect, rodent
infestation, and other feral or wild animals.
   (L)   Unlicensed, abandoned, junk, and salvage vehicles. Unlicensed,
abandoned, junk, and salvage vehicles, campers, or ORVs may be stored outside
of buildings as detailed herein. Motor vehicles, campers, and ORVs stored
outside must be parked or arranged on property in an orderly state and in a
manner that allows fire vehicles and safety personnel access to the property
without danger to life or equipment. Vehicles must be stored and maintained so
the area around vehicles remains in compliance with the provisions of the city
ordinances, including the height of weeds and grasses. No scrap or junk
vehicles may be stored in a way so as to constitute a junkyard where junk as
defined in this chapter. Vehicles that are partially salvaged or missing
components such as doors, hoods, windshields, or unmaintained wheels and/or
tires shall be considered junk vehicles, and shall not be allowed to remain on-
premises for more than 30 days without extensions.
   (M)   Exclusions. These provisions shall not apply to any vehicle being
repaired or restored as part of a commercial transaction, so long as there is
ongoing progress concerning the restoration of the vehicle.
   (N)   Owner responsibility for maintenance. The owner of a property shall be
responsible for complying with the standards set forth in this chapter except
as otherwise stated in this chapter.
   (O)   Good workmanship. Additions, replacements, repairs, or changes made to
buildings, accessory buildings, appurtenances, structures, improvements, or
facilities regulated by this chapter shall be made with good workmanlike
manner.
   (P)   Exterior security lighting. Any exterior light fixture must be
maintained in good repair.
   (Q)   Street address visible. Street addresses shall also be provided for
any building regulated by this chapter so as to identify the building from an
adjacent public street, consistent with state and local law.
   (R)   Vacant/abandon property identification. An identification sign in good
repair and visible from the street shall be affixed to a vacant or abandoned
building regulated by this chapter. Such sign shall provide the name and phone
number of the property owner or other responsible person to be contacted
regarding maintenance or an emergency.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.08 COURT ORDERS, PENALTIES, AND FINES AND FEES.
    Each violation of any provision of this code may be charged as separate
violation of this code. Each violation shall be denominated as a separate count
on the notice of violation or citation. Upon conviction in a court of law, the
defendant shall be sentenced separately on each count.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018; Ord. passed 3-9-2023) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.09 APPEAL.
   (A)   Appeal authorized. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any
person issued a notice by the city in the course of enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter may appeal the decision or interpretation made by
the city to the city’s Zoning Board of Appeals. All appeals shall be filed,
heard, and decided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Time period for filing an appeal. An appeal must be filed within 21
days of the date of any order or notice being appealed. However, if an order
requires the correction of a cited violation within a shorter period of time,
the appeal must be made within such shorter period.
   (C)   Effect of appeal on correction time limits. A responsible person who
has been ordered to correct a violation within a specified period of time shall
not be held accountable for any time which elapses between the time of filing
an appeal and the time a decision is made.
   (D)   Procedure for filing an appeal. Any person wishing to make an appeal
must fill a written appeal form setting forth the order or ruling being
appealed. The appellant must file the written form with the city at a clerk’s
office. The city will send a notice to the appellant regarding the date the
appeal will be heard by the Zoning Board of Appeals (“ZBA”). Notice of the
hearing date will be by regular mail sent to the address stated on the written
appeal form. Any person requesting a written appeal form shall be notified of
the standards for ZBA decisions.
   (E)   Appeal fee. An appeal fee established by resolution of the City
Council shall be submitted with any claim of appeal. The ZBA may also authorize
the return of a fee to an appellant if it determines that an error by the city
caused an unnecessary appeal to be submitted.
   (F)   Procedures prior to appellate hearing. Prior to an appeal hearing, the
following procedures shall take place:
      (1)   The city shall forward copies of the claim of appeal and a copy of
the notice or order being appealed to members of the ZBA;
      (2)   The Code Official or other designee of the City Manager may prepare
a presentation of the property subject to appeal. This presentation may
include, as elements, the exterior view of the dwelling, from all sides, the
exterior view of adjoining properties, specific illustration of the issue(s) of
the appeal, and interior illustration as needed to make a determination;
      (3)   The city shall notify the owner of the premises that is the subject
of the appeal; and
      (4)   Failure of the owner or other responsible person to arrange access
to any portion of the property where a cited violation is located and which is
not clearly visible from a public street or alley shall constitute grounds for
denial of an appeal.
   (G)   Hearings on appeals. All hearings on appeals shall take place at a
regular or special meeting of the ZBA. The city shall have a minimum of 15 days
after a claim of appeal is filed to issue the required notices. The appeal
shall be heard at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the ZBA following
the 15-day period for which the hearing is scheduled, provided that a quorum is
present. When a quorum is not present, the Chair or other presiding member of
the ZBA shall reschedule the meeting, and the appeal shall be heard at the
rescheduled meeting. A hearing may be held at a special meeting by a majority
vote of the ZBA.
   (H)   Hearing procedures. At any hearing of the ZBA arising out of this
chapter, the following procedures shall be followed:
      (1)   Testimony of the appellant, the city, and any witnesses shall be
heard. A summary or minutes shall be recorded in a manner determined by the
city;
      (2)   The appellant or authorized agent of the appellant, and the Code
Official or designee of the City Manager shall be present;
      (3)   At least three members of the ZBA shall be present at a hearing and
shall constitute a quorum; and
      (4)   Summary minutes shall be prepared to show all motions and actions
of the Board.
   (I)   Decision by the ZBA. After all evidence and testimony has been
presented, the ZBA shall affirm, modify or reverse the notice being appealed.
Any decision of the ZBA modifying or reversing a notice by the city shall
require the concurring vote of three members.
   (J)   Standards for Appeal Board decisions. A decision by the ZBA shall
include the reasons for the decision in the language of the decision. Any
decision not complying with this chapter shall be void. Any decision to reverse
or modify any order or ruling of the city shall:
      (1)   Include any necessary special conditions to carry out the intent of
the provisions being appealed;
      (2)   Determine that the decision is necessary to avoid causing undue
hardship to the appellant which is not caused to others to whom the same
provision is applied;
      (3)   Determine that the order or ruling was an incorrect interpretation
of a standard of this chapter; or
      (4)   Determine that an alternative proposed solution by an appellant
meets the minimum standards for building maintenance as expressed in this
chapter.
   (K)   Appeals prohibited. An emergency order shall not be appealed because
of imminent danger calling for immediate action. A ruling, decision, opinion,
or action of the City Attorney cannot be appealed to the ZBA.
   (L)   Conflicts of interest. No member of the ZBA shall speak or vote on any
appeal in which the member has any direct personal or financial interest nor
shall any member participate in any matter where participation is prohibited by
the City Charter or state law.
   (M)   Summary of rulings. The ZBA shall report a summary of its findings and
rulings to the City Council annually on any appeal arising out of this chapter.
The report shall include a summary of recurrent appeals or recurrent problems,
along with resultant recommendations for modifications to this chapter.
   (N)   Compliance with Zoning Board of Appeals decisions. It shall be a
violation of this chapter for a responsible person to fail to comply with
special conditions which are a part of a ZBA decision modifying or reversing an
order or ruling of the city.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018) Penalty, see §
153.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.20 INSPECTION AUTHORIZED.
   The standards of this chapter are to be enforced by inspections of
buildings, accessory structures, and any property subject to any of the terms
of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018)
§ 153.21 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all non-residential buildings,
structures, and properties located in the city.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018)
§ 153.22 ENFORCEMENT PROCESS.
   The city may, but shall not be required to, bring a violation of the
standards established in this chapter to the attention of the property owner or
other responsible person by issuing a notice of violation or by any other
lawful means.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018)
§ 153.23 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for a person, firm, corporation, or entity to be in
conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.24 NOTICE.
   The city police, Code Official, other designee of the City Manager, or other
duly appointed representative shall serve a written notice of violation, which
will include identification of the property, a statement of the violation, and
why the notice is being issued, an order of correction allowing time to make
the repairs, and improvements consistent with §
153.30, the right to appeal the violation, and a statement indicating that the
city may abate violation, charge such costs to the property owner, and/or file
a lien against the property. The notice shall be served by personal delivery to
the owner, or sent first-class mail to the last known address of the owner. A
copy of the notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
property.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018)
§ 153.25 [RESERVED].
§ 153.26 [RESERVED].
§ 153.27 [RESERVED].
§ 153.28 [RESERVED].
§ 153.29 [RESERVED].
§ 153.30 TIME TO CORRECT VIOLATIONS.
   (A)    Any notice of violation shall provide a specified time for achieving
compliance in relation to the seriousness of the violation.
   (B)   If a notice of violation is issued, the following time limits shall be
used:
      (1)   Not more than 24 hours for an emergency;
      (2)   Not more than ten days for correcting hazardous conditions; and
      (3)   Not more than 120 days for all other violations, except as stated
otherwise below.
   (C)   The Code Official or other designee of the City Manager may approve an
extension of time to correct a violation provided in a written notice when
there are documented extenuating circumstances beyond the control of the
responsible person and/or where the responsible person has made a substantial
documented effort to correct violations.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018; Ord. passed 3-9-2023)
§ 153.31 EMERGENCY ORDERS.
   If the Code Official or other designee of the City Manager, or designee of
the City Manager determines that a condition exists or is likely to exist which
is an emergency, the city shall immediately attempt to verbally inform the
responsible person and all occupants of the building of the nature of the
condition. The city shall immediately attempt to give verbal notice to the
responsible person to correct the condition. Such an order shall be effective
immediately. A written notice of violation called for by this chapter shall be
prepared and mailed and/or personally served to the responsible person as soon
as practicable after the verbal notice herein referred to has been attempted.
If notice is attempted to be served in good faith but cannot be completed prior
to having to take action necessary to abate an emergency condition, such notice
shall be posted upon the subject property in a prominent location. Failure to
comply with an emergency notice or order is a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.32 ABATEMENT OF EMERGENCY.
   If the responsible person cannot be contacted or refuses or fails to correct
an emergency condition within the time ordered, the City Manager or a
representative of the City Manager may authorize corrective actions to abate
the emergency. The cost of abatement shall be billed to the owner as a personal
debt which, if unpaid, may be assessed as a lien upon the property involved,
may also be placed on the tax roll for the property, and the city may seek full
reimbursement of the abatement costs through a nuisance or other appropriate
action in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018)
§ 153.33 AUTHORIZATION TO CONDEMN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or any person other than the
owner to enter any building or accessory building the city has condemned as
unfit for human occupancy or entry for any of the following reasons or
conditions:
   (A)   An emergency condition is present;
   (B)   A hazardous condition cited in a notice of violation has not been
corrected; and/or
   (C)   A notice of violation, which contains an order to repair or demolish,
has been issued to the owner.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018)
§ 153.34 EMERGENCY ENTRY AUTHORIZED.
   When an emergency is believed to exist within a property, building, or
accessory building subject to this subchapter, the city shall have the right to
enter immediately and at any time without a warrant or without requesting
permission. Entry must be for the sole purpose of public safety and determining
that an emergency exists or to abate an emergency condition known to exist.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018)
§ 153.35 [RESERVED].
§ 153.36 CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   An owner or responsible person of a property who has received a notice
regarding a violation of a provision of this chapter shall notify the city by
writing the Code Official or other designee of the City Manager within ten days
of transferring ownership of the cited property to another person or entity.
   (B)   The notice to the city shall include the name, address, and telephone
number of the new owner and the effective date of the transfer of ownership.
   (C)   The city shall issue a new notice of violation to any new person or
entity assuming the ownership or the status of responsible person for any
property which has been cited in a notice of violation.
   (D)   An owner or responsible person who has failed to comply with a notice
of violation shall remain responsible for any violations cited in a notice of
violation and shall not be relieved of the responsibility of having violated
any provision of this chapter by transferring ownership or responsible person
status.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018)
§ 153.37 REMOVAL OF POSTED SIGN OR NOTICES.
   No person shall remove, damage, deface, interfere with, move, or conceal any
notice or sign posted in accordance with the provision of this chapter without
first obtaining permission of the city.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalties and sentencing. Upon conviction for violation of any
provision of this chapter, the court shall sentence the defendant to pay a fine
not less than $50, but not more than up to $500. The court shall, when justice
so requires, from requiring a defendant to bring property subject to this
chapter into compliance with the terms herein and to prevent further
violations.
   (B)   Fines. Fines shall reflect the seriousness of each offense as well as
the history of the person convicted. Fines shall not be less than the following
amounts for each separate offense:
      (1)   At least $150 for each failure to comply with an emergency order or
correct a hazardous condition; and
      (2)   At least $50 for each failure to comply with any other provision of
this chapter or any order or notice issued in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
   (C)   City costs. Upon conviction for violation of any provision of this
chapter, the court shall order the defendant to reimburse the city for all of
the costs of enforcement of this chapter attributable to the violations for
which the defendant was convicted, including but not limited to the costs of
inspection, prosecution, and administration. If such condition is not imposed,
the city may file a civil action against the defendant and may, upon proof of
the defendant’s conviction, recover all of the costs referred to above.
   (D)   Fines doubled. In cases of recurrent violations, which shall be
defined as any cited violation not remediated or cured within 15 days after the
initial citation is issued, any applicable fine will be doubled.
   (E)   Signs. A $100 fine will be issued for each posted sign or notice
improperly removed, damaged, defaced, interfered with, moved, or concealed.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2018)
CHAPTER 154: RENTAL CODE
Section
   
154.01   Purpose
   
154.02   Definitions
   
154.03   Registration
   
154.04   Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities
   
154.05   Minimum standards for light, ventilation, and heating
   
154.06   Minimum maintenance requirements
   
154.07   Minimum space, use, and location requirements
   
154.08   Minimum standards and requirements for short-term rentals, bed and
breakfast inns, and bed and breakfast establishments
   
154.09   Fire safety
   
154.10   Inspection of the premises
   
154.11   Certificate of compliance required
   
154.12   Appeals
   
154.13   Rules and regulations
§ 154.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Purpose. The city recognizes a compelling interest in establishing
standards for the maintenance of sanitary and safe residential rental
structures and for improving rental properties within the city. Such standards
are an important factor supportive of the general health, safety, and welfare
of all of its citizens of the city. This chapter is designed to promote the
continuing maintenance and quality of safe rental properties and to enhance and
maintain property values throughout the city.
   (B)   Scope.
      (1)   This chapter shall apply to any structures or part thereof, which
is let or available for occupancy by persons pursuant to an oral or written
rental or lease arrangement or other valuable consideration; or to any occupant
therein. Such structures shall include, but not be limited to, single-family
dwellings, multiple-family dwellings, rooming houses, housekeeping units,
rooming units, bed and breakfast establishments, bed and breakfast inns, and
short-term rentals.
      (2)   This chapter does not apply to hotel/motels (where the average
overnight stay is less than 30 days), jails, nursing homes, school dormitories,
hospitals, nor federally licensed and inspected properties. Nor does it apply
to facilities offering healthcare of any kind that are inspected, certified,
and/or licensed by the state.
      (3)   This chapter shall be enforced by the City Manager or his or her
authorized representatives. The Administrator may utilize additional personnel
to assist with the enforcement including individuals with specialized technical
training or experience necessary to evaluate the condition of rental properties
and determine compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-14-2019)
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. Accepted by the Building Inspection Officer or his or her
authorized representative as a result of their experience or investigation, or
by reason of tests, or acceptable to a recognized testing laboratory,
designated by the Building Inspection Officer.
   BASEMENT. A story partly underground, provided that where the vertical
distance from the average grade to the ceiling of a basement equals or exceeds
five feet. The BASEMENT shall be considered a story.
   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. A single-family residence where no more
than five guest’s rooms are made available for the temporary accommodation of
the traveling or vacationing public. Such an establishment may offer meals only
to those persons temporarily residing at the establishment.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A structure used primarily for lodging purposes where
the use as a residence is clearly secondary. A structure where more than five
but no more than nine guest rooms are made available for the temporary
accommodation of the traveling or vacationing public. Such an establishment may
offer meals to the public and the persons temporarily residing at the
establishment.
   BUILDING. Any structure used, designed, or intended for the protection,
shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property.
   BUILDING INSPECTION OFFICER. The legally designated building inspection
authority of the city or his or her authorized representative.
   DWELLING. Any house, building, structure, trailer, or vehicle, or portion
thereof, which is occupied or intended for occupancy in whole or in part as the
home, residence, living, or sleeping place of one or more human beings, either
permanently or transiently. A house trailer shall be subject to all the
provisions of this chapter, as well as all other ordinances of the city, except
that house trailers or other vehicles duly licensed as a vehicle, may be
occupied or used as a DWELLING for reasonable periods or lengths of time,
without otherwise being subject to the provisions of the act for dwellings,
when located in a park, provided that such parking sites are equipped with
adequate electric, water, safety, and sanitary facilities.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, which meets all of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It complies with the minimum square footage requirements for
building floor area for the applicable district;
      (2)   It has a minimum width along any exterior side elevation of 24 feet
and a minimum internal height of seven and one-half feet;
      (3)   It is firmly attached to a solid foundation constructed on the site
in accordance with the state’s Building Code and state’s Residential Code;
      (4)   It does not have exposed wheels, towing mechanisms, undercarriage,
or chassis;
      (5)   The dwelling is connected to a public sewer and water supply or to
such private facilities approved by the local Health Department;
      (6)   The dwelling contains storage area(s) either in a basement located
under said dwelling, in an attic area, in a closet area, or in a separate fully
enclosed structure on the site, equal to not less than 15% of the interior
living area of the dwelling; and
      (7)   The dwelling is aesthetically compatible in design and appearance
to conventionally on-site constructed homes.
   EFFICIENCY RENTAL. A small rental dwelling unit with a living and bedroom
spaces being combined into one room. Sometimes, a bathroom and a kitchen area
or kitchenette may be combined into one room.
   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
   HABITABLE ROOM. A room used or intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments,
laundries, pantries, foyers, or connecting corridors, closets, and storage
space.
   HUMAN HABITATION. The use of any room, rooming unit, dwelling, dwelling
unit, apartment unit, building or premises for living, sleeping, cooking, or
eating purposes by one or more persons.
   INFESTATION. The presence of any insects, rodents, or other pests within or
around a dwelling, building, or premises.
   OCCUPANT. Any person living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having
actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care, or control of a building, or part
thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
   OWNER. Any person who, alone, jointly, or severally with others:
      (1)   Shall have legal title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
unit, building, or premises with or without accompanying actual possession
thereof; or
      (2)   Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling unit or rooming
unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, trustee, or
guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the
actual OWNER shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter, and
of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he
or she were the OWNER.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, association, or partnership.
   PLUMBING. All of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes,
gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water
closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths,
installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other
similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, or
gas lines.
   PREMISES. Any lot or piece of land inclusive of the buildings and shall
include parking lots or other places or enclosures however owned or occupied.
   RENTAL STRUCTURE. Any dwelling that contains, at a single property address,
one or more dwelling units intended for rental.
   ROOMING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used
or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating
purposes.
   RUBBISH. Combustible and non-combustible waste materials except garbage; and
the said term shall include but not be restricted to paper, rags, cartons,
boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin
cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery, dust, animal, and human feces,
and the residue from the burning of combustible materials.
   SANITARY MAINTENANCE. Any condition in which any significant amount of
filth, trash, or human waste is present in such a manner that a reasonable
person would believe that the condition might constitute a health hazard; or of
strong, persistent, chemical, or human waste odors sufficient to deter use of
the facility, or give rise to a reasonable concern with respect to exposure to
hazardous fumes. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, a toilet bowl
filled with human waste, soiled toilet paper, or other products used in the
toilet compartment, that are present due to a defective toilet facility that
will not flush or otherwise remove waste; visible human waste residue on the
floor or toilet seat that is present due to a toilet that overflowed; an
accumulation of soiled paper towels or soiled toilet paper on the floor, toilet
facility, or sink; an accumulation of visible dirt or human waste on the floor,
toilet facility, or sink; and strong, persistent chemical, or human waste
odors.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. Any dwelling or condominium or portions thereof that is
available for use or is used for accommodations or lodging of guests, paying a
fee, or other compensation for a period of less than 30 consecutive days.
   STRUCTURES. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground.
   STUDIO APARTMENT. A small rental dwelling unit with a living and bedroom
spaces being combined into one room. Sometimes, a bathroom and a kitchen area
or kitchenette may be combined into one room.
   SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished, provided by, or under the control of the
owner or operator.
   TENANTS. A person to whom a landlord grants temporary and exclusive use of
land or a part of a building, usually in exchange for rent.
   UTILITIES. Some commodity or service, such as electricity, gas, water,
transportation, or telephone or internet service.
(Ord. passed 3-14-2019)
§ 154.03 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Requirements. All rental structures regulated by this chapter are
required to be registered pursuant to this chapter and shall comply with the
following.
      (1)   All existing rental structures shall be registered by property
address by close of business of (date TBD) the effective date of this chapter.
Registration, which is the owner’s responsibility, if is on file prior to this
date will be at no cost.
      (2)   All newly constructed rental structures shall be registered prior
to any use or occupancy as a rental structure.
      (3)   All existing non-rental structures which are legally converted to
rental structures shall be registered, prior to the date on which the property
is first occupied for rental purposes.
      (4)   A new owner or purchaser shall register a rental structure which is
sold, transferred, or conveyed from previous owners within 30 days of the date
of the sale/closing. New owners of rental structures are responsible for the
completion of the registration process.
      (5)   Registration is one time only for an owner of a rental structure. A
rental structure registered under this chapter must be reregistered only when
the rental structure changes ownership as described in division (A)(4) above or
loss of registration has occurred.
      (6)   All property taxes must be current with no balances at time of
registration.
   (B)   Registration forms. Registration application forms shall be made in
such form and in accordance with such instruction as may be provided by the
Administrator of the Department of Planning and Zoning or his or her authorized
designees. It is the property owner’s responsibility to obtain and submit the
registration form in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-14-2019)
§ 154.04 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.
   No owner or operator shall let, rent, or hire to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or
eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good
working condition and properly connected to water and sewage system.
   (B)   Water closet, lavatory, and bath. Every dwelling unit shall contain a
room which affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped
with a flush water closet, a lavatory basin, and a bathtub or shower. The water
closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower unit must be properly installed
and maintained in working order and must be kept free from obstructions, leaks,
and defects. They must be capable of performing the functions for which they
are designed. They must be properly connected to a water and sewage system.
They must be maintained in a safe, sanitary, and functional condition.
   (C)   Shared sanitary facilities. Except for §
154.08, shared sanitary facilities are not allowed under this chapter. Provided
further that the provisions of this chapter shall in no way supersede or alter
the requirements of the Building Code pertaining to new structures or
conversions of old structures.
   (D)   Water connections. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or
shower required under the provisions of divisions (A), (B), and (C) above shall
be connected with both hot and cold water lines.
   (E)   Water heating facilities. Every dwelling shall have water heating
facilities which are properly installed, maintained, have a current inspection
tag if required by state law, and capable of providing an adequate amount of
water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower
at a temperature of not less than 110°F (43°C) such that each required sink,
lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower is capable of performing the function for
which they were respectively designed.
   (F)   Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in
a clean, safe, and sanitary condition.
   (G)   Anti-discrimination. All rentals shall be in compliance with the
established Fair Housing Act (Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, being
42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq. (Pub. Law No. 90-284)). In the event the
Administrator of Planning and Zoning or other designated city official finds
that the area is not clean, safe, or sanitary, the tenant shall be deemed
responsible for cleaning the area. In the event an enforcement action is taken
against the tenant for non-compliance, the city shall also notify the owner/
operator of the action. In the event the tenant does not comply with the
required remedial action, the owner/operator shall be held liable for the
cleaning. If, within a reasonable time of the owner/operator retaking legal
control of the property, the required remedial action has still not been
complied with, the owner/operator shall be held responsible.
(Ord. passed 3-14-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.05 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION, AND HEATING.
   No owner or operator shall let, rent, or hire to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Windows. Every sleeping room shall have at least one window or
skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area
measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be one window of at
least five and seven-tenths square feet. Whenever the only window in a room is
a skylight-type window in the top of such room, the total window area of such
skylight shall equal at least 15% of the total floor area of such room. Every
window and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair, and weather-
tight. The city will not require apartment units, houses, and the like, to be
retrofitted to meet the minimum window square footage or total floor area
requirement. These two requirements will be met when the unit, building, house,
and the like, is to be rehabilitated to a cost greater than 50% of the current
value.
   (B)   Ventilation. Every sleeping room shall have at least one window or
skylight which can be easily opened for adequate ventilation, except where
there is supplied some other device or method affording adequate ventilation
and approved by the Building Inspection Officer.
   (C)   Bathroom lights and ventilation. Every bathroom and water closet
compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for
habitable rooms contained in divisions (A) and (B) above, except that no window
or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water
closet compartments equipped with an operational ventilation system approved by
the Building Inspection Officer.
   (D)   Heating facilities. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which
are properly installed and inspection tagged if required by law, are maintained
in safe and working condition such that they are capable of safely heating all
habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments in every dwelling
unit located therein to a temperature of at least 68°F (20°C).
   (E)   Electrical outlets. Every room shall contain at least two electrical
convenience outlets or one such convenience outlet and one lighting fixture.
Additional convenience outlets shall be provided such that each electrical
device and appliance located within each room can be plugged in and operated.
Cords to appliances and devices shall not be run through doorways, under rugs,
or stapled to wood baseboards, door casings, or through holes in partitions or
floors. All installations and repairs of electrical outlets are to be made in a
manner that conforms to the Electrical Codes in force in the county at the time
of inspection. Dwellings and dwelling units already in existence will not have
to be retrofitted to meet the outlet amount requirement.
   (F)   Lighting public halls and stairways. Every public hall and stairway in
every dwelling containing four or more dwelling units shall be adequately
lighted at all times. Adequate lighting for public halls consists of one
constantly shining electrical lighting fixture for every 100 feet of hall
length. Adequate lighting for stairways consists of a proper number of
constantly shining electrical lighting fixtures to enable each riser and
landing to be visible. Every public hall and stairway in structures of four or
more dwelling units shall have emergency lighting and exit signs.
   (G)   Screens, basement or cellar windows. Every basement or cellar window
used or intended to be used for ventilation and every other opening to a
basement which might provide an entry for rodents shall be supplied with a
screen or such other device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
(Ord. passed 3-14-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.06 MINIMUM MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   No owner or operator shall let, rent, or hire to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements, unless otherwise provided in this
chapter.
   (A)   Roofs and drainage. The roof shall be sound- and weather-tight,
without defects that would cause leakage. All roof gutters and downspouts if
installed shall be free from obstructions and without holes or damage that
would compromise their ability to perform the task for which they were
designed. All roof gutters and downspouts must be securely attached to the
building. No storm drainage shall be connected to the sanitary sewer.
   (B)   House and unit numbers. Each building shall have the street number
displayed in four-inch Arabic numbers in a position easily observed and
readable from the street. Additionally, each unit that is assigned a unit,
room, or apartment number or letter shall be clearly marked on the entrance
door to the unit, room, or apartment.
   (C)   Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and maintained in good condition. Every exterior and interior flight
of stairs having more than four risers and every open portion of a stair,
landing, or balcony which is more than 30 inches above the floor or grade shall
have guards.
   (D)   Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks,
and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weather-proof and properly
surface-coated where required to prevent deterioration.
   (E)   Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained free from
open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent
entry from rodents.
   (F)   Exterior openings; maintenance. Every window, exterior door, and
basement hatchway shall be weather-tight, water-tight, and rodent-proof; and
shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.
   (G)   Plumbing fixtures; maintenance. Every plumbing fixture and water and
waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working
condition, free from defects, leaks, and obstructions.
   (H)   Floor surfaces. Every water closet compartment, bathroom, and kitchen
floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be water-resistant
and/or so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
   (I)   Supplied facilities; maintenance. Every supplied facility, piece of
equipment, or utility which is required under this chapter, shall be so
constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively, and
shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.
   (J)   Public areas. Every owner and occupant of a dwelling containing one or
more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and
sanitary condition the public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
(Ord. passed 3-14-2019)
§ 154.07 MINIMUM SPACE, USE, AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.
   No owner or operator shall let, rent, or hire to another for occupancy and
dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements, unless otherwise provided in this
chapter.
   (A) Cooking, sleeping in same room. Where more than two persons occupy any
dwelling unit, food shall not be prepared or cooked in any room used for
sleeping purposes. This shall not apply to studio apartments or efficiency
units.
   (B)   Ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable
room on the main floor, shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet. The
ceiling height of any room in a top floor or attic, shall be not less than six
feet six inches over not less than one-third of the floor area of any room. The
city will not require units to be retrofitted to comply with these
requirements. Units will comply with these requirements at the time of
rehabilitation or remodeling.
   (C) Cellar and/or basement. No cellar and/or basement space shall be used as
a habitable room or dwelling unit unless:
      (1)   The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness;
      (2)   The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window area sizes as required in §
154.05(A);
      (3)   Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area;
      (4)   Openable window area in each room is provided as required under §
154.05(B), except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate
ventilation and approved by the Building Inspection Officer; and
      (5)   There are at least one means of egress directly to the outside in
sleeping rooms.
(Ord. passed 3-14-2019)
§ 154.08 MINIMUM STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR SHORT-TERM RENTALS, BED AND
BREAKFAST INNS, AND BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS.
   No owner or operator shall own or operate a SBR or shall let or hire to
another for occupancy any rooming unit in any SBR except in compliance with the
provisions of every section of this chapter.
   (A)   Minimum basic facilities. At least one flush water closet, lavatory
basin, and bathtub or shower, connected to a water and sewer system and in
compliance with §
154.04, must be supplied for each eight persons residing within a SBR,
including members of the operator’s family whenever they share the use of the
said facilities. Provided that in a SBR where rooms are let only to males,
flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half the required number
of water closets. All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling
as to be accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing
such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied
with hot and cold water at all times. If the structure has only one facility,
it shall not be located in a basement.
   (B)   Minimum space. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person
shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space and every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 20 square
feet of floor space for each additional occupant thereof.
   (C)   Means of egress. Every rooming unit shall have two remote means of
egress, one of which may be a window that conforms to this chapter. Every
rooming unit shall have safe unobstructed means of egress leading to an open
space at ground level and this open space shall lead to a public street or
alley as required by the laws of the state and the city.
   (D)   Responsibility for maintenance. The owner and occupant of every SBR
shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and
ceilings, and for maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of
the rooming house; and he or she shall be further responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building is
leased or occupied by the operator.
   (E)   Maximum occupancy. Every SBR registration shall contain the name(s)
and address(es) of the owner and operator, the type of accommodation for which
issued, the maximum number of rooms which may be rented, together with the
maximum number of persons that may occupy such premises at one time. No person
shall rent a greater number of rooms than is specified in his or her
registration filed with the City Clerk, nor shall accommodations be rented to a
greater number of persons that is specified therein.
   (F)   Parking. Every SBR shall provide adequate off-street parking as
detailed in §§
156.200 and
156.201.
   (G)   Register. Every SBR operator shall provide and maintain a register of
the name and home address of any person other than members of the family of the
owner or operator as listed in the registration filed with the Planning and
Zoning Administrator, occupying said premises or any part thereof. Said
register shall be maintained in said premises and shall be submitted upon
demand to any official or police officer of the city or to any police officer
of the state. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to
inscribe in such register or to give for the purpose of being inscribed in such
register, any false information.
   (H)   Health Department. Any short-term rental where food is served shall
comply with the county’s Health Department Food Preparation Codes.
(Ord. passed 3-14-2019)
§ 154.09 FIRE SAFETY.
   (A)   Scope of responsibility. The owner of a rental dwelling unit shall
provide and the renter shall maintain fire safety facilities and equipment in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, other ordinances, and state
law. No person shall rent to another for occupancy any premises which do not
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Egress. A safe, continuous, and unobstructed means of egress shall be
provided from the interior of a structure to the exterior at a street, or to a
yard, court, or passageway leading to a public open area at grade. If there is
only one means of egress from above the second story, then an alternate exit
must be provided through the use of fire escape stairs or an approved fire
ladder.
   (C)   Direct exit. Every dwelling unit or room shall have access directly to
the outside or to a public corridor.
   (D)   Locked doors. All doors in the required means of egress shall be
readily openable from the inside without the use of keys. Exits from dwelling
units shall not lead through other such units or through toilet rooms or
bathrooms.
   (E)   Fire escapes. All required fire escapes shall be provided and
maintained in working condition and shall be structurally sound.
   (F)   Emergency escapes.
      (1)   Windows or doors. Every sleeping room shall have a safe means of
emergency escape to the outside consisting of an emergency escape window or
door.
      (2)   Maintenance. Emergency escape windows and doors shall be maintained
operational and available to occupants of sleeping rooms in residential uses.
      (3)   Security. Bars, grilles, grates, or similar devices are permitted
to be placed over a required emergency escape window provided that such devices
must be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool,
or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape
and rescue opening.
   (G)   Accumulation and storage.
      (1)   Waste materials. Waste, refuse, or other materials shall not
obstruct stairways, passageways, doors, windows, fire escapes, or other means
of egress.
      (2)   Flammable and explosive matter. Highly flammable or explosive
matter, such as paints, volatile oils, and cleaning fluids, or combustible
refuse, such as waste paper, boxes, and rags shall not be accumulated or stored
on residential rental premises except in reasonable quantities consistent with
normal usage.
      (3)   Flammable liquids. A rental dwelling unit shall not be located
within a structure containing an establishment handling, dispensing, or storing
flammable liquids with a flash point of 110°F (43.33°C) or lower.
   (H)   Fire protection systems.
      (1)   Generally. All fire protection systems and equipment shall be
maintained in proper operating condition at all times.
      (2)   Fire alarms. Fire alarms and detecting systems shall be maintained
and shall be suitable for their respective purposes.
      (3)   Fire extinguishers. All portable fire extinguishers shall be
visible, accessible, and maintained in a safe operating condition with
inspection tags attached. One will be required in the kitchen area and another
in the heating system area.
      (4)   Smoke detectors required. At least one working smoke detector in
each sleeping room, outside each sleeping room, and on each additional story
including basements, but not crawl spaces or uninhabitable attics. All
detectors shall be installed in an approved location. All detectors shall be in
working order at the time of occupancy by a renter.
      (5)   Carbon monoxide detector required. If the unit contains a fuel-
fired appliance and/or an attached garage, a carbon monoxide detector is
required.
(Ord. passed 3-14-2019)
§ 154.10 INSPECTION OF THE PREMISES.
   (A)   Periodic inspection. The Administrator of Planning and Zoning or his
or her authorized representative is hereby authorized to, and shall inspect all
rental dwellings on a periodic rotating basis of once every three years; upon
completion of the registration and receipt of the fee, the Administrator of
Planning and Zoning or his or her authorized representative shall schedule a
compliance inspection within three years of registration. Efforts shall be made
to schedule each compliance inspection at a reasonable time with respect to the
Inspector’s and the owner’s and operator’s convenience. The city will attempt
to give vacant units priority.
   (B)   Satisfactory inspection. Upon satisfactory completion of the
compliance inspection, and upon receipt of the fee for said inspection, the
Administrator of Planning and Zoning or his or her authorized representative
shall issue a certificate of compliance to the owner. A certificate of
compliance shall be valid for a period of three years. Subsequent periodic
inspections shall be conducted in accordance with this chapter. Satisfactory
completion means that every applicable requirement found in this chapter has
been adhered to and complied with. Only total compliance will be considered
satisfactory completion.
   (C)   Unsatisfactory inspection/notification of non-compliance/reinspection.
      (1)   If the Administrator of Planning and Zoning determines that a
dwelling unit does not comply with this chapter, he or she will notify the
property owner, in writing, of all areas of non- compliance, steps that must be
undertaken by the owner and/or operator to remedy the defects, and the time
frame to remedy all areas of non-compliance.
      (2)   The Administrator of Planning and Zoning must indicate in the
notice of non-compliance, whether the conditions are such that the rental
dwelling unit must be vacated, or whether steps to bring the unit up to code
may continue while the unit continues to be occupied by tenants.
      (3)    Notice of violations of the code shall be mailed by registered
first-class mail to the owners and/or operators of the property and by first-
class mail to the tenants within seven business days subsequent to the
inspection. The notice of violation shall state the right to appeal and the
instructions for making such appeal. Failure to remedy the violation within the
time specified in the notice, and the owner fails to appeal within the time
specified herein shall be deemed a violation of the code.
   (D)   Non-periodic inspections. Any rental unit may be subject to non-
periodic inspection if any of the following occur:
      (1)   Upon receipt of a complaint of an owner, operator, occupant or
citizen who has reasonable cause to believe that the premises are in violation
of this chapter;
      (2)   Upon receipt of a report or a referral from a Police Department,
Fire Department, public or private school, or other public agency that the
rental property is not in compliance with this chapter;
      (3)   Upon reasonable belief that a rental structure is not registered
with the city as required by this chapter; and/or
      (4)   Upon evidence of a violation observed by, or brought to the
attention of, the Administrator of Planning and Zoning.
         (a)   The Administrator of Planning and Zoning is empowered to enter
at any and all reasonable times upon and into any premises, building, or
structure for the purpose of examining and inspecting with owner or tenant
consent. If the owner or tenant fails to permit an inspection, the
Administrator may seek a warrant as provided in division (B) above.
         (b)   If a dwelling unit is required to undergo a non-periodic
inspection pursuant to any of the items in division (B) above, the inspection
will be based on the same criteria as periodic inspections, and failure to pass
will lead to the Administrator of Planning and Zoning nullifying any previously
issued certificates of compliance. The Administrator of Planning and Zoning
will also establish clear requirements of what must be undertaken by the owner
or operator, and what time frame, in order to schedule a reinspection and, when
warranted, reissue the certificate of compliance. In addition, an Administrator
of Planning and Zoning must indicate whether the conditions are such that the
rental unit must be vacated, or whether steps to bring the unit up to code may
continue while the unit continues to be rented by tenants.
            1.   If the rental unit that undergoes a non-periodic inspection
passes the inspection, there will be no fee for this inspection.
            2.   If the rental unit that undergoes a non-periodic inspection
fails to pass the inspection, there will be a fee for non-periodic inspection,
as well as fees for re-inspections required to establish compliance with this
chapter.
   (E)   Fees. The city shall charge a non-refundable fee for registration and
inspections. Fees as set forth in the city’s fee schedule and shall be paid at
the time of registration and at the time of the periodic inspection. Any fee
under this act shall be set by resolution of the City Council and be based on
the administrative cost associated with enforcement of the chapter. The fee for
inspection covers the initial inspection. If any subsequent re-inspections are
required, the City Council shall establish by resolution a reinspection fee.
   (F)   Payment. Any fee for required registration, inspection, or re-
inspections, including the administrative service fee, shall be paid by the
owner or party in interest whose name appears on the city’s real property tax
assessment records and/or the person or entity that registered the property.
      (1)   In the event of non-payment of the required fee, the taxpayer of
record shall be notified of the amount of unpaid fees by first-class mail at
the address shown on the City Assessor’s records. If he or she fails to pay the
amount owed within 30 days after mailing of the notice, the City Assessor shall
add the amount to the next tax roll of the city and it shall be collected as
provided by law for the collection of city taxes, plus 10% administrative fee
for processing the tax information required.
      (2)   Any unpaid fees or costs assessed under this chapter shall be a
lien against the real property and shall be reported to the City Assessor for
placement on the real property tax assessment records. Any fees and costs may
also be collected as allowed by law. This provision does not limit any other
remedies available to the city for violation of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-14-2019)
§ 154.11 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Owner/operator. No owner or operator shall lease or rent a rental
dwelling unit, unless there is a valid certificate of compliance issued by the
Administrator of Planning and Zoning and the name of the owners. The
certificate shall be issued after registration and inspection by the
Administrator of Planning and Zoning to determine that each rental dwelling
unit complies with the provisions of the codes and ordinances of the city. The
only exception to this requirement is during the first certification period
during which all rental dwelling units will be inspected over a three-year
period.
      (1)   An Administrator of Planning and Zoning must inspect the premises
before the certificate of compliance is initially issued. Upon failure of the
Building Inspector to conduct an inspection prior to occupancy, the owner or
operator may rent the property until the Administrator of Planning and Zoning
has conducted an inspection and the owner or operator will not be deemed in
violation during that time. If, however, the Inspector’s inability to inspect
the premises is due to the owner’s or operator’s action, failure to act, or
inability to arrange the inspection after reasonable notice of the intent to
inspect, the owner or operator shall not rent the property without a current
certificate of compliance as required.
      (2)   Between 30 and 60 days before the expiration date of the
certificate of compliance, the city will arrange with the owner or operator for
an inspection date and time, and indicate the amount due for the next periodic
compliance inspection; said notice shall be by first-class mail to the address
as provided by the owner and/or operator. The Inspector shall attempt to
inspect the premises before the certificate of compliance expires. Upon failure
of the Inspector to conduct an inspection prior to expiration of the
certificate of compliance, the owner or operator may rent the property until
the Inspector has conducted an inspection, and the owners and operators will
not be deemed in violation during that time. If, however, the Inspector’s
inability to inspect is due to the owner’s or operator’s action, failure to act
or refusal to permit an inspection after reasonable notice of the intent to
inspect, the owners or operators shall not rent the property without a current
certificate of compliance as required. If the tenants are utilizing the
dwelling unit, the Inspector is authorized to require vacation of the dwelling
unit. A certificate of compliance shall expire three years from the date of
issue.
   (B)   Certification. Once certified, the unit will be issued a certification
placard by the city. Emergency contact information and the Planning and Zoning
Office contact information will be included in said placard as well as date of
certification. Placed near the entrance in interior at a visible location.
   (C)   Warrants.
      (1)   Nonemergency. In a nonemergency, if a registered owner, registered
agent or occupant demands a warrant for inspection of the premises, the
Administrator of Planning and Zoning shall obtain a warrant for inspection from
a court of competent jurisdiction.
      (2)   Preparation of warrant. The Administrator of Planning and Zoning
shall prepare the warrant, stating the address of the structure to be
inspected, the nature of the inspection, as defined in this code or other
applicable codes or statutes, and the reason for the inspection.
      (3)   Warrant shall be issued. If the court finds the warrant is in
proper form and in accordance with this code, it shall be issued forthwith.
      (4)   Emergency. In the event of an emergency, no warrant shall be
required.
      (5)   The fee associated with the City of Negaunee having to procure an
administrative warrant is $500, which shall be assessed to the registered owner
of the subject rental unit regardless of who demands the administrative
warrant, and must be paid to the Negaunee City Treasurer's office within 30
days of the city's mailing of the administrative fee invoice to the registered
owner. Failure to pay within 30 days shall be a violation of this Code and
subject the registered owner to any and all applicable penalties as identified
in §
10.99, General Penalty.
(Ord. passed 3-14-2019; Ord. passed 10-9-2025)
§ 154.12 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeal procedure. Any owner or operator affected by any notice of
violation which has been issued under this chapter may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the city Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA).
An appeal from a ruling of the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator
under this chapter concerning the enforcement of the provisions of this may be
made to the ZBA within such time as shall be prescribed by ZBA in compliance
with state statute. The applicant shall file with ZBA a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith
transmit to ZBA all documents concerning the appeal. The notice requirements
under state law shall be met as to the matters heard by ZBA.
   (B)   Hearings. ZBA shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal
and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may
appear in person or by agent or attorney. ZBA actions shall be in the form of a
resolution clearly setting forth ZBA decision. ZBA may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the office or board
or commission from whom the appeal is taken.
   (C)   Decisions and powers of the city’s Zoning Board of Appeals.
      (1)   After a hearing, the ZBA may sustain, modify, or withdraw the
notice of violation depending upon its findings. In rendering these
determinations, the powers of the ZBA shall be strictly limited to making
interpretations of the provisions of this chapter, to the applicability of its
specific provisions to the specific case being heard, and to granting
exemptions to the provisions of this chapter. In granting exemptions, the ZBA
shall be allowed to grant an exemption if it clearly appears that, by reason of
special condition, undue hardship would result from strict application of any
section of the chapter. However, no exemption shall be granted if the same
would result in either the purpose or intent of this chapter, or of any
particular sections at issue, being nullified, in reviewing a request for an
exemption, the ZBA shall consider the following to determine whether an
exemption would be appropriate:
         (a)   Whether there are exceptional or extraordinary conditions
applying to the property that do not apply to other similar properties;
         (b)   Whether the exceptional or extraordinary conditions resulted
from the action of the property owner;
         (c)    Whether there exists alternative or equivalent methods or
materials that would allow the purpose and intent of the particular sections at
issue to be satisfied;
         (d)   Whether the granting of an exemption would result in a
substantial detriment to the property; and
         (e)   Whether the exemption requested is the minimum exemption
possible that would still allow the purpose and intent of the particular
sections at issue should be met.
      (2)   The ZBA may permit an exemption for mandatory provisions in such a
manner that public safety shall be secured, substantial justice done, and the
spirit and intent of the provisions of this chapter are upheld. In no case
shall this Board grant an exemption which would lessen the safety, health and
welfare requirements of this chapter. Any exemptions granted shall be for this
chapter and shall not, and cannot, waive the requirements and provisions of any
other ordinance or law. All decisions rendered under this chapter shall be in
writing and shall be final. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the
appellant at the address shown on the appeal. Failure of the appellant or his
or her representative to appear and state his or her case at the hearing, shall
have the same effect as if no appeal was filed and the ZBA shall proceed to
deny the appeal and affirm the notice of violation.
      (3)   ZBA shall meet in a fixed place and all meetings shall be opened to
the public. The ZBA shall keep a record of its proceedings, showing the actions
of the ZBA and the vote of each member upon each question considered. These
records shall be considered public records.
      (4)   The decision of ZBA shall be final. However, a party aggrieved by
the order or decision may appeal the decision to a court of competent
jurisdiction as provided by state statutes and court rules.
(Ord. passed 3-14-2019)
§ 154.13 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Administrator of Planning and Zoning is hereby empowered to promulgate
such rules and regulations as shall be necessary for the enforcement of this
chapter subject, however, to the approval of the City Manager. When the rules
and regulations made hereunder have been adopted and promulgated by the
Administrator of Planning and Zoning and approved by the City Manager, they
shall be deemed to be as complete and binding a part of this chapter as if the
same were herein specifically set forth; and the violation of any of said
regulations so adopted shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. Copies of
such rules and regulations shall be placed on file in the office of the City
Clerk for inspection by interested parties at any reasonable time.
(Ord. passed 3-14-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
Platting Procedure
   
155.001   Subdivision application procedures and approval process
   
155.002   Specifications for construction plans
   
155.003   Specifications for final plats
Division of Land
   
155.015   Land detached
   
155.016   Lot divided into two
   
155.017   Division into three or four lots
   
155.018   Existing dwellings of record
   
155.019   Appeals
Specifications for Pre-Preliminary Plats
   
155.030   Name
   
155.031   Ownership
   
155.032   Description
   
155.033   Features
   
155.034   Sketch of subdivision area
Specifications for Preliminary Plats
   
155.045   In general
   
155.046   Features
   
155.047   Sketch plat information; notations
   
155.048   Endorsement by Commission Chairperson
   
155.049   Insufficient or improper information
Design Standards
   
155.060   Drainage and storm sewers
   
155.061   Water facilities
   
155.062   Sidewalks
   
155.063   Utilities
   
155.064   Public uses
   
155.065   Preservation of natural features and amenities
   
155.066   Non-residential subdivisions
Roads
   
155.080   Purpose
   
155.081   Road surfacing and improvements
   
155.082   Excess right-of-way
   
155.083   Railroads and limited-access highways
   
155.084   Intersections
   
155.085   Bridges
   
155.086   Dedications and reservations
Sewerage Facilities
   
155.100   General requirements
   
155.101   High Density Residential and Non-Residential Districts
   
155.102   Low and Medium Density Residential Districts
   
155.103   Mandatory connection to the public sewer system
   
155.104   Individual disposal system requirements
   
155.105   Design criteria for sanitary sewers
Subdivision Regulations
   
155.120   Short title
   
155.121   Purposes
   
155.122   Legal basis; scope
   
155.123   Interpretation; conflicts
   
155.124   Severability
   
155.125   Effective date
   
155.126   Definitions
Administration, Enforcement, and Penalty
    
155.140   Administration generally
   
155.141   Enforcement generally
   
155.142   Amendments
   
155.143   Requirements for resubdivisions, replats, and the like
   
155.144   Schedule of fees
   
155.145   Variances
Improvements
   
155.160   Assurance of completion and maintenance
   
155.161   Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy
General Requirements
   
155.175   Conformance to applicable rules and regulations
   
155.176   Self-imposed restrictions
   
155.177   Plats straddling municipal boundaries
   
155.178   Character of the land
   
155.179   Subdivision name
Lots
   
155.190   Arrangement
   
155.191   Dimensions
   
155.192   Double frontage lots
   
155.193   Drainage
   
155.194   Waste materials
   
155.195   Fences
   
155.196   Waterbodies and watercourses
   
155.197   Surety to include lot improvement
Construction and Roads
   
155.210   Frontage on improved roads
   
155.211   Grading and improvement plan
   
155.212   Topography and arrangement
   
155.213   Blocks
   
155.214   Access to primary arterials
   
155.215   Road names
   
155.216   Road regulatory signs
   
155.217   Street lights
   
155.218   Reserve strips
   
155.219   Construction of roads and dead-end roads
 
   
155.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure; effect, see M.C.L.A. § 125.3871
   Approval of plats; street system, see M.C.L.A. § 125.3871
   Certification of city plats, see M.C.L.A. §§ 125.51 et seq.
   Publication of codes of municipal ordinances, see M.C.L.A. § 117.5b
   Regulations governing subdivision of land; bond to secure improvement;
publication of regulations,     see M.C.L.A. § 125.3871
PLATTING PROCEDURE
§ 155.001 SUBDIVISION APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS.
   (A)   Preliminary plat requirements.
      (1)   Preliminary plats shall be submitted and filed for approval in
accordance with the requirements of §§ 112 through 120 inclusive of the
Subdivision Control Act, being Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 560.112 through 560.120, and these subdivision regulations. The fee
provided for in these subdivision regulations for review of preliminary plats
shall be deposited with the City Clerk at the time of filing the initial
application.
      (2)   The proprietor or his or her agent shall submit ten copies each of
the completed application form along with the preliminary plat to the City
Clerk at least two weeks prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the city’s
Planning Commission. The Clerk will immediately forward two complete sets of
documents to the City Engineer for review.
      (3)   The City Engineer, upon finding the submission complete, will
notify the City Clerk who will in turn alert the Secretary of the Planning
Commission to place the matter on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the city’s Planning Commission.
      (4)   Distribution of the ten copies by the City Clerk as required in
division (A)(2) above shall be as follows:
         (a)   City Clerk - Record File: two;
         (b)   Local School District Superintendent: one;
         (c)   City Engineer: two;
         (d)   Chairperson, City Planning Commission: three; and
         (e)   City Manager: two.
      (5)   The City Engineer, prior to the next regular meeting of the
Planning Commission, shall review the proposed preliminary plat and
accompanying documents, and report his or her findings to the Chairperson of
the Planning Commission.
      (6)   After careful review of the City Engineer’s report and
recommendation, along with any other relevant information, the Planning
Commission may, at its option, pursue the following course of action:
         (a)   Grant tentative approval or disapprove the plat. If the proposed
subdivision is disapproved, the Planning Commission shall set forth in writing
its reasons for rejection and specify to the proprietor the requirements for
tentative approval; or
         (b)   Grant provisional approval subject to certain modifications and/
or requirements which it shall state in writing.
      (7)   In the case of provisional approval the proprietor shall re-submit
the revised preliminary plat incorporating the modifications and/or changes as
required by the Planning Commission. Re-submission may be made prior to the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission.
      (8)   The City Planning Commission shall forward its recommendations to
the City Council for its action. Tentative approval, granted by the City
Council, in accordance with the requirements of § 112(4) of the Subdivision
Control Act, being Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, shall confer upon the
proprietor, for a period of one year from its date, approval of lot sizes, lot
orientation, and street layout. Such tentative approval may be extended if
applied for by the proprietor and granted by the City Council in writing.
      (9)   If tentative approval of the preliminary plat is granted by the
City Council, the proprietor shall conform to all applicable state laws
regulating the subdivision of land, and subsequent processing of the proposed
subdivision will be in accordance with these subdivision regulations and the
requirements and procedures set forth in the Subdivision Control Act, being
Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293.
      (10)   Within one year of the date of City Council’s tentative approval,
the proprietor may submit six copies of the final preliminary plat, along with
documented evidence of approvals from all required state and local agencies, to
the City Clerk, all in accordance with § 120, Item 1(c) of Public Act 288 of
1967, as amended, and these regulations. The City Clerk shall immediately
forward two copies each to the Planning Commission, the City Manager, and the
City Engineer. The City Council shall not act on the matter until it has
received a recommendation from the Planning Commission that the final
preliminary plat is in general agreement with the previously submitted
preliminary plat.
      (11)   Prior to approval of the final preliminary plat by the City
Council, the City Manager shall require a written report from the City Engineer
regarding the adequacy of proposed improvements, their design, and their
scheduled installation, along with a review of the final preliminary plat prior
to acceptance by the City Council.
      (12)   The City Council may grant approval of the final preliminary plat
if it is determined, after reviewing written reports from the City Engineer,
and after receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, that the
plat and proposed improvements have met all requirements. Final approval of the
preliminary plat shall confer upon the proprietor, for a period of two years
from the date of approval, the conditional right that the general terms and
conditions under which approval was granted will not be changed. The two-year
period may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the City
Council in writing. The City Manager shall send written notice of any extension
to all other approving authorities in accordance with §§ 113 through 119 of
Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A.§§ 560.113 through 560.119.
      (13)   After the City Council’s approval of the final preliminary plat,
the proprietor may begin the installation of the approved subdivision
improvements or post surety in the form of a performance bond, letter of
credit, certified check, or cash deposit as specified herein.
   (B)   Final plat requirements.
      (1)   Final subdivision plats shall be prepared and submitted in
accordance with the requirements as set forth in the Subdivision Control Act,
being Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through
560.293.
      (2)   A written application for final plat approval along with the State
Treasurer’s recording fee shall accompany all final plats.
      (3)   The subdivider shall submit proof of ownership of the land included
in the final plat in the form of an abstract of title certified to the date of
the proprietor’s certificate or a policy of title insurance currently in force.
      (4)   The City Council may require such other information as it deems
necessary to establish whether the proper parties have signed the plat.
      (5)   Within two years from the date of the final preliminary plat
approval, the proprietor may file a final plat with the City Clerk who will in
turn forward the plat to the City Manager and place the item on the agenda of
the next regularly scheduled meeting.
      (6)   If the City Council determines that all conditions for final plat
approval have been satisfied, including pre-installation of required
improvements, and/or acceptable security provided to assure said installation,
Council may grant such approval in accordance with § 148 of the Subdivision
Control Act, being Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §
560.148.
(Prior Code, § 1244.01)
§ 155.002 SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   (A)   Construction plans shall be prepared for all required improvements.
Plans shall be drawn at a scale of no more than one inch equals 50 feet, and
plan sheets shall be standard 24-inch by 36-inch size.
   (B)   The following shall be shown.
      (1)   Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along centerlines
of all roads. Where a proposed road intersects an existing road or roads, the
elevation along the centerline of the existing road or roads, within 100 feet
of the intersection, shall be shown, along with approximate radii of all
curves, lengths of tangents, and central angles on all streets.
      (2)   The Planning Commission and/or the City Engineer may require, where
steep slopes exist, that cross-sections of all proposed streets at 100-foot
stations shall be shown at five points as follows: On a line at right angles to
the centerline of the street, and said elevation points shall be at the
centerline of the street, each property line, and points 25 feet inside each
property line.
      (3)   Plans and profiles showing the location and typical cross-section
of street pavements, including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, drainage
easements, servitudes, rights-of-way, manholes, and catch basins; the location
of street trees, street lighting standards, and street signs; the location,
size, and invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, storm
water drains and fire hydrants, showing connection to any existing or proposed
utility systems; and the exact location and size of all water, gas, or other
underground utilities or structures.
      (4)   The location, size, elevation, and other appropriate description of
any existing facilities or utilities, including, but not limited to, existing
streets, sewers, drains, water mains, easements, waterbodies, streams, and
other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings, features noted
on the official map or master plan, at the point of connection to proposed
facilities and utilities within the subdivision, and each tree with a diameter
of eight inches or more, measured 12 inches above ground level. The water
elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of the survey, and the
approximate high- and low-water elevations of such lakes or streams, shall also
be shown. All elevations shall be referred to the USGS data plane. If the
subdivision borders a lake, river, or stream, the distances and bearings of a
meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the ordinary high-
water mark of such waterways shall also be shown.
      (5)   Topography at the same scale as the sketch plat with a contour
interval of two feet, referred to sea level data. All data provided shall be
the latest applicable U.S. coast and geodetic survey data and should be so
noted on the plat.
      (6)   All specifications and references required by the local
government’s construction standards and specifications and the City Engineer,
including a site-grading plan for the entire subdivision.
      (7)   Notation of approval as follows:
 
 
____________________            ____________________
Owner                     Date
 
____________________            ____________________
Planning Commission Chairperson      Date
 
      (8)   The title, name, address, and seal of a professional engineer and/
or registered land surveyor, and the date, including revision dates.
(Prior Code, § 1244.05)
§ 155.003 SPECIFICATIONS FOR FINAL PLATS.
   (A)   In general. The final subdivision plat shall be prepared in accordance
with the regulations of §§ 132 through 151, inclusive, of the Subdivision
Control Act, being Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§
M.C.L.A. §§ 560.132 through 560.151, and shall reflect any changes or additions
required by resolution of the Planning Commission, as shown on the preliminary
plat. The preliminary plat may be used as the final subdivision plat if it
meets these requirements and is in accordance with any revisions required under
the Planning Commission’s resolution.
   (B)   Preparation. The final subdivision plat shall be prepared under the
direct supervision of a land surveyor registered by the state and said plat
shall comply with all requirements of these subdivision regulations and the
requirements of the Subdivision Control Act, being Public Act 288 of 1967, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293.
   (C)   Survey procedures. All survey procedures will be in accordance with
the Subdivision Control Act, being Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293.
(Prior Code, § 1244.06)
DIVISION OF LAND
§ 155.015 LAND DETACHED.
    Land may be detached from one such lot, outlot, or parcel and added to
another lot, outlot, or parcel upon application to and approval by the City
Manager. The fact of such a division shall be noted upon the city assessment
roll and thereafter the enlarged lot, outlot, or parcel shall be considered to
be a single lot, outlot, or parcel for tax assessment, and all other purposes.
No such division shall be permitted unless the remainder of the lot, outlot, or
parcel from which the part was taken meets the minimum requirements of the
city’s Zoning Code, including width, area, setback, and side yard requirements.
(Prior Code, § 1244.02)
§ 155.016 LOT DIVIDED INTO TWO.
   Such a lot, outlot, or parcel may be divided into not more than two new
lots, outlots, or parcels upon application to and approval by the City Manager.
The fact of such a division shall be noted upon the city assessment roll and
thereafter each separate parcel shall be considered to be a single lot, outlot,
or parcel for tax assessment and all other purposes. No such division shall be
permitted unless each separate parcel meets the minimum requirements of the
city’s Zoning Code, including width, area, setback, and side yard requirements.
In those cases where water, sewer, or other services have been installed within
the subdivision plat by special assessment, and the lot, outlot, or parcel
proposed to be divided has been assessed therefor, no division shall be
permitted unless the applicant agrees in writing to pay into the Special
Assessment District an additional amount to be determined by the City Manager,
said amount representing the increased share of the cost of the Special
Assessment District which should be borne by the applicant for the divisions of
said lot, outlot, or parcel as the result of increased benefit received by the
applicant for the division of said lot, outlot, or parcel when divided into two
separate lots, outlots, or parcels.
(Prior Code, § 1244.02)
§ 155.017 DIVISION INTO THREE OR FOUR LOTS.
   Such lot, outlot, or parcel may be divided into more than two but not more
than four separate lots, outlots, or parcels upon application to and approval
by the City Planning Commission. A survey showing such proposed divisions
prepared by a registered engineer or by a registered land surveyor, including a
proper legal description of each separate lot, outlot, or parcel proposed,
shall be submitted with the application. A copy of the application and the
survey shall be forwarded to the City Engineer for recommendation. Upon receipt
of such recommendation, the matter shall be placed upon the agenda of the next
regular meeting of the Planning Commission. Should the Planning Commission
approve the requested divisions, the Chairperson shall notify the City Manager,
and the fact of such a division shall be noted upon the city assessment roll
and thereafter the divided portions of the lot, outlot, or parcel shall be
considered to be separate lots, outlots, or parcels for tax assessment and all
other purposes. No such division shall be permitted unless each of the parts
into which such lot, outlot, or parcel is to be divided meets the minimum
requirements of the city’s Zoning Code, including width, area, side yard, and
setback requirements. In those cases where either sewer or other services have
been installed within the plat by special assessment and the lot proposed to be
divided has been assessed therefor, no division shall be permitted unless the
applicant agrees in writing to pay into the Special Assessment District an
additional amount to be determined by the City Manager representing the
increased share of the cost of the Special Assessment District which should be
borne by the applicant for the division of said divided lot, outlot, or parcel
when divided into three or four such lots, outlots, or parcels.
(Prior Code, § 1244.02)
§ 155.018 EXISTING DWELLINGS OF RECORD.
   Areas where dwellings have been constructed upon lots, outlots, or parcels
of record, or upon parts of lots, outlots, or parcels of record, created prior
to January 1, 1968, the effective date of the Subdivision Control Act, being
Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293,
such recorded lots, outlots, or parcels may be divided into more than two but
not more than four separate lots, outlots, or parcels upon application to and
approval by the City Planning Commission. A survey showing such proposed
divisions prepared by a registered land surveyor, including a proper legal
description of each separate lot, outlot, or parcel proposed, shall be
submitted with the application. A copy of the applications, survey, and legal
description shall be forwarded to the City Engineer for his or her review and
recommendation. Upon receipt of such recommendation, the matter shall be placed
upon the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Planning
Commission. Should the Planning Commission approve the requested divisions, the
Chairperson shall notify the City Manager, and the fact of such division shall
be noted upon the city assessment roll and thereafter the divided portions of
the recorded lots, outlots, or parcels shall be considered to be separate lots,
outlots, or parcels for tax assessment and all other purposes. In such
situations the minimum requirements of the city’s Zoning Code, including width,
area, side yard, and setback requirements are hereby waived. Adequate rights-
of-way and/or easements shall be provided for all water, sewer, and other
public utility lines servicing the approved lots, outlots, or parcels.
(Prior Code, § 1244.02)
§ 155.019 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by any action of the City Manager, the City Assessor,
or the city’s Planning Commission hereunder shall be entitled to a hearing
before the City Council. Such hearing shall be requested in writing and shall
be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council occurring
not less than ten days after filing of the request. The City Council may, after
hearing, modify or reverse any decision of the City Manager, the City Assessor,
or the City Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 1244.02)
SPECIFICATIONS FOR PRE-PRELIMINARY PLATS
§ 155.030 NAME.
   (A)   The approval of all pre-preliminary, preliminary, and final plats
shall be conditional upon compliance with the requirements set forth in the
Subdivision Control Act, being Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, and these
subdivision regulations.
   (B)   Pre-preliminary plats submitted to the Planning Commission for
information and review shall be prepared in pen and pencil, shall be drawn to a
convenient scale of not more than 100 feet to an inch and shall show the
following information:
      (1)   The name of the subdivision if the property is within an existing
subdivision;
      (2)   The proposed name of the subdivision if it is not within a
previously platted subdivision. The proposed name shall not duplicate the name
of any plat previously recorded in the county; and
      (3)   The name of the property if no subdivision name has been chosen.
(This is commonly the name by which the property is locally known.)
(Prior Code, § 1244.03)
§ 155.031 OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   The name and address, including the telephone number, of the legal
owner or agent of the property, and a citation of the last instrument conveying
title to each parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving
grantor, grantee, date, and land records reference.
   (B)   The citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements
affecting the property.
   (C)   Existing covenants on the property, if any.
   (D)   The name and address, including the telephone number, of the
professional person(s) responsible for subdivision design, for the design of
public improvements, and for the land survey.
(Prior Code, § 1244.03)
§ 155.032 DESCRIPTION.
   The location of the property by government lot, section, township, range,
and county; the graphic scale, the north arrow, and the date.
(Prior Code, § 1244.03)
§ 155.033 FEATURES.
   (A)   The location of property lines, existing easements, burial grounds,
railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, and existing wooded areas; the location,
width, and names of all existing or platted streets, or other public ways
within or immediately adjacent to the tract; and the names of adjoining
property owners from the latest assessment rolls within 500 feet of any
perimeter boundary of the subdivision.
   (B)   The location, sizes, elevations, and slopes of existing sewers, water
mains, culverts, and other underground structures within the tract and
immediately adjacent thereto, existing permanent buildings, and utility poles
on or immediately adjacent to the site and utility rights-of-way.
   (C)   The approximate topography, at the same scale as the sketch plat.
   (D)   The approximate location and widths of proposed streets.
   (E)   Preliminary proposals for connection with existing water supply and
sanitary sewerage systems, or alternative means of providing water supply and
sanitary waste treatment and disposal; preliminary provisions for collecting
and discharging surface water drainage.
   (F)   The approximate location, dimensions, and area of all proposed or
existing lots.
   (G)   The approximate location, dimensions, and area of all parcels of land
proposed to be set aside for park or playground use or other public use, or for
the use of property owners in the proposed subdivision.
   (H)   The location of temporary stakes to enable the Planning Commission to
find and appraise features of the sketch plat in the field.
   (I)   A vicinity map showing streets and other general development of the
surrounding area. The sketch plat shall show all school and improvement
district lines with the zones properly designated.
(Prior Code, § 1244.03)
§ 155.034 SKETCH OF SUBDIVISION AREA.
   Whenever the sketch plat covers only a part of an applicant’s contiguous
holdings, the applicant shall submit, at a scale of no more than 200 feet to
the inch, a sketch in pen or pencil of the proposed subdivision area, together
with its proposed street system, and an indication of the probable future
street and drainage system of the remaining portion of the tract.
(Prior Code, § 1244.03)
SPECIFICATIONS FOR PRELIMINARY PLATS
§ 155.045 IN GENERAL.
   The preliminary plat shall be prepared under the direct supervision of a
registered engineer or a registered land surveyor in accordance with the
requirements set forth in these regulations and in accordance with all
applicable sections of the Subdivision Control Act, being Public Act 288 of
1967, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 1244.04)
§ 155.046 FEATURES.
   In addition to the requirements of the Subdivision Control Act, being Public
Act 288 of 1967, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293, the
preliminary plat shall show the following:
   (A)   The location of property with respect to surrounding property and
streets, the names of all adjoining property owners of record or the names of
all adjoining developments, and the names of adjoining streets;
   (B)   The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property, to
be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot;
   (C)   The location of existing streets, easements, waterbodies, streams, and
other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings, parks,
cemeteries, drainage ditches, and bridges;
   (D)   The location and width of all existing and proposed streets,
easements, alleys, and other public ways, and proposed street rights-of-way and
building setback lines;
   (E)   The location, dimensions, and area of all proposed or existing lots;
   (F)   The location and dimensions of all property to be set aside for park
or playground use, or other public or private reservation, with a designation
of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication or
reservation;
   (G)   The name and address of the owner or owners of land to be subdivided,
the name and address of the subdivider if other than the owner, and the name of
the registered land surveyor;
   (H)   The date of the map, the approximate true north point, the scale, and
the title of the subdivision;
   (I)   Sufficient data acceptable to the City Engineer to determine readily
the location, bearing, and length of all lines, and to reproduce such lines
upon the ground, and the location of all proposed monuments;
   (J)   The name of the subdivision and of all new streets as approved by the
Planning Commission and the City Engineer;
   (K)   An indication of the use of any lot (single-family, two-family, multi-
family, townhouse) and all uses other than residential proposed by the
subdivider; and
   (L)   All lots in each block consecutively numbered. Outlots shall be
lettered in alphabetical order.
(Prior Code, § 1244.04)
§ 155.047 SKETCH PLAT INFORMATION; NOTATIONS.
   All information required on a sketch plat should also be shown on the
preliminary plat, and the following notations shall also be shown:
   (A)   An explanation of drainage easements, if any;
   (B)   An explanation of site easements, if any;
   (C)   An explanation of reservations, if any; and
   (D)   An endorsement of the owner, as follows.
 
 
_______________________         _______________________
Owner                     Date
 
(Prior Code, § 1244.04)
§ 155.048 ENDORSEMENT BY COMMISSION CHAIRPERSON.
   The form for endorsements by the Commission Chairperson shall be as follows.
 
 
Approved by resolution of the _________________ Planning Commission
 
_______________________         ___________________
Chairperson                  Date
 
(Prior Code, 1244.04)
§ 155.049 INSUFFICIENT OR IMPROPER INFORMATION.
   The lack of information under any item specified herein, or improper
information supplied by the applicant, shall be cause for disapproval of a
preliminary plat.
(Prior Code, § 1244.04)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 155.060 DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS.
   (A)   General requirements. The Planning Commission shall not recommend for
approval any subdivision plat which does not make adequate provision for storm
or flood water run-off. The storm water drainage system shall be separate and
independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where required, shall
be designed by the rational method, or other methods as approved by the City
Engineer, and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with
plans. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across or
around any intersection, nor for a distance of more than 600 feet in the
gutter. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a
point, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and catch
basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface water drainage
patterns shall be shown for each lot and block.
   (B)   Nature of storm water facilities.
      (1)   Location. The applicant may be required by the governing body to
carry away by pipe or open ditch, any spring or surface water that may exist
either previously to or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage
facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, or in
perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed
in accordance with the local government’s construction standards and
specifications.
      (2)   Accessibility to public storm sewers.
         (a)   Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall
install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable
distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of storm waters,
subject to the specifications of the City Engineer. However, in subdivisions
containing lots less than 15,000 square feet in area and in Business and
Industrial Districts, underground storm sewer systems shall be constructed
throughout the subdivisions and shall be conducted to an approved outfall.
Inspections of all facilities shall be conducted by the City Engineer.
         (b)   If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided
eventually, as determined by the City Engineer and the Planning Commission, the
developer shall make arrangements for future storm water disposal by a public
utility system at the time the plat receives final approval. Provision for such
connection shall be incorporated by inclusion in the surety required for the
subdivision plat.
      (3)   Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other
drainage facility shall, in each case, be large enough to accommodate potential
run-off from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the
subdivision. The City Engineer shall determine the necessary size of the
facility, based on the provisions of the construction standards and
specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development
permitted by the Zoning Code.
      (4)   Effect on downstream drainage areas. The City Engineer shall also
study the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities
outside the area of the subdivision. Local government drainage studies together
with such other studies, as shall be appropriate, shall serve as a guide to
needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional run-off
incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing
downstream drainage facility, the City Council may withhold approval of the
subdivision until provision has been made for the improvement of said potential
condition in such amount as the City Council shall determine. No subdivision
shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate
drainage watercourse or facility.
      (5)   Areas of poor drainage. Whenever a plat is submitted for an area
which is subject to flooding, the City Council, upon recommendation of the
Planning Commission, may approve such subdivision, provided that the applicant
fills the affected area of said subdivision to an elevation sufficient to place
the elevation of said streets and lots at a minimum of 12 inches above the
elevation of the maximum probable flood, as determined by the City Engineer.
The plat of such subdivision shall provide for a flood plain area along the
bank of any stream or watercourse, in a width which shall be sufficient in
times of high-water to contain or move the water, and no fill shall be placed
in the flood plain area nor shall any structure be erected or placed therein.
The boundaries and the elevation of the flood plain area shall be subject to
approval by the City Engineer and any other state and/or local agency which may
be required under Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended. Areas of extremely poor
drainage shall be discouraged from development.
      (6)   Flood plain areas. The Planning Commission may, when it deems it
necessary for the health, safety, or welfare of the present and future
population of the area, and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage,
and sanitary facilities, prohibit the subdivision of any portion of property
which lies within the flood plain of any stream or drainage course. These flood
plain areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting
from clearing, grading or dumping of earth, waste material or stumps.
   (C)   Dedication of drainage easements.
      (1)   General requirements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm
water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines
of such watercourse, and of such width and construction or both as will be
adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage
be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for
maximum potential volume of flow.
      (2)   Drainage easements.
         (a)   Where topography or other conditions make impractical the
inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way, perpetual
unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width for such drainage facilities
shall be provided across property outside the road lines and with satisfactory
access to the road. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage
easements shall be carried from the road to a natural watercourse or to other
drainage facilities.
         (b)   When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private
land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage easements must be secured.
         (c)   The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by drainage
easement, land on both sides of existing watercourses, to a distance to be
determined by the City Engineer.
         (d)   Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or
overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for
dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as
drainageways. Such land or lands subject to periodic floodings shall not be
computed in determining the number of lots to be utilized for average density
procedure nor for computing the area requirement of any lot.
(Prior Code, § 1246.02)
§ 155.061 WATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or
create a Water Supply District for the purpose of providing a water supply
system capable of providing domestic water use and fire protection.
      (2)   Where a public water main is accessible, the subdivider shall
install adequate water supply facilities, including fire hydrants, subject to
the specifications of the state and/or local authorities. All water mains shall
be at least six inches in diameter.
      (3)   All water main extensions shall be approved by the state’s Health
Department.
      (4)   To facilitate the requirements of this subchapter, the location of
all fire hydrants, all water supply improvements, and the boundary lines of
proposed districts, indicating all the improvements proposed to be served,
shall be shown on the proposed construction plans, and the cost of installing
the same shall be included in the surety to be furnished by the developer.
   (B)   Individual wells and central water systems.
      (1)   In Low Density Zoning Districts, in the discretion of the Planning
Commission, if a public water system is not available, individual wells may be
used or a central water system may be provided in such a manner that an
adequate supply of potable water will be available to every lot in the
subdivision. Water samples shall be submitted to the Health Department for
approval, and individual wells and central water systems shall be approved by
the appropriate health authorities. Orders of approval shall be submitted to
the Planning Commission.
      (2)   If the Planning Commission requires that a connection to a public
water main be eventually provided as a condition of approval of an individual
well or central water system, the applicant shall make arrangements for future
water service at the time the plat receives final approval. Performance or cash
bonds may be required to ensure compliance.
   (C) Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions with
public water supply systems. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 1,000
feet apart and within 500 feet of any structure and shall be approved by the
applicable protection unit. To eliminate future street openings, all
underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants
themselves, and all other supply improvements, shall be installed before any
final paving of a street shown on the subdivision plat.
(Prior Code, § 1246.03)
§ 155.062 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Required improvements.
      (1)   Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated non-pavement
right-of-way of all roads as shown in the table below.
      (2)   Concrete curbs are required for all roads where sidewalks are
required by these regulations or where required in the discretion of the
Planning Commission.
      (3)   Sidewalks shall be improved as required in these regulations. A
median strip at least five feet wide shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent
curbs.
   (B)   Pedestrian accesses. The Planning Commission may require, in order to
facilitate pedestrian access from roads to schools, parks, playgrounds, or
other nearby roads, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width.
Easements shall be indicated on the plat.
 
Sidewalks Required (Both Sides of Pavement)
Nature of Road     Low         Medium     High       Business Industrial/
                                                     Commercial
Collector Road     Optional**  5 ft. wide 5 ft. wide 6 ft. wide***
Local Road         Optional*   4 ft. wide 5 ft. wide 6 ft. wide***
Primary Arterial   Both Sides  5 ft. wide 5 ft. wide 6 ft. wide***
Secondary Arterial Optional*** 5 ft. wide 5 ft. wide 6 ft. wide***
NOTES TO TABLE:
*Optional, but where provided four feet minimum on either side of road with
concrete curbs.
**Optional, but where provided five feet minimum on either side of road
with concrete curbs.
***Or as determined by the Planning Commission.
 
(Prior Code, § 1246.05)
§ 155.063 UTILITIES.
   (A)   Location. All utility facilities, including, but not limited to, gas,
electric power, telephone, and CATV cables, shall be located underground
throughout the subdivision. Where possible, flush-type connections shall be
made. Wherever existing utility facilities are located above ground, except
where existing on public roads and rights-of-way, they shall be removed and
placed underground. All utility facilities existing and proposed throughout the
subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat. Underground service
connections to the street property line of each platted lot shall be installed
at the subdivider’s expense. At the discretion of the Planning Commission, the
requirement for service connections to each lot may be waived in the case of
adjoining lots to be retained in single ownership and intended to be developed
for the same primary use.
   (B)   Easements.
      (1)   Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided for
utilities (private and municipal). Such easements shall be at least 20 feet
wide, ten feet on either side of said lot line. Proper coordination shall be
established between the subdivider and the applicable utility companies for the
establishment of utility easements established in adjoining properties.
      (2)   Where topographical or other conditions are such as to make the
inclusion of utilities within the rear lot lines impractical, perpetual
unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width, ten feet on either side of
the lot line, in width shall be provided along side lot lines with satisfactory
access to the road or rear lot lines. Easements shall be indicated on the plat.
(Prior Code, § 1246.06)
§ 155.064 PUBLIC USES.
   (A)   Parks, playgrounds, and recreation areas.
      (1)   Recreation standards. The Planning Commission shall require that
land be reserved for parks and playgrounds or other recreation purposes in
locations designated on the master plan or otherwise where such reservations
would be appropriate. Each reservation shall be of suitable size, dimension,
topography, and general character and shall have adequate road access for the
particular purposes envisioned by the Planning Commission. The park area shall
be shown and named on the plat. When parks and/or recreation areas are
required, the Planning Commission shall determine the number of acres to be
reserved from the following table, which has been prepared on the basis of
providing three acres of recreation area for every 100 dwelling units. The
Planning Commission may refer such proposed reservations to the local
government official or department in charge of parks and recreation for
recommendation. The developer shall dedicate all such recreation areas to the
local government as a condition of final subdivision plat approval. In Multi-
Family and High Density Residential Districts, the Planning Commission shall
determine the acreage for reservation based on the number of dwelling units per
acre to occupy the site as permitted by the Zoning Code.
Recreation Requirements
Single-Family Lots Size of Lot (sq. Percentage of Total Land in Subdivision
ft.)                                to be Reserved for Recreation Purposes
Recreation Requirements
Single-Family Lots Size of Lot (sq. Percentage of Total Land in Subdivision
ft.)                                to be Reserved for Recreation Purposes
80,000 or more                      1.5
50,000                              2.5
40,000                              3.0
35,000                              3.5
25,000                              5.0
15,000                              8.0
 
      (2)   Minimum size of park and playground reservations. In general, land
reserved for recreation purposes shall have an area of at least four acres.
When the percentages from the table above would create less than four acres,
the Commission may require that the recreation area be located at a suitable
place on the edge of the subdivision so that additional land may be added at
such time as the adjacent land is subdivided. In no case shall an area of less
than two acres be reserved for recreation purposes if it will be impractical or
impossible to secure additional lands in order to increase its area. Where
recreation land in any subdivision is not reserved, or the land reserved is
less than the percentage set forth in division (A)(1) above, the provisions of
division (A)(4) below shall be applicable.
      (3)   Recreation sites. Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of
a character and location suitable for use as a playground or playfield or for
other recreation purposes, shall be relatively level and dry, and shall be
improved by the developer to the standards required by the Planning Commission,
which improvements shall be included in the performance bond. The Planning
Commission may refer any subdivision proposed to contain a dedicated park to
the local government official or department in charge of parks and recreation
for a recommendation. All land to be reserved for dedication to the local
government for park purposes shall have prior approval of the governing body
and shall be named and shown on the plat.
      (4)   Alternative procedure: money in lieu of land. Where, with respect
to a particular subdivision, the reservation of land required pursuant to this
subchapter does not equal the percentage of total land required to be reserved
in division (A)(1) above, the Planning Commission shall require, prior to final
approval of the subdivision plat, that the applicant deposit with the governing
body a cash payment in lieu of land reservation. Such deposit shall be placed
in a neighborhood park and reservation improvement fund to be established by
the governing body. Such deposit shall be used by the local government for the
improvement of a neighborhood park, playground or recreation area, including
the acquisition of property. Such deposit must be used for facilities that will
be actually available to and benefit the persons in said subdivision and be
located in the general neighborhood of the subdivision. The Planning Commission
shall determine the amount to be deposited, based on the following formula:
$200 multiplied by the number of times the total area of the subdivision is
divisible by the required minimum lot size of the zoning district in which it
is located, less a credit for the amount of land actually reserved for
recreation purposes, if any, as the land reserved bears in proportion to the
land required for reservation in division (A)(1) above, but not including any
lands reserved through density zoning.
      (5)   Applicability to land utilizing average density. Any subdivision
plat in which the principle of average density of flexible zoning has been
utilized shall not be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter, except as
to such portion of land which is actually dedicated to the local government for
park and recreation purposes. If no further area, other than the area to be
reserved through averaging, is required by the Planning Commission, the full
fee shall be paid as required in division (A)(4) above. If further land is
required for reservation, apart from that reserved by averaging, credit shall
be given as provided by division (A)(4) above.
   (B)   Other public uses.
      (1)   Plat to provide for public uses. Except where an applicant utilizes
planned unit development or density zoning in which land is set aside by the
developer as required by the provisions of the Zoning Code, whenever a tract to
be subdivided includes a school, recreation uses (in excess of the requirements
of division (A) above), or any other public use as indicated on the master
plan, or any portion thereof, such space shall be suitably incorporated by the
applicant into his or her sketch plat. After proper determination of its
necessity by the Planning Commission and the appropriate local government
official or other public agency involved in the acquisition and use of each
such site, and after a determination has been made to acquire the site by the
public agency, the site shall be suitably incorporated by the applicant into
the preliminary and final plats.
      (2)   Referral to public body. The Planning Commission shall refer the
sketch plat to the public body concerned with acquisition for its consideration
and report. The Planning Commission may propose alternative areas for such
acquisition and shall allow the public body or agency 30 days for reply. The
agency’s recommendation, if affirmative, shall include a map showing the
boundaries and area of the parcel to be acquired and an estimate of the time
required to complete the acquisition.
      (3)   Notice of property owner. Upon receipt of an affirmative report,
the Planning Commission shall notify the property owner and shall designate on
the preliminary and final plats that area proposed to be acquired by the public
body.
      (4)   Duration of land reservation. The acquisition of land reserved by a
public agency on the final plat shall be initiated within 12 months of
notification from the owner, in writing, that he or she intends to develop the
land. Such letter of intent shall be accompanied by a sketch plat of the
proposed development and a tentative schedule of construction. Failure on the
part of the public agency to initiate acquisition within the prescribed 12
months shall result in the removal of the “reserved” designation from the
property involved and the freeing of the property for development in accordance
with these regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1246.07)
§ 155.065 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES.
   Existing features which would add value to residential development or to the
local government as a whole, such as trees, watercourses, waterfalls, beaches,
historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the
design of the subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any subdivision, nor
any change of grade of the land effected, until approval of the preliminary
plat has been granted. All trees on the plat required to be retained shall be
preserved, and all trees, where required, shall be welled and protected against
change of grade. The sketch plat shall show the number and location of existing
trees, as required by these regulations, and shall further indicate all those
marked for retention and the location of all proposed shade trees required
along the street side of each lot as required by these regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1246.08)
§ 155.066 NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   In general. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for
commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect
to such land shall make such provision as the Planning Commission may require.
A non-residential subdivision may also be subject to the requirements for site
plan approval set forth in the Zoning Code. Site plan approval and non-
residential subdivision plat approval may proceed simultaneously at the
discretion of the Planning Commission. A non-residential subdivision shall be
subject to all the requirements of these regulations, as well as additional
standards required by the Planning Commission, and shall conform to the
proposed land use and standards established in the master plan, the official
map, and the Zoning Code.
   (B)   Standards. In addition to the principles and standards set forth in
these regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions,
the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission
that the street, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to
the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The
following principles and standards shall be observed.
      (1)   Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and
dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated.
      (2)   Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate
the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon.
      (3)   Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to
street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction.
      (4)   Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to the
installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and storm water
drainage.
      (5)   Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas
from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision,
including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or
potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped
buffer strip when necessary.
      (6)   Streets carrying non-residential traffic, especially truck traffic,
shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or
potential residential areas.
(Prior Code, § 1246.09)
ROADS
§ 155.080 PURPOSE.
   To provide for roads of suitable location, width, and improvement to
accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access for police,
fire-fighting, snow removal, sanitation, and road maintenance equipment, and to
coordinate roads so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships
to adjoining properties, the following road design standards are required. Road
classification may be indicated on the master plan or official map, or it may
be determined by the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 1246.01)
§ 155.081 ROAD SURFACING AND IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   After sewer and water utilities have been installed by the developer,
the applicant shall construct curbs and gutters and shall surface or cause to
be surfaced roadways to the widths prescribed in these regulations. Said
surfacing shall be of such character as is suitable for the expected traffic
and in harmony with similar improvements in the surrounding areas. Types of
pavement shall be determined by the City Engineer. Adequate provision shall be
made for culverts, drains, and bridges.
   (B)   All road pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and structures,
curbs, turn-arounds, and sidewalks shall conform to all construction standards
and specifications adopted by the Planning Commission, the City Engineer, or
the governing body, and shall be incorporated into the construction plans to be
submitted by the developer prior to plat approval.
(Prior Code, § 1246.01)
§ 155.082 EXCESS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards designated in these
regulations may be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is
necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. Slopes shall not be in excess of
three-to-one.
(Prior Code, § 1246.01)
§ 155.083 RAILROADS AND LIMITED-ACCESS HIGHWAYS.
   Railroad rights-of-way and limited-access highways, where so located as to
effect the subdivision of adjoining lands, shall be treated as follows.
   (A)   In Residential Districts, a buffer strip of at least 25 feet in depth
in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall be
provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited-access highway. This
strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat as
follows: “This area is reserved for screening purposes. The placement of
structures hereon is prohibited.”
   (B)   In districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses, the
nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad
shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure
suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites.
   (C)   Streets parallel to the railroad, when intersecting a street which
crosses the railroad at grade, shall, to the extent practicable, be at a
distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance
shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for
future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients.
(Prior Code, § 1246.01)
§ 155.084 INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The design of the internal road circulation system shall incorporate
the use of three-way or “T” intersections, wherever possible, to assure added
safety.
   (B)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles. A proposed intersection of two new streets at an angle of less
than 75 degrees shall not be acceptable. Not more than two streets shall
intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the Planning
Commission.
   (C)   Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall,
wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersection on the opposite
side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet
shall not be permitted. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignment
shall be continuous. Intersections of major streets shall be at least 800 feet
apart.
   (D)   The minimum curb radius at the intersection of two local streets shall
be at least 20 feet, and the minimum curb radius at an intersection involving a
collector street shall be at least 25 feet.
   (E)   Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever
practicable. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a
leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a 2% grade at a
distance of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the
intersecting street.
   (F)   Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing
vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting
visibility, the developer shall clear out such ground, and/or vegetation
(including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to
the extent deemed necessary by the City Engineer to provide adequate sight
distance.
   (G)   The cross-slopes on all streets, including intersections, shall be 3%
or less.
(Prior Code, § 1246.01)
§ 155.085 BRIDGES.
   Bridges of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined by the Planning
Commission, shall be constructed at the full expense of the applicant without
reimbursement from the local government. The sharing expense for the
construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined
by the Planning Commission, will be fixed by special agreement between the
governing body and the applicant. Said cost shall be charged to the applicant
pro rata as the percentage of his or her land developed and so served.
(Prior Code, § 1246.01)
§ 155.086 DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS.
   (A)   New perimeter streets. Street systems in new subdivisions shall be
laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-streets. Where an
existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the
street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider. The Planning
Commission may authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves
and dedicates the entire required street right-of-way width within his or her
own subdivision boundaries.
   (B)   Widening and realignment of existing roads. Where a subdivision
borders an existing narrow road or when the master plan, official map, or
zoning setback regulations indicate plans for realignment or widening a road
that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant
shall be required to improve and dedicate, at his or her expense, such areas
for widening or realignment of such roads. Such frontage roads and streets
shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant at his or her own expense to
the full width as required by these subdivision regulations. Land reserved for
any road purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements of
the Zoning Code, whether the land is to be dedicated to the municipality in fee
simple or an easement is granted to the local government.
Design Standards for Roads
Development Density
Residential                 Non-residential
Improvement Low Medium High Business Industrial/ Commercial
Design Standards for Roads
Development Density
Residential                                    Non-residential
Improvement                 Low   Medium High  Business Industrial/ Commercial
Min. Width R.O.W. (FT.)
Local Road                  66    66     66    66
Collector Road              66    66     66    66
Secondary Arterial          66    66     86    86
Primary Arterial            86    100    120   120
Min. Width Traveled Route
Local Road                  26W/S 30W/C  32W/C 30W/C
Collector Road              28W/S 32W/C  34W/C 40W/C
Secondary Arterial          30W/S 40W/C  44W/C 44W/C
Primary Arterial            44W/S 48W/C  48W/C 48W/C
Max. Grade %
Local Road                  10%   10%    8%    6%
Collector Road              8%    8%     8%    6%
Secondary Arterial          6%    6%     6%    5%
Primary Arterial            6%    6%     6%    5%
Min. Grade %                1%    1%     1%    1%
Local Road
Collector Road
Secondary Arterial
Primary Arterial
Min. Radius of Curve (FT.)
Local Road                  100   100    100   200
Collector Road              100   100    100   200
Secondary Arterial          300   300    300   400
Primary Arterial            500   500    500   500
NOTE: W/S = with shoulders (roll-type curb)
W/C = with curb
Min. Length of Vertical Curves
Local Road                  100 ft. but not less than 20 ft. for each algebraic
                            difference in grade
Collector Road              100 ft. but not less than 20 ft. for each algebraic
                            difference in grade
Secondary Arterial          200 ft. but not less than 50 ft. for each 1%
Primary Arterial            300 ft. but not less than 50 ft. for each algebraic
                            difference in grade
Min. Length of Tangents Between Reverse Curves (FT.)
Local Road                  100   100    150   200
Collector Road              100   100    150   200
Secondary Arterial          200   200    250   300
Primary Arterial            300   300    350   400
Min. Sight Distance (FT.)
Local Road                  200   200    200   250
Collector Road              200   240    240   250
Secondary Arterial          275   275    300   300
Primary Arterial            275   300    300   400
Intersection                Across corners - 75 ft. back of intersection
Min. Turnaround (FT.)
Cul-de-sac (See figure following this table)
Local Road
R.O.W. Diameter             160   160    170   170
Pavement (Outside Dia.)     124   124    134   134
Center Island (Inside Dia.) 84    84     82    74
Design Speed (MPH)
Local Road                  25    25     25    25
Collector Road              30    30     30    30
Secondary Arterial          40    35     35    35
Primary Arterial            40    40     40    40
Min. Length of Cul-de-sac
Permanent                   Seven times average lot width and not exceeding
                            1,000 ft. in length
Temporary                   As approved by the Planning Commission and the City
                            Engineer
Min. Radius (FT.)
At right-of- way            25    25     30    30
At pavement                 25    25     30    30
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0738dcf21f421e8d115b2bbb273306d0573c6511/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1574.png]
 
(Prior Code, § 1246.01)
SEWERAGE FACILITIES
§ 155.100 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities in a manner prescribed
by the local government construction standards and specifications. All plans
shall be designed in accordance with the rules, regulations, and standards of
the City Engineer, the state’s Department of Natural Resources, and other
appropriate agencies. Plans shall be approved by the aforementioned agencies.
Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or create a Sanitary
Sewer District for the purpose of providing sewerage facilities to the
subdivision where no district exists for the land to be subdivided.
(Prior Code, § 1246.04)
§ 155.101 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL AND NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   Sanitary sewerage facilities shall connect with public sanitary sewerage
systems. Sewers shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades and sizes
required by approving officials and agencies. No individual disposal system or
treatment plans, or private or group disposal systems, shall be permitted.
sanitary sewerage facilities, including the installation of laterals in the
right-of-way, shall be subject to the specifications, rules, regulations, and
guidelines of the City Engineer and the state’s Department of Natural
Resources.
(Prior Code, § 1246.04)
§ 155.102 LOW AND MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   Sanitary sewerage systems shall be constructed as follows.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably accessible, the
applicant shall connect with the same and provide sewers accessible to each lot
in the subdivision.
   (B)   Where public sanitary sewerage systems are not reasonably accessible
but will become available within a reasonable time (not to exceed 15 years),
the applicant may choose one of the following alternatives.
      (1)   A central sewerage system, where plans for future public sanitary
sewerage systems exist, the applicant shall install the sewer lines, laterals,
and mains to be in permanent conformance with such plans and ready for
connection to such public sewer mains.
      (2)   An individual disposal system, where an individual disposal system
is chosen, the applicant shall install sanitary sewer lines, laterals, and
mains from the street curb to a point in the subdivision boundary where a
future connection with the public sewer main shall be made. Sewer lines shall
be laid from the house to the street line, and a connection shall be available
in the home to connect the individual disposal system to the sewer system when
the public sewers become available. Such sewer systems shall be capped until
ready for use and shall conform to all plans for installation of the public
sewer system, where such exist, and shall be ready for connection to such
public sewer main.
   (C)   Where sanitary sewer systems are not reasonably accessible and will
not become available for a period in excess of 15 years, the applicant may
install sewage systems as follows.
      (1)   In Medium Density Residential Districts, only a central sewerage
system may be installed. No individual disposal system will be permitted. Where
plans exist for a public sewer system to be built for a period in excess of 15
years, the applicant shall install all sewer lines, laterals, and mains to be
in permanent conformance with such plans and ready for connection to such
public sewer main.
      (2)   In Low Density Residential Districts, an individual disposal system
or a central sewerage system shall be used.
(Prior Code, § 1246.04)
§ 155.103 MANDATORY CONNECTION TO THE PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM.
   If a public sanitary sewer is accessible and a sanitary sewer is placed in a
street or alley abutting upon property, the owner thereof shall be required to
connect to said sewer for the purpose of disposing of waste, and it shall be
unlawful for any such owner or occupant to maintain or retain upon any such
property an individual sewage disposal system.
(Prior Code, § 1246.04)
§ 155.104 INDIVIDUAL DISPOSAL SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.
   If public sewer facilities are not available and individual disposal systems
are proposed, minimum lot areas shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning
Code and percolation tests, and test holes shall be made as directed by the
county’s Health Department. The individual disposal system, including the size
of the septic tanks and the size of tile fields or other secondary treatment
devices, shall also be approved by the county’s Health Department.
(Prior Code, § 1246.04)
§ 155.105 DESIGN CRITERIA FOR SANITARY SEWERS.
   (A)   Deviations. These design criteria are not intended to cover
extraordinary situations. Deviations will be allowed and may be required in
those instances where considered justified by the City Engineer.
   (B)   Design factors.
      (1)   Sanitary sewer systems should be designed for the ultimate
tributary population. Due consideration should be given to current zoning
regulations and approved planning and zoning reports where applicable. Sewer
capacities should be adequate to handle the anticipated maximum hourly quantity
of sewage and industrial waste together with an adequate allowance for
infiltration and other extraneous flows. The unit design flows presented
hereinafter should be adequate in each case for the particular type of
development indicated. Sewers shall be designed for the total tributary area
using the following criteria.
 Cubic Feet per Second (cfs)/Acre
                                               Cubic Feet per Second (cfs)/Acre
Apartments
   One- and two-story                       .02
   Three- through six-story                 .03
Commercial
   High rise                                As directed by the City Engineer
   Industrial                               As directed by the City Engineer
   Shopping centers                         .02
   Small stores, offices, and miscellaneous .02
businesses
One- and two-family dwellings                  .02
 
      (2)   These design factors shall apply to watersheds of 300 acres or
less. Design factors for watersheds larger than 300 acres and smaller than
1,000 acres shall be computed on the basis of a linear decrease from the
applicable design factor for an area of 300 acres to a design factor of .01
cfs/acre for an area of 1,000 acres, unless otherwise directed by the City
Engineer. Design factors for watersheds larger than 1,000 acres shall be .01
cfs/acre unless otherwise directed by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Maximum size. The diameter of sewers proposed shall not exceed the
diameter of the existing or proposed outlet, whichever is applicable, unless
otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
   (D)   Minimum size. No public sewer shall be less than eight inches in
diameter.
   (E)   Minimum slope. All sewers shall be designed to give mean velocities,
when flowing full, of not less than 2.7 feet per second. All velocity and flow
calculations shall be based on the Manning Formula using an N value of 0.013.
The slopes shall be the minimum for the size indicated. Exceptions to these
slopes shall be made at the upper end of lateral sewers serving under 30
houses. Said sewers shall have a minimum slope of 0.76%. Where lateral sewers
serve less than ten houses, the minimum slope shall be not less than 1%.
Minimum Slopes for Sewer Size Indicated
Sewer Size (in.) Minimum Slope (in ft./l00 ft.)
Minimum Slopes for Sewer Size Indicated
Sewer Size (in.) Minimum Slope (in ft./l00 ft.)
8                0.60
10               0.44
12               0.36
15               0.28
18               0.24
21               0.20
24               0.16
 
   (F)   Alignment. All sewers shall be laid with straight alignment between
manholes, unless otherwise directed or approved by the City Engineer.
   (G)   Manhole location. Manholes shall be installed at the end of each line;
at all changes in grade, size or alignment; at all intersections; and at
distances not greater than 400 feet for sewers 15 inches and smaller, and 500
feet for sewers 18 inches in diameter and larger.
   (H)   Manholes. The difference in elevation between any incoming sewer and
the manhole invert shall not exceed 12 inches, except where required to match
crowns. The use of drop manholes will require approval by the City Engineer.
The minimum inside diameter of the manholes shall conform to those specified by
the City Engineer. Inside drop manholes will require special considerations.
However, in no case shall the minimum clear distance be less than that
indicated herein. When a smaller sewer joins a larger one, the crown of the
smaller sewer shall not be lower than that of the larger one. The minimum drop
through manholes shall be 0.2 feet.
   (I)   Sewer locations. Sanitary sewers shall be located within a street or
right-of-way, unless topography dictates otherwise. When located in easements
on private property, access shall be to manholes. A manhole shall be provided
at each street or crossing. End lines shall be extended to provide access from
a street or alley right-of-way where possible. Imposed loading shall be
considered in all locations. Not less than six feet of cover shall be provided
over the top of a pipe in streets and rights-of-way, and not less than three
feet shall be provided in all other areas.
   (J)   Cleanouts. Cleanouts will not be permitted.
   (K)   Water supply interconnections. There shall be no physical connection
between a public or private potable water supply system and a sewer which will
permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable supply.
Sewers shall be kept removed from water supply wells or other water supply
sources and structures.
   (L)   Relation of sewers to water mains. A minimum horizontal distance of
ten feet shall be maintained between parallel water and sewer lines. At points
where sewers cross water mains, the sewer shall be constructed of cast iron
pipe or encased in concrete for a distance of ten feet in each direction from
the crossing, measured perpendicular to the water line. This will not be
required when the water main is at least two feet above the sewer.
(Prior Code, § 1246.04)
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
§ 155.120 SHORT TITLE.
   These subdivision regulations shall be known and may be cited as “the City
of Negaunee Subdivision Control Code,” hereinafter referred to as “these
subdivision regulations,” or “these regulations,” or “this subchapter.”
(Prior Code, § 1240.01)
§ 155.121 PURPOSES.
   (A)   The purpose of these subdivision regulations is to regulate and
control the subdivision of land within the city in order to promote the safety,
public health, and general welfare of the community.
   (B)   These regulations are specifically designed to:
      (1)   Provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the
community, consistent with orderly growth policies, and to guide future growth
of development of the municipality in accordance with the master plan;
      (2)   Protect and conserve the value of land throughout the municipality
and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the
conflicts among the uses of land and buildings;
      (3)   Ensure adequate provisions for public utilities, including storm
water drainage, potable water supplies, sanitary facilities, and other health-
related requirements;
      (4)   Establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use of land and to
ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of the subdivided land; and
      (5)   Ensure that public facilities are available and will have
sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 1240.02)
§ 155.122 LEGAL BASIS; SCOPE.
   These subdivision regulations are enacted pursuant to the statutory
authority granted by the Subdivision Control Act, being Public Act 288 of 1967,
as amended; Public Act 191 of 1939, as amended, providing for publication of
ordinances; and the Municipality Planning Act, being Public Act 285 of 1931, as
amended, authorizing cities to adopt ordinances and regulations to secure the
public health, safety, and general welfare. These subdivision regulations shall
not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision created or
recorded prior to the effective date of these subdivision regulations, except
for the further dividing of lots within a recorded subdivision plat.
(Prior Code, § 1240.03)
§ 155.123 INTERPRETATION; CONFLICTS.
   (A)   The provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
   (B)   (1)   These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate
or annul any other code, rule, regulation, statute, or other provision of law.
      (2)   Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or
other code, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is
more restrictive or imposes a higher standard shall control.
   (C)   These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant,
or other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the provisions
of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards than such
easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements
of these regulations shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 1240.04)
§ 155.124 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any part or provision of these regulations or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance is adjudged invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the
part, provision or application directly involved in all controversy in which
such judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the
validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application thereof to
other persons or circumstances.
   (B)   The city hereby declares that it would have enacted the remainder of
these regulations even without any such part, provision, or application.
(Prior Code, § 1240.05)
§ 155.125 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   These subdivision regulations shall take effect in the city after adoption
by the City Council, publication of notice of such adoption within ten days
after such adoption, entry in the City Code Book and certification by the City
Clerk as to the date of publication of such notice. The effective date shall be
30 days after the date of publication of such notice.
(Prior Code, § 1240.06)
§ 155.126 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   As used in these regulations, a “person” includes a corporation, a
partnership and an incorporated association of persons such as a club; “shall”
is always mandatory; a “building” includes a “structure”; a “building” or
“structure” includes any part thereof; and “used” or “occupied,” as applied to
any land or building, shall be construed to include the words “intended,
arranged, or designed to be used or occupied.”
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALLEY. A public or private right-of-way shown on a plat which provides
secondary access to a lot, block or parcel of land.
      APPLICANT. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his or her
representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises.
      BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways,
or boundary lines of municipalities.
      BOND. Any form of security, including a cash deposit, letter of credit,
certified check, surety bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in
an amount and form satisfactory to the governing body. All BONDS shall be
approved by the governing body wherever a BOND is required by these
regulations.
      BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, and includes any
structure.
      BUILDING AND ZONING INSPECTOR. The person designated by the governing
body to administer the Building Code and the Zoning Code.
      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM. A proposed schedule of all future projects
listed in order of construction priority, together with cost estimates and the
anticipated means of financing each project. All major projects requiring the
expenditure of public funds, over and above the annual local government’s
operating expenses, for the purchase, construction, or replacement of the
physical assets for the community, are included.
      CAPTION. The name by which a subdivision plat is legally and commonly
known.
      CITY ATTORNEY. The licensed attorney designated by the governing body to
furnish legal assistance for the administration of these regulations.
      CITY ENGINEER. The licensed engineer designated by the governing body to
furnish engineering assistance for the administration of these regulations.
      COLLECTOR ROAD. A road intended to move traffic from local roads to
secondary arterials. A COLLECTOR ROAD serves a neighborhood or large
subdivision and should be designed so that no residential properties face onto
it.
      CONSTRUCTION PLAN. The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat
showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the
subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the municipality as a
condition of the approval of the plat.
      COUNTY PLAT BOARD. The Registrar of Deeds, who shall act as Chairperson,
the County Clerk, who shall act as Secretary, and the County Treasurer.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate
terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
      DEDICATION. The intentional appropriation of land by the owner thereof to
public use.
      DEVELOPER. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his or her
representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises.
      EASEMENT. Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and
for a specified purpose of any designated part of his or her property.
      ESCROW. A deposit of cash with the governing body in lieu of an amount
required and still in force on a performance or maintenance bond. Such ESCROW
shall be deposited by the Building and Zoning Inspector into a separate
account.
      FINAL PLAT. The map, plan, or record of a subdivision and any
accompanying material, as described in these regulations.
      FLOOD PLAIN. The area of land adjoining the channel of a river, stream,
watercourse, lake, or other similar body of water which will be inundated by a
flood which can reasonably be expected for that region.
      FRONTAGE. The side of a lot abutting on a street or way and ordinarily
regarded as the front of the lot, but it shall not be considered as the
ordinary side of a corner lot.
      FRONTAGE STREET. Any street constructed by the developer or any existing
street in which development shall take place on both sides.
      GOVERNING BODY. The legislative body of the city.
      GOVERNMENT SURVEY. The land surveyed, subdivided, and monumented by the
United States Public Land Survey.
      GRADE. The slope of a road, street, or other public way, specified in
percentage terms.
      HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The state, city, county, or District Health
Department having jurisdiction.
      HIGH DENSITY. The Residential Zoning Districts in which the density is
equal to or greater than one dwelling unit per 10,000 square feet.
      HIGHWAY, LIMITED-ACCESS. A freeway or expressway providing a trafficway
for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting
property on lands, and other persons, have no legal right of access to or from
the same, except at such points and in such manner as may be determined by the
public authority having jurisdiction over such trafficway.
      IMPROVEMENT. Any structure incident to servicing or furnishing facilities
for a subdivision.
      INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A septic tank, seepage tile, sewage
disposal system, or other approved sewage treatment device.
      JOINT OWNERSHIP. Among persons, the same owner. For the purpose of
imposing these subdivision regulations, JOINT OWNERSHIP means CONSTRUCTIVE
OWNERSHIP.
      LAND. All land areas occupied by real property.
      LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The government of the city.
      LOCAL ROAD. A road intended to provide access to other roads from
individual properties and to provide a right-of-way beneath it for sanitary
sewer, water and storm drainage systems, and/or other utility systems.
      LOT. A measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described
and fixed in a recorded plat.
      LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the
interior angle of which intersection does not exceed 135 degrees.
      LOT IMPROVEMENT. Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other
object or improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a
physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment.
      LOT OF RECORD. A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a
record plat on file with the county’s Register of Deeds, at the time these
regulations became effective, or in common use by city officials and which
actually exists as shown, or any part of a parcel held in a recorded ownership
separate from the remainder thereof at the time these regulations became
effective.
      LOW DENSITY. The Residential Zoning Districts in which the density is
equal or less than one dwelling unit per 40,000 square feet.
      MAJOR SUBDIVISION. All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions,
including, but not limited to, subdivisions of five or more lots, or any size
subdivision requiring any new street, extension of local governmental
facilities, or the creation of any public improvements.
      MASTER PLAN. A comprehensive plan for development of the community,
prepared and adopted by city officials, pursuant to state law, and including
any part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or part
thereof.
      MEDIUM DENSITY. The Residential Zoning Districts in which the density is
between 10,000 and 40,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
      MICHIGAN COORDINATE SYSTEM. The system defined in Public Act 9 of 1964,
as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 54.231 to 54.239, as amended.
      MINOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision containing not more than four lots
fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road, or the
extension of municipal facilities, or the creation of any public improvements,
and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property,
and not in conflict with any provisions or portion of the master plan, the
official map, the Zoning Code, or these regulations.
      MODEL HOME. A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which
typifies the type of units that will be constructed in the subdivision. Such
dwelling units may be erected, at the discretion of the municipality, by
permitting a portion of a major subdivision, involving no more than four lots,
to be created.
      MUNICIPALITY. The City of Negaunee, Michigan.
      NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. A subdivision whose intended use is other
than residential, such as commercial or industrial. Such subdivision shall
comply with the applicable provisions of these regulations.
      OFFICIAL MAP. The map established by the governing body pursuant to law
showing the streets, highways, parks, drainage systems, and setback lines
theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law, and any amendments or
additions thereto adopted by the governing body and resulting from the approval
of subdivision plats by the Planning Commission and the subsequent filing of
such approved plats.
      OFF-SITE. Any premises not located within the area of the property to be
subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the developer.
      ORDINANCE. Any legislative action, however denominated, of a local
government which has the force of law, including any amendment or repeal of any
ordinance.
      OUTLOT. When included within the boundary of a recorded plat, means a lot
set aside for purposes other than a building site, park, or other land
dedicated to public use or reserved to private use.
      OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, or any other legal entity, having legal title to or a sufficient
proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these
regulations.
      PARCEL and TRACT. A continuous area or acreage of land which can be
described as provided for in the Subdivision Control Act, being Public Act 288
of 1967, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 through 560.293.
      PERIMETER STREET. Any existing street to which the parcel of land to be
subdivided abuts on only one side.
      PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city.
      PLAT. A map or chart of a subdivision of land.
      PRELIMINARY PLAT. A map showing the salient features of a proposed
subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary
consideration.
      PRE-PRELIMINARY PLAT. A sketch preparatory to the preparation of the
preliminary plat as provided under § 107 of the Subdivision Control Act, being
Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, to enable the subdivider to save time and
expense in reaching general agreement with the Planning Commission as to the
form of the plat and the objectives of these regulations.
      PRIMARY ARTERIAL. A road intended to move through traffic to and from
such major attractors as Central Business Districts, regional shopping centers,
colleges and/or universities, military installations, major industrial areas,
and similar traffic generators within the city, and/or a route for traffic
between communities or large areas.
      PROPRIETOR. A natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation
or combination of any of them which may hold any ownership interest in land,
whether recorded or not.
      PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk,
pedestrianway, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other
facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an
improvement for which local government responsibility is established. All such
IMPROVEMENTS shall be properly bonded.
      PUBLIC SEWER. A sewerage system as defined in Public Act 98 of 1913, as
repealed and recodified by Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. § 324.90101, and
specifically defined at M.C.L.A. § 324.4101.
      PUBLIC UTILITY. All persons, firms, corporations, co-partnerships, or a
municipal or other public authority providing gas, electricity, water, steam,
telephone, sewer, cable television, or other services of a similar nature.
      PUBLIC WATER. A waterworks system, as defined in Public Act 98 of 1913,
as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 325.201 to 325.214.
      REGISTERED ENGINEER. An engineer properly licensed and registered in the
state.
      REPLAT. The process of changing, or the map or plat which changes, the
boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. The legal dividing
of an outlot within a recorded subdivision plat without changing the exterior
boundaries of the outlot is not a REPLAT.
      RESUBDIVISION. A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision
plat if such change affects any street layout on such map or an area reserved
thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any map or plan
legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling
subdivisions.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main or shade trees, or for
another special use. The use of the term RIGHT-OF-WAY for land platting
purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on
a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining
such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots
or parcels.
      ROAD, DEAD-END. A road or a portion of a street with only one vehicular
traffic outlet.
      ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH. The distance between property lines measured at
right angles to the centerline of the street.
      SALE or LEASE. Any immediate or future transfer of ownership, or of any
possessory interest in land, including a contract of sale, lease, devise,
intestate succession, or transfer of an interest in a subdivision or part
thereof, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, lease, devise,
intestate succession, or other written instrument.
      SAME OWNERSHIP. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm,
partnership, unincorporated association, or other entity; or ownership by
different corporations, firms, partnerships, unincorporated associations, or
other entities, in which a stockholder, partner or associate, or a member of
his or her family, owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership,
unincorporated association or other entity.
      SCREENING. Either:
         (a)   A strip at least ten feet wide, densely planted or having
equivalent natural growth with shrubs or trees at least four feet high at the
time of planting, or a type that will form a year-round dense screen at least
six feet high; or
         (b)   An opaque wall or barrier or a uniformly painted fence at least
six feet high.
      SECONDARY ARTERIAL. A road intended to collect and distribute traffic in
a manner similar to primary arterials, except that these roads service minor
traffic generating areas such as community commercial areas, primary and
secondary educational plants, hospitals, major recreational areas, churches and
offices, and/or are designed to carry traffic from collector streets to the
system of primary arterials.
      SETBACK. The distance between a building and the street line nearest
thereto.
      SUBDIVIDE AND SUBDIVISION. The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or
tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors,
administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, for the purpose
of sale or lease of more than one year, or of building development, where the
act of division creates five or more parcels of land each of which is ten acres
or less in area, or five or more parcels of land each of which is ten acres or
less in area created by successive divisions within a period of ten years.
      SUBDIVIDER. Any person who:
         (a)   Having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly,
to be divided into a subdivision;
         (b)   Directly or indirectly sells, leases or develops, or offers to
sell, lease or develop, or advertises for sale, lease or development, any
interest, lot, parcel, site, unit, or plat in a subdivision;
         (c)    Engages, directly or through an agent, in the business of
selling, leasing or developing or offering for sale, lease or development, a
subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit, or plat in a subdivision;
and
         (d)   Is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under direct or
indirect common control with any of the foregoing.
      SUBDIVISION AGENT. Any person who represents, or acts as an agent for or
on behalf of, a subdivider or developer in selling, leasing or developing, or
in offering to sell, lease or develop, any interest, lot, parcel, unit, site,
or plot in a subdivision, except an attorney-at-law whose representation of
another person consists solely of rendering legal services.
      SURVEYOR. A land surveyor who is licensed in this state as a registered
land surveyor, or a civil engineer who is registered in this state as a
registered professional engineer.
      TEMPORARY LAND IMPROVEMENT. An improvement built and maintained by a
subdivider during construction of a subdivision and prior to release of the
performance bond.
      TOPOGRAPHICAL MAP. A map showing existing physical characteristics with
contour lines at sufficient intervals to permit determination of proposed
grades and drainage.
(Prior Code, § 1240.07)
ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTY
§ 155.140 ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY.
   These subdivision regulations shall be administered by the city in
accordance with the Subdivision Control Act, being Public Act 288 of 1967, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 325.201 to 325.214.
(Prior Code, § 1242.01)
§ 155.141 ENFORCEMENT GENERALLY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of Council to enforce these regulations and to
bring to the attention of the City Attorney any violations or lack of
compliance herewith.
   (B)   No owner or agent of an owner of any parcel of land located in a
proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any parcel before a plat of the
subdivision has been approved by the city, in accordance with the provisions of
these regulations, and recorded with the office of the county’s Register of
Deeds.
   (C)   The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land, by the use of a
metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer, or lease, with
the intent of evading these regulations, shall not be permitted. All such
described subdivisions shall be subject to all of the requirements contained in
these regulations.
   (D)   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any
building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation
of the provisions of these regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1242.02)
§ 155.142 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety, and
general welfare, the Planning Commission may from time to time amend these
subdivision regulations.
   (B)   Public hearings on all proposed amendments shall be held by the city
in the manner prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 1242.03)
§ 155.143 REQUIREMENTS FOR RESUBDIVISIONS, REPLATS, AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Any proposed resubdivision, replat, amended plat, urban renewal plat,
or vacation of any part of any recorded subdivision plat located within the
corporate limits of the city shall be accomplished in strict accordance with
the requirements of the Subdivision Control Act, being Public Act 288 of 1967,
as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 325.201 to 325.214.
   (B)   The City Council shall be advised as to the status of all proceedings
as noted in division (A) above and as required under the Subdivision Control
Act.
(Prior Code, § 1242.04)
§ 155.144 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   (A)   There shall be a minimum fee for the review of all plats as follows.
      (1)   The engineering fee for both the preliminary and final approval of
all subdivision plats providing for public water and/or public sewage systems
shall be $100 plus an additional $10 for each lot in the plat.
      (2)   The engineering fee for both the preliminary and final approval of
all subdivision plats which do not provide for either public water or public
sewage systems shall be $100 plus an additional $7 for each lot in the plat.
   (B)   An additional fee shall be paid for all time and expense incurred by
the city, the City Engineer, or any other city agent or employee in the review
of any subdivision plat when such time and expense exceed the minimum fee
provided for in division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 1242.05)
§ 155.145 VARIANCES.
   (A)   In general. Where the municipality finds that extraordinary hardships
or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these
regulations and/or that the purposes of these regulations may be served to a
greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve variances to these
regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secured, provided that such variance shall not have the effect of nullifying
the intent and purpose of these regulations, and provided, further, that the
municipality shall not approve variances unless it shall make findings based
upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
      (1)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property as located;
      (2)   The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property;
      (3)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of these regulations is carried out; and
      (4)   The variance will not, in any manner, vary the provisions of the
Zoning Code, the master plan, or the official map.
   (B)   Conditions. In approving variances, the municipality may require such
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards or requirements of these regulations.
   (C)   Procedures. A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in
writing by the subdivider at the time the preliminary plat is filed for the
consideration of the Planning Commission. The petition shall state fully the
grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
(Prior Code, § 1242.06)
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 155.160 ASSURANCE OF COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Improvements and performance bond.
      (1)   Completion of improvements. Before the final plat is approved by
the City Council, all applicants shall be required to complete, in accordance
with the City Council’s decision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer,
all street, sanitary, sewer, and other improvements, including lot improvements
on the individual lots of the subdivision, as required by these regulations, as
specified in the final subdivision plat and as approved by the City Council,
and to dedicate the same to the local government free and clear of all liens
and encumbrances on the property and on the public improvements thus dedicated.
      (2)   Performance bond.
         (a)   The City Council, in its discretion, may waive the requirements
provided for in division (A)(1) above. As an alternative, the applicant may
post cash, a certified check, a surety bond or a letter of credit at the time
of application for final subdivision approval in an amount estimated by the
City Engineer to be sufficient to secure to the local government the
satisfactory construction, installation, and dedication of the incompleted
portion of the required improvements. The surety shall also secure all lot
improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision, as required in these
regulations.
         (b)   Such surety shall comply with all statutory requirements and
shall be satisfactory to the City Attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner
of execution, as set forth in these regulations. The period within which the
required improvements must be completed shall be specified by the City Council
in the resolution approving the final subdivision plat, shall be incorporated
in the surety and shall not, in any event, exceed two years from the date of
final approval.
         (c)   Such surety shall be approved by the governing body as to the
amount and conditions that shall be satisfactory to the governing body. The
City Engineer may, upon proof of difficulty, recommend to the governing body an
extension of the completion date set forth in such surety for a maximum period
of one additional year. The governing body may, at any time during the period
of such surety, accept a substitution of principal or sureties on the bond,
upon recommendation of the City Engineer or City Manager.
      (3)   Temporary improvements. The applicant shall construct and pay for
all temporary improvements required by the City Council and shall maintain the
same for the period specified by Council. Prior to construction of any
temporary facility or improvement, the developer shall file with the local
government a separate suitable surety for temporary facilities, which shall
ensure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained,
and removed.
      (4)   Costs of improvements. All required improvements shall be made by
the applicant, at his or her expense, without reimbursement by the local
government or any improvement district therein.
      (5)   Failure to complete improvements. For subdivisions for which no
performance bond has been posted, if the improvements are not completed within
the period specified by the City Council in the resolution approving the final
plat, the approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases where surety
has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the
terms of such surety, the local government may declare the surety to be in
default and require that all the improvements be installed regardless of the
extent of the building development at the time the surety is declared to be in
default.
   (B)   Inspection of improvements.
      (1)   General procedure and fees. The City Council shall provide for the
inspection of required improvements during construction and ensure their
satisfactory completion. The applicant shall pay to the local government an
inspection fee of 2% of the amount of the surety or the estimated cost of the
required improvements, and the subdivision plat shall not be approved by the
City Council unless such fee has been paid at the time of application. These
fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the local government and no
building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until all such
fees are paid. If the City Engineer finds upon inspection that any of the
required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the local
government’s construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be
responsible for completing or correcting the improvements. Wherever the cost of
improvements is covered by a performance bond, the applicant, and the bonding
company shall be severally and jointly liable for completing the improvements
according to specifications.
      (2)   Release or reduction of performance bond.
         (a)   Certificate of satisfactory completion. The governing body will
not accept the dedication of required improvements, nor release or reduce a
performance bond, until the City Engineer has submitted a certificate stating
that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until the
applicant’s engineer or surveyor has certified to the City Engineer, through
submission of a detailed “as-built” survey plat of the subdivision, indicating
location, dimensions, materials, and other information required by the City
Engineer, that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements is
in accordance with construction plans for the subdivision, and that a title
insurance policy has been furnished to and approved by the City Attorney
indicating that the improvements have been completed, are ready for dedication
to the local government, and are free and clear of any and all liens and
encumbrances. Upon such approval and recommendation, the governing body shall
thereafter accept the improvements for dedication in accordance with the
established procedure.
         (b)   Reduction of performance bond. A performance bond shall be
reduced upon the actual dedication of public improvements, but only in the
ratio that the public improvement dedicated bears to the total public
improvements for the plat. In no event shall a performance bond be reduced
below 25% of the principal amount of such bond.
   (C)   Escrow deposits for lot improvements.
      (1)   Acceptance of escrow funds. Whenever, by reason of the season of
the year, any lot improvements required by these subdivision regulations cannot
be performed, the Building and Zoning Inspector may, nevertheless, issue a
certificate of occupancy, provided there is no danger to health, safety, or
general welfare, upon accepting a cash escrow deposit in an amount to be
determined by the City Engineer for the cost of said improvements. The
performance bond covering such lot improvements shall remain in full force and
effect.
      (2)   Procedures on escrow funds. All required improvements for which
escrow monies have been accepted by the Building and Zoning Inspector at the
time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be installed by the
developer within a period of nine months from the date of deposit of such
escrow monies and the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. In the event
that the improvements have not been properly installed, at the end of the nine-
month period specified herein, the Building and Zoning Inspector shall give two
weeks’ written notice to the developer requiring him or her to install such
improvements. In the event that the required improvements are not installed
properly, in the discretion of the Building and Zoning Inspector, he or she may
request the governing body to authorize the local government to proceed to
contract out the work for the installation of the necessary improvements in a
sum not to exceed the amount of the escrow deposit. At the time of the issuance
of the certificate of occupancy for which escrow monies have been deposited
with the Building and Zoning Inspector, the applicant shall obtain and file
with the Building and Zoning Inspector, prior to obtaining the certificate of
occupancy, a notarized statement from the purchaser or purchasers of the
premises authorizing the Building and Zoning Inspector to install the
improvements at the end of the nine-month period in the event that the same
have not been duly installed by the developer.
   (D)   Maintenance of improvements.
      (1)   The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements on the
individual and subdivided lots and to provide for snow removal on streets and
sidewalks, if required, until the acceptance of said improvements by the
governing body. If there are any certificates of occupancy on a street not
dedicated to the local government, the local government may, on 12 hours’
notice, plow the street or effect emergency repairs, and charge the same to the
applicant.
      (2)   The applicant shall be required to file a maintenance bond with the
governing body, prior to dedication, in an amount considered adequate by the
City Engineer, and in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, in order to
assure the satisfactory condition of the required improvements, including all
lot improvements on the individual subdivided lots, for a period of one year
after the date of their acceptance by the governing body, and the dedication of
the same to the local government.
   (E)   Deferral or waiver of required improvements.
      (1)   At the time of final plat approval and subject to appropriate
conditions, Council may defer or waive the provision of any or all such
improvements as in its judgment are not requisite in the interests of the
public health, safety, and general welfare, or which are inappropriate because
of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities.
      (2)   Whenever it is deemed necessary by the Planning Commission to defer
the construction of any improvement required herein because of incompatible
grades, future planning, inadequate connecting facilities, or the lack thereof,
or for other reasons, the applicant shall pay his or her share of the costs of
the future improvements to the local government prior to the signing of the
final subdivision plat by Council, or the applicant may post acceptable surety
to ensure the completion of said improvements upon demand of the local
government.
(Prior Code, § 1248.04)
§ 155.161 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Where surety has been required for a subdivision, no certificate of
occupancy for any building in the subdivision shall be issued prior to the
completion of the improvements and the dedication of the same to the local
government, as required in the City Council’s final approval of the subdivision
plat by Council.
   (B)   The extent of street improvement shall be adequate for vehicular
access by the prospective occupant and by police and fire equipment prior to
the issuance of an occupancy permit. The developer shall, at the time of the
dedication, submit monies in escrow to the local government in an amount
determined by the City Engineer for the necessary final improvement of the
street.
   (C)   No building permit shall be issued for the final 10% of lots in a
subdivision, or if 10% is less than two lots, then for the final two lots of a
subdivision, until all public improvements required by the City Council for the
plat have been fully completed and dedicated to the local government.
   (D)   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be granted or
issued if a developer or his or her authorized agent shall have violated any
federal, state, or local law pertaining to the consumer protection of real
estate land sales, land subdivision, promotion, or practices, or any applicable
conflicts-of-interest legislation, with respect to the lot or parcel of land
which is the subject of the permit or certificate, until so ordered by a court
of competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   With respect to the lot or parcel of land, in the event a building
permit or certificate of occupancy has been granted or issued, such permit or
certificate shall be subject to revocation by the municipality until otherwise
ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction, provided that in no event shall
the rights of intervening innocent third parties in possession of a certificate
of occupancy be prejudiced by any such revocation.
   (F)   Any violation of a federal, state, or local consumer protection law,
including, but not limited to, the Postal Reorganization Act of 1970, being 39
U.S.C. §§ 410 et seq., the Federal Trade Commission Act of 1970, being 15
U.S.C. §§ 41 to 58, the Interstate Land Sales Full Disclosure Act, being 15
U.S.C. §§ 1701 et seq., the Truth-in-Lending Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 16.01 et
seq., the Uniform Commercial Code, State Uniform Securities Act, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 451.2101 et seq., and State Land Division Act, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et
seq., or of a conflicts of interest statute, law, or ordinance, shall be deemed
a violation of these regulations and shall be subject to all of the penalties
and proceedings set forth in these regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1248.05)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 155.175 CONFORMANCE TO APPLICABLE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   In addition to the requirements established elsewhere in these subdivision
regulations, all subdivision plats shall be in compliance with the following
laws, rules, and regulations:
   (A)   All applicable statutory provisions;
   (B)   The local government Zoning Code, Building, and Housing Codes and all
other applicable laws of appropriate jurisdictions;
   (C)   The official master plan, official map, public utilities plant, and
capital improvements program of the local government, including all streets,
drainage systems, and parks shown on the official map or master plan, as
adopted;
   (D)   The special requirements of these regulations and any rules of the
Health Department and/or appropriate county, regional, state, or federal
agencies;
   (E)   The rules of the state’s Transportation Department, if the subdivision
or any lot contained therein abuts a state highway or connecting street;
   (F)   The standards and regulations adopted by the City Engineer and all
boards, commissions, agencies, and officials of the local government;
   (G)   All pertinent standards contained within the planning guides published
by the applicable regional Planning Commission. Plat approval may be withheld
if a proposed subdivision plat is not in conformity with the guidelines
provided for herein or the policies and purposes set forth in §
155.126; and
   (H)   New subdivision developments shall incorporate non-motorized
facilities into the design of the site by providing context-appropriate design
features that meet the mobility needs of future occupants.
(Prior Code, § 1248.01) (Ord. passed 7-9-2020)
§ 155.176 SELF-IMPOSED RESTRICTIONS.
   If an owner places restrictions on any of the land contained in a
subdivision that are greater than those required by the Zoning Code or these
subdivision regulations, such restrictions or references thereto shall be
indicated on the subdivision plat, and the restrictive covenants shall be
recorded with the county’s Register of Deeds in a form approved by the City
Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 1248.01)
§ 155.177 PLATS STRADDLING MUNICIPAL BOUNDARIES.
   Whenever access to a subdivision is required across land in another local
government, the Planning Commission may request assurance from the City
Attorney that such access is legally established, and from the City Engineer
that the access road is adequately improved and/or that surety has been
provided and is sufficient in amount to assure the construction of the access
road. In general, lot lines should not cross municipal boundary lines.
(Prior Code, § 1248.01)
§ 155.178 CHARACTER OF THE LAND.
   Land which the Planning Commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or
development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations,
adverse earth formations, adverse topography, utility easements, or other
features which will be reasonably harmful to the safety, health, and general
welfare of present or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its
surrounding areas shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods
are formulated by the developer and approved by the Planning Commission, upon
recommendation of the City Engineer, to solve the problems created by the
unsuitable land conditions.
(Prior Code, § 1248.01)
§ 155.179 SUBDIVISION NAME.
   The proposed name of a subdivision shall not duplicate or closely
approximate phonetically the name of any other subdivision in the area covered
by these regulations. The Planning Commission and the county’s Plat Board shall
have final authority to designate the name of the subdivision, which shall be
determined prior to pre-preliminary approval of the plat under the requirements
of § 112 of Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, being M.C.L.A. § 560.112.
(Prior Code, § 1248.01)
LOTS
§ 155.190 ARRANGEMENT.
   The lot arrangement shall be designed so that there will be no foreseeable
difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing
permits to build on lots within the subdivision in compliance with either the
Zoning Code or Health Department regulations and in providing driveway access
to buildings on any lots from an approved street.
(Prior Code, § 1248.02)
§ 155.191 DIMENSIONS.
   (A)   Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the Zoning
Code.
   (B)   In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines or
radial to curving street lines, unless a variation from this rule will produce
a more desirable street or lot plan.
   (C)   The dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for the
erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback from both
streets.
   (D)   The depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business,
commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for off-street
parking and loading facilities as required for the type of use and development
contemplated and established in the Zoning Code.
(Prior Code, § 1248.02)
§ 155.192 DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS.
   Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where
necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic
arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
(Prior Code, § 1248.02)
§ 155.193 DRAINAGE.
   Lots shall be designed to provide positive drainage away from all proposed
building sites. Individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general
storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage systems shall be designed to
avoid any concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots.
(Prior Code, § 1248.02)
§ 155.194 WASTE MATERIALS.
   No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones, soil, junk, rubbish, or
other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land, or left or
deposited on any lot or street at the time of the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, and removal of the same shall be required prior to issuance of any
certificate of occupancy on a subdivision. No such waste materials shall be
left or deposited in any area of the subdivision at the time of the expiration
of the performance bond or the dedication of public improvements, whichever is
sooner.
(Prior Code, § 1248.02)
§ 155.195 FENCES.
   Each subdivider and/or developer shall be required to furnish and install
fences wherever the Planning Commission determines that a hazardous condition
may exist. The fences shall be constructed according to the standards
established by the City Engineer, and the height and material shall be noted on
the final construction plans. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until
said fence improvements have been duly installed.
(Prior Code, § 1248.02)
§ 155.196 WATERBODIES AND WATERCOURSES.
   If a tract being subdivided contains a waterbody, or portion thereof, lot
lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of the waterbody
among the fee simple owners of the adjacent lots. The Planning Commission may
approve an alternative plan whereby the ownership of and responsibility for the
safe maintenance of the waterbody is so placed that it will not become a local
government responsibility. No more than 25% of the minimum area of a lot
required under the Zoning Code may be satisfied by land which is under water.
Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the street by
which it has access, provisions shall be made for the installation of a culvert
or other structure of a design approved by the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 1248.02)
§ 155.197 SURETY TO INCLUDE LOT IMPROVEMENT.
   The surety shall include an amount to guarantee the completion of all
requirements, including, but not limited to, soil preservation, final grading,
lot drainage, removal of debris and waste, fencing, and all other lot
improvements required by the Planning Commission. Whether or not a certificate
of occupancy has been issued, at the expiration of a surety so placed, the
local government may enforce the provisions of the surety where the provisions
of this subchapter or any other applicable law, code, or regulation have not
been complied with.
(Prior Code, § 1248.02)
CONSTRUCTION AND ROADS
§ 155.210 FRONTAGE ON IMPROVED ROADS.
   No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have
frontage on and access from an existing street on the official map, or if there
is no official map, unless such street is.
   (A)   An existing state, county, city, or township highway; or
   (B)   Shown upon a plat approved by the Planning Commission and recorded in
the county’s Register of Deeds. Such street or highway must be suitably
improved as required by highway rules, regulations, specifications, or orders,
or be secured by a form of security required under these subdivision
regulations, with the width of the right-of-way as required by these
subdivision regulations or the official map. Wherever the area to be subdivided
is to utilize existing road frontage, such road shall be suitably improved, as
provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 1248.03)
§ 155.211 GRADING AND IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
   Roads shall be graded and improved, shall conform to the local government
construction standards and specifications, and shall be approved as to design
and specifications by the City Engineer in accordance with the construction
plans to be submitted prior to final plat approval.
(Prior Code, § 1248.03)
§ 155.212 TOPOGRAPHY AND ARRANGEMENT.
   (A)   Roads shall be appropriately related to the topography. Local roads
shall be curved wherever possible to avoid conformity of lot appearance. All
streets shall be arranged to obtain building sites at or above the grades of
the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the
original topography. Combinations of steep grades and curves shall be avoided.
Specific standards are contained in the design standards of these regulations.
   (B)   All streets and non-motorized facilities shall be properly integrated
with the existing and proposed circulation system as established in the
official map and/or master plan.
   (C)   All thoroughfares shall be properly related to special traffic
generators such as industries, Business Districts, schools, churches, and
shopping centers, to population densities and to the pattern of existing and
proposed land uses.
   (D)   Minor or local streets shall be designed to conform to the topography,
to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility
systems, and to provide convenient and safe access to property.
   (E)   The use of curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs, or U-shaped streets is
encouraged wherever such use will result in a more desirable and functional
layout.
   (F)   Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract
to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions,
or unless, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, such extension is not
necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision
with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of
adjacent tracts.
   (G)   In business and industrial developments, streets, and other accessways
shall be planned to accommodate the grouping of buildings, the location of rail
facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas,
and walks and parking areas, so as to minimize the conflict of movement between
the various types of traffic, including pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 1248.03) (Ord. passed 7-9-2020)
§ 155.213 BLOCKS.
   (A)   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of
appropriate depth. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted
in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads, or waterways.
   (B)   The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be appropriate for the
locality and the type of development contemplated. However, block length in
residential areas shall not exceed 2,200 feet or 12 times the minimum lot width
required in the zoning district, nor shall the length of such blocks be less
than 400 feet in length. Wherever practicable, blocks along major arterials,
and collector streets shall not be not less than 1,000 feet in length.
   (C)   In long blocks, the Planning Commission may require the reservation of
an easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, or
pedestrian traffic. Pedestrianways or crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide,
may be required by the Planning Commission through the center of blocks more
than 800 feet long where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to
schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or other community
facilities. Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of such length and
width as may be determined to be suitable by the Planning Commission for the
prospective use.
(Prior Code, § 1248.03)
§ 155.214 ACCESS TO PRIMARY ARTERIALS.
   Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed primary
arterial, the Planning Commission may require that access to such street be
limited by one of the following means.
   (A)   The design of lots to back onto the primary arterial and to front onto
a parallel local street; no access shall be provided from the primary arterial,
and screening shall be provided in a strip of land along the rear property
lines of such lots.
   (B)   A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered from
and designed generally at right angles to a parallel street, with the rear
lines of their terminal lots backing onto the major arterial.
   (C)   A marginal access or service road, separated from the primary arterial
by a planting or grass strip, and having access at suitable points.
(Prior Code, § 1248.03)
§ 155.215 ROAD NAMES.
   All proposed road names shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission and the City Council and cleared through the county’s Road
Commission, prior to approval of the preliminary plat. Names shall be
sufficiently different in sound and in spelling from other road names in the
local area so as not to cause confusion. A road which is or is planned as a
continuation of an existing road shall bear the same name.
(Prior Code, § 1248.03)
§ 155.216 ROAD REGULATORY SIGNS.
   The applicant shall deposit with the local government, at the time of
submission of the final plat for approval, the sum of $50 for each road sign
required. The city shall install all road signs prior to issuing certificates
of occupancy for any residence. Street name signs shall be placed at all
intersections within or abutting the subdivision, the type and location of
which shall be approved by the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 1248.03)
§ 155.217 STREET LIGHTS.
   Installation of street lights shall be required in accordance with design
and specification standards approved by the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 1248.03)
§ 155.218 RESERVE STRIPS.
   Reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a proposed street in a
location which strips would deny access from adjacent property to the street.
(Prior Code, § 1248.03)
§ 155.219 CONSTRUCTION OF ROADS AND DEAD-END ROADS.
   (A)   Construction of roads. The arrangement of streets shall provide for
the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when such
continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire
protection, and efficient provision of utilities and where such continuation is
in accordance with the local government plan. If the adjacent property is
undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the right-of-
way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary T- or L-shaped
turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets. The Planning
Commission may limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in accordance
with the design standards of these regulations.
   (B)   Dead-end roads (permanent). Where a road does not extend to the
boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the
Planning Commission for access to adjoining property, the Planning Commission
may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage
facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. A cul-de-sac turn-around shall be
provided at the end of a permanent dead-end street in accordance with local
government construction standards and specifications. Permanent dead-end
streets shall be limited in length in accordance with the design standards of
these regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1248.03)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of §§ 155.140 through 155.145
or fails to comply therewith is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 30
days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. A landowner,
tenant, subdivider, builder, public official, or other person who commits,
participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may be found guilty of
a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the City Council or any other public official or
private citizen from taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or
prevent any violation of §§ 155.140 through 155.145 or of the Subdivision
Control Act, being Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§
560.101 through 560.293.
   (B)   Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken at law or in equity
to prevent any violation of §§
155.140 through
155.145, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain,
correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building,
structure, or premises, and these remedies shall be in addition to the
penalties described in division (A) above.
CHAPTER 156: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Severability
   
156.002   Definitions
   
156.003   Amendments
   
156.004   Zoning compliance permits; certificates of occupancy
Board of Zoning Appeals
   
156.015   Establishment; membership; compensation
   
156.016   Meetings
   
156.017   Jurisdiction
   
156.018   Appeals
   
156.019   Variances
Zoning Map
   
156.030   Establishment of zoning districts
   
156.031   Zoning map; district boundaries
Districts
   
156.045   Single-Family Residential District (R-1)
   
156.046   Multiple-Family Residential District (R-2)
   
156.047   Rural Residential District (RR)
   
156.048   Business District (B-1)
   
156.049   Business District (B-2)
   
156.050   Industrial District (I)
   
156.051   Public Area District
   
156.052   Mining District
   
156.053   Natural Resource District (NR)
   
156.054   Teal Lake Overlay District (TL)
Special Land Uses
   
156.065   Special land use approval standards
   
156.066   Conditions for approval; enforcement; appeals; notice
Planned Unit Development
   
156.080   Intent
   
156.081   Eligibility
   
156.082   Application and modification powers
   
156.083   Preliminary conference
   
156.084   Preliminary application
   
156.085   Waiver of final application
   
156.086   Approval of application
   
156.087   Final application
   
156.088   Authorization and issuance of special land use permit
   
156.089   Planned unit development standards
   
156.090   Changes in approved PUD
Open Space Preservation
   
156.105   Intent
   
156.106   Eligibility criteria
   
156.107   Project design standards
   
156.108   Project standards
   
156.109   Application and approval process
   
156.110   Revision of approved plans
Site Plan Review
   
156.125   Intent
   
156.126   Site plan required
   
156.127   Site plans for single- and two-family dwellings and residential
accessory uses and structures
   
156.128   Site plans for uses other than single- and two-family dwellings
   
156.129   Review procedures
   
156.130   Site plan approval
Non-Conforming Uses
   
156.145   Alterations
   
156.146   Repairs and maintenance
   
156.147   Home occupations
Supplementary Regulations
   
156.160   Right to light
   
156.161   Height expectations
   
156.162   External wood and solid fuel burning boilers
   
156.163   Wireless communications facilities
   
156.164   Fences, walls, and hedges
Signs
   
156.175   Definitions
   
156.176   Permits required
   
156.177   Exemptions
   
156.178   Regulations applicable to all signs
   
156.179   Regulations based upon sign type
   
156.180   Signs permitted by zoning district
   
156.181   Non-conforming signs and abandoned signs
   
156.182   Maintenance
   
156.183   Sign removal
   
156.184   Dangerous signs
   
156.185   Appeals
Off-Street Parking Requirements
   
156.200   Parking minimum adjustments
   
156.201   Off-street parking requirements
 
   
156.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section or part of a section of this chapter is held to be invalid
for any reason, such invalidity shall not be held to impair or invalidate this
chapter in its entirety, it being the legislative intent that every chapter or
part thereof shall remain in force and in effect notwithstanding any invalidity
of any particular provision or provisions.
(Prior Code, § 1260.01) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A subordinate building or portion of a main
building or structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the main
building or structure. The ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE shall be located on
the same property as the main building or structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0738dcf21f421e8d115b2bbb273306d0573c6511/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1589.png]
 
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS. A secondary house or apartment that shares the
building lot of a larger, primary house.
   ADULT FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME. A private single-family residence licensed
under Public Act 218 of 1979, being M.C.L.A. §§ 400.701 et seq., as amended,
with the approved capacity to receive six or fewer adults who are provided
supervision, personal care, and protection for five or more days a week, and
for two or more consecutive weeks, for compensation. The ADULT FOSTER CARE HOME
licensee must be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence.
   ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOME. A facility licensed under Public Act 218
of 1979, as amended, with the approved capacity to receive at least 13 but not
more than 20 adults who are provided supervision, personal care, and protection
in addition to room and board, for 24 hours a day, five or more days a week,
and for two or more consecutive weeks, for compensation.
   ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOME. A facility licensed under Public Act 218
of 1979, as amended, with the approved capacity to receive 12 or fewer adults
who are provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room
and board, for 24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two or more
consecutive weeks, for compensation.
   ASPHALT OR CONCRETE PLANT. An establishment engaged in the manufacturing,
mixing, or batching of asphalt, asphaltic cement, cement, or concrete products.
   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. A residence that provides a special combination of
housing, personalized support, and health care designed to respond to the
individual needs of those who need help with activities of daily living but do
not need the skilled medical care provided in a nursing home.
   AUTOMOBILE WASH FACILITY. A structure containing facilities for the washing
of vehicles by automatic or self service means.
   BANKS AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS. A non-residential structure in which money
is kept for savings or commercial purposes or is invested, supplied for loans,
or exchanged. Such business establishment can be a BANK, credit union,
brokerage, or other establishment pertaining to the management of money.
   BARBER AND BEAUTY SHOP. Includes hair salons and other personal grooming
services such as nails, skin, and spas.
   BASEMENT. A story partly underground, provided that where the vertical
distance from the average grade to the ceiling of a basement equals or exceeds
five feet, the BASEMENT shall be considered a “story.”
   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. A single-family residence where no more
than five guest rooms are made available for the temporary accommodation of the
traveling or vacationing public. Such an establishment may offer meals only to
those persons temporarily residing at the establishment. In residential zones
(R-1, R-2, RR) the property must be owner-occupied.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A structure used primarily for lodging purposes where
the use as a residence is clearly secondary. A structure where more than five
but not more than nine guest rooms are made available for the temporary
accommodation of the traveling or vacationing public. Such an establishment may
offer meals to the public and persons temporarily residing at the
establishment.
   BILLBOARD. Any freestanding structure on which is lettered, pictured, or
displayed matter, the chief purpose of which is for advertising or publicity.
   BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. The Board of Zoning Appeals of the city.
   BOAT LIVERY. An establishment for the renting of boats, canoes, and other
similar vessels to the public.
   BUILDING. Any structure used, designed, or intended for the protection,
shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property.
   BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF. The line of that face of the building nearest the
FRONT LINE of the lot. This does not include the steps, but it does include sun
parlors, chimneys, fireplaces, and open and enclosed porches.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance from final grade to the highest
point of the roof surface for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, to
the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
Where a building is located on a sloping terrain, the HEIGHT shall be measured
from the average ground level of the final grade at the building walls.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0738dcf21f421e8d115b2bbb273306d0573c6511/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1591.png]
 
   BUILDING MATERIAL SALES AND STORAGE. A facility for retail sales and storage
of building materials not including production or remanufacturing.
   BUSINESS SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Establishments primarily engaged in
rendering services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such
as advertising and mailing; building maintenance; employment services;
management and consulting services; protective services; equipment rental and
leasing; commercial research; development and testing; photo finishing; and
personnel supply service.
   COMPLETE STREETS. A transportation policy that encourages streets to be
designed and operated to enable safe use and support mobility for all users.
Those include people of all ages and abilities, regardless of whether they are
traveling as drivers, pedestrians, bicyclists, or public transportation riders.
   CONFERENCE CENTER. A facility to allow large group meetings, ceremonies, and
assemblies which may include classrooms and exhibit areas.
   CONTEXT-APPROPRIATE DESIGN. A collaborative, interdisciplinary approach
involving a range of likely potential stakeholder users for the development of
a transportation facility that fits its physical setting and preserves scenic,
aesthetic, historic, cultural, and environmental resources, while maintaining
safety and mobility.
   CONTRACTOR YARD. An area intended for the temporary or long-term storage of
materials and equipment used for construction, road building, and forestry
operations.
   CONVENIENCE RETAIL. A retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged
food products, household items, newspapers and magazines, and sandwiches and
other freshly prepared foods, such as salads.
   CULTURAL FACILITY. A premises designed for musical or other performances,
museum displays and art exhibits, which may include classrooms.
   DAY CARE CENTER. A facility, other than a private residence, that provides
care for preschool or school-aged children for periods of less than 24 hours a
day, as defined by Public Act 116 of 1973, being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.111 through
722.128. A DAY CARE CENTER does not include a family or group day care home.
   DAY CARE HOME, FAMILY. A day care operation located in and subordinate to
the residential use of the residence of the operator of the facility, which
provides day care services for six or fewer children, and which is licensed or
registered under Public Act 116 of 1973, being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.111 through
722.128.
   DAY CARE HOME, GROUP. A day care operation located in and subordinate to the
residential use of the residence of the operator of the facility, which
provides day care services for seven to 12 children, and which is licensed or
registered under Public Act 116 of 1973, being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.111 through
722.128.
   DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT. A facility using chemical solvents containing
little or no water for the cleaning of clothing of fabrics.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, which meets all of the following
criteria.
      (1)   It complies with the minimum square footage requirements for
building floor area for the applicable district.
      (2)   It has a minimum width along any exterior side elevation of 24 feet
and a minimum internal height of seven and one-half feet.
      (3)   It is firmly attached to a solid foundation constructed on the site
in accordance with the state’s Building Code and state’s Residential Code.
      (4)   It does not have exposed wheels, towing mechanisms, undercarriage,
or chassis.
      (5)   The dwelling is connected to a public sewer and water supply or to
such private facilities approved by the local Health Department.
      (6)   The dwelling contains storage area(s) either in a basement located
under said dwelling, in an attic area, in a closet area, or in a separate fully
enclosed structure on the site, equal to not less than 15% of the interior
living area of the dwelling.
      (7)   The dwelling is aesthetically compatible in design and appearance
to conventionally on-site constructed homes.
      (8)   The dwelling contains no additions of rooms or other areas which
are not constructed with similar materials and are similar in appearance and
with similar quality of workmanship as in the original structure.
      (9)   The dwelling complies with all pertinent Building and Fire Codes
including the state’s Building Codes and state’s Residential Code.
   ERECTED. Built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon or any physical
operation on the premises required for a building. Excavations, fill, drainage
and the like shall be considered part of ERECTION.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance
by public or private utilities, municipal departments, or commissions of
underground, surface, or overhead, gas, electrical, steam, or water
transmission or distribution systems, or of collection, supply, or disposal
systems, including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, wires, cables, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith which are reasonably
necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or
municipal departments, commissions, or for the public health or safety or
general welfare, but not including buildings other than such buildings as are
primarily enclosures or shelters of the mentioned equipment.
   EXTERNAL WOOD AND SOLID FUEL BURNING BOILERS. Any equipment, device,
appliance, or apparatus, or any part thereof, which is installed, affixed, or
situated outdoors for the primary purpose of combustion of wood or other solid
fuel to produce heat or energy used as a component of a heating system
providing heat for any interior space or water source.
   FAIRGROUND. Activities that are primarily out-of-doors for a fixed period of
time, not to exceed five consecutive days, and including flea markets,
fireworks, displays, speeches, farm stands, seasonal sales, swap and shop
markets, racing meets, circuses, carnivals, and concerts.
   FENCE.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0738dcf21f421e8d115b2bbb273306d0573c6511/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1593.png]
   FLEA MARKET AND FARMER’S MARKET. A structure which is used seasonally for
display and sale of items such as agricultural produce and farm products,
flowers, Christmas trees and wreaths, grave blankets, antiques and
collectibles, and prepared food and beverage items.
   FLOOR AREA. The floor area within the perimeter of the outside walls of the
building under consideration, without deduction for hallways, stairs, closets,
thickness of walls, columns, or other features.
   FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT. Premises used for the preparation and/or
manufacture of foodstuffs for resale but not for consumption on the premises
including wholesale food preparation.
   FREIGHT HANDLING FACILITY. A terminal with the capability of handling a
large variety of goods which may involve various forms of transportation and
may provide multi modal shipping capabilities, such as rail to truck.
   FRONT FACING DOORWAYS. The main entrance to a structure having more than one
entrance must be on the primary street.
   FRONT OF LOT. The front boundary line of a lot bordering on the street, and
in the case of a corner lot, may be either frontage.
   FUEL SALES ESTABLISHMENT. A structure used for the retail sale or supply of
fuels, lubricants, air, water, and other operating commodities for motor
vehicles and other internal combustion operated machines, and including the
customary space and facilities for the installation of such commodities on or
in such vehicles and machines.
   FUNERAL HOME. A building used for the preparation of the deceased for
burial, and for display of the deceased and rituals connected before burial or
cremation.
   GARAGE, RESIDENTIAL. A fully enclosed residential accessory building or
space typically used for the storage of vehicles.
   GRADE. The level at which the ground intersects with the foundation of a
building.
   GRAVEL/SAND PIT. An open land area where sand, gravel, and rock fragment are
mined, excavated, and processed for sale or off-tract use. An area is
maintained for the on-site storage of materials to be processed or have been
processed.
   GREENHOUSE. A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or
other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and
humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-of-season
plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment. Also, an enclosed, locked
facility used for the growing of medical marijuana pursuant to M.C.L.A. §§
333.26421 et seq., the state’s Medical Marijuana Act.
   HEALTH CARE FACILITIES, IN-PATIENT. A facility offering medical care and
services for observation, diagnosis, and active treatment of an individual with
a medical, mental, surgical, obstetric, chronic, or rehabilitation condition
requiring the daily direction or supervision of a physician. Overnight care is
provided.
   HEALTH CARE FACILITIES, OUT-PATIENT. An establishment where patients are
admitted for examination and treatment on an OUT-PATIENT basis by one or more
physicians, dentists or other medical personnel, psychologists, or social
worker, and where patients are not lodged overnight.
   HEAVY MANUFACTURING AND ASSEMBLY. Establishments engaged in the mechanical
or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products,
including the ASSEMBLING of components parts, the creation of products, and the
blending of materials, such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, or liquor.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Activities of the type usually conducted for gainful
employment which are clearly incidental and subordinate to a principal
residential use as further set forth in §
156.147.
   HOTEL. A building in which lodging or boarding are provided and offered to
the public for compensation and which ingress to and egress from ail rooms is
made through an inside lobby or office normally supervised at all hours. As
such, it is open to the public as distinguished from a boarding house, lodging
house, or apartment.
   INDOOR RECREATION FACILITY. A place designed and equipped for the conduct of
indoor sports and leisure activities such as handball, badminton, basketball,
tennis, archery, golf, bowling, and ice skating.
   KENNEL. A commercial establishment or animal shelter in which dogs or other
domesticated animals, other than horses, are housed, groomed, bred, boarded,
trained, or sold, for a fee or compensation. This specifically excludes animals
kept and raised for a person’s personal enjoyment or for hobby or recreational
purposes.
   LAUNDROMAT. An establishment providing clothing and fabric washing and
drying, machines on the premises for rental use to the general public.
LAUNDROMATS may incorporate drop-off facilities for commercial dry-cleaning
establishments, but do not include dry-cleaning equipment.
   LIBRARY. An installation or foundation maintaining a collection or
repository of literary or artistic materials such as books, periodicals, and
newspapers kept for reading or reference.
   LIGHT MANUFACTURING AND ASSEMBLY. Establishments where the finished product
generally consists of small machine parts, small electronic equipment, or
similar items. LIGHT MANUFACTURING operations shall be located within the
principal building.
   LODGE HALL. A building used by a non-profit membership organization for
recreational or social purposes.
   LOT. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory
buildings, including such open spaces as are required under this Zoning Code,
and having its frontage upon a public street or any private way used for street
purposes. LOT shall also mean a parcel of land.
   LOT, CORNER. Any lot having at least two contiguous sides abutting upon a
street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides
is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall
be considered a CORNER LOT if the tangents to the curve, at its point of
beginning within the lot or at the points of intersection of the side lot lines
with the street line, intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA CAREGIVER DISPENSARY. A registered, primary caregiver
under the state’s Medical Marijuana Act who engages in assisting one or more
patients with their medical use of marijuana, but does not engage in the
growing of marijuana plants.
   MINING. The extraction of minerals including the actual removal, processing,
and transportation of minerals, and attendant by-products.
   MINI-STORAGE FACILITY. A structure or group of structures for the storage of
customer’s goods and wares, recreational vehicles, and related equipment, but
not warehousing.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure designed and built to comply with U.S. Department
of Housing and urban development manufactured home and construction safety
standards, as adopted by the state in its Mobile Home Commission Act, Public
Act 96 of 1987, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.2301 et seq. Any MOBILE HOME or
MANUFACTURED HOME which does not meet the definition of a “dwelling” under this
section, but which complies with the state and federal Manufactured Home Code,
may be placed in a mobile home park as provided in this subchapter.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel or tract of land as defined by, and which
complies with, the definition and standards adopted by the state in its Mobile
Home Commission Act.
   MOTEL. A building or group of buildings having units containing sleeping
accommodations which are available for temporary occupancy primarily by
automobile travelers and usually providing separate entrances for the units.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. A building or premises lawfully used or occupied at the
time of the passage of this chapter or amendments thereto, which use or
occupancy does not conform to the regulations of this chapter or amendments
thereto.
   NON-MOTORIZED FACILITIES. Physical features that provide access and/or
support for the operation of non-motorized vehicles and pedestrian access. They
may include walkways, sidewalks, crosswalks, paths, pedestrianized streets,
pedestrian plazas, bike lanes, bus shelters, bicycle parking, and other
pedestrian infrastructure for the purpose of enhancing safety and mobility.
   NURSERY. Land or greenhouses used to raise flowers, shrubs, and plants for
sale.
   NURSING HOME. A nursing care facility, including a county medical care
facility, that provides organized nursing care and medical treatment to seven
or more unrelated individuals suffering or recovering from illness, injury, or
infirmity, as defined by the state’s Public Health Code.
   OFFICE BUILDING. A building used primarily for conducting the affairs of a
business, profession, service, industry, or government, or like activity, and
which may include ancillary services exclusively for workers in the building,
such as a restaurant, coffee shop, newspapers, or candy stand, or child care
facilities.
   OFFICE PARKS. A development on a tract of land that contains a number of
separate office buildings, accessory and supporting uses, and open space
designed, planned, constructed, and managed on an integrated, and coordinated
basis.
   OWNER-OCCUPIED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Real property located in the City of
Negaunee having thereon a dwelling occupied, or to be occupied as a qualifying
taxable homestead property. This definition shall be limited to the principal
residence of a person, and not an investment property or second home.
   PASSIVE PARK. A green or natural area for public use, not including sporting
facilities or fields.
   PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. A type of business providing services for
personal grooming and exercise, such as health clubs, spas, chiropractic
services, and the like.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. An area of minimum contiguous size, as specified
by ordinance, to be planned, developed, operated, and maintained as a single
entity and containing one or more residential clusters or planned unit
residential developments and/or one or more public, quasi-public, commercial,
or industrial areas.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city.
   PUBLIC BUILDINGS. Any government or quasi-governmental building, structure,
facility, or complex used by the general public or providing public services,
including, but not limited to, assembly buildings, such as auditoriums and
libraries, and the like; city halls; community centers, senior citizen centers,
and fire halls.
   RECREATION FACILITY. A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports
and leisure-time activities.
   RECYCLING CENTER, JUNKYARD, SALVAGE YARD. A facility in which used material,
such as paper, glass, plastic, or motor oil, is separated and processed prior
to shipment to other locations for processing or manufacturing into new
products or for reuse.
   RECYCLING COLLECTION POINT. A site containing containers for the collection
and temporary storage of recyclable materials, typically an accessory use.
Materials collected are transported from the drop-off site to another location
for processing.
   RECYCLING PLANT. A facility in which recyclable materials, such as
newspaper, magazines, books, and other paper products; glass; metal; and other
products, are recycled, reprocessed, and/or treated to return such products to
a condition in which they may again be used in new products.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS. A building whose primary purpose is the regular
assembly for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a
religious body organized to sustain public worship, together with all accessory
buildings and uses customarily associated with such primary purpose.
   RESIDENCE, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building containing more than one dwelling
unit.
   RESIDENCE, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building containing a single dwelling unit
designed for residential use by one or two persons who may be providing care
for their children and/or parents plus not more than two other persons, or by
not more than four unrelated persons living together as a single housekeeping
unit.
   RESTAURANTS WITH OR WITHOUT DRIVE-THROUGH. An establishment where food or
beverages are cooked or prepared and offered for retail sale and where
consumption is permitted on the premises.
   RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Establishments selling food to the public for
consumption but not for resale, usually in small quantities, as well as
services incidental to the sale of these goods.
   RETAIL OUTLET STORE. A retail establishment selling a single manufacturer’s
product.
   RETAIL SALES ESTABLISHMENT. Establishments selling goods to the public for
consumption but not for resale, usually in small quantities, as well as
services incidental to the sale of these goods. This shall not include the sale
of heavy equipment, vehicles, recreational vehicles, watercraft, or
establishments where there is the permanent exterior display of merchandise.
   RETAIL WAREHOUSE OUTLET. A retail operation from a warehouse as an accessory
to the principal warehouse use.
   RIGHT OF WAY.  
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0738dcf21f421e8d115b2bbb273306d0573c6511/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1595.png]
   SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE. An institution which offers regular instruction
at the preschool, primary, or secondary level or serves disabled students. This
definition does not include day care facilities, programs offering individual
instruction, or courses offered in a non-institutional setting in a specialized
subject.
   SETBACK. The required distance between every structure and any lot line on
the lot on which it is located except where a front lot line is not defined by
any conveyance or recorded plat, in which case it means the required distance
between every structure and the nearest land actually used for purpose of a
roadway or parallel drainage ditch.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0738dcf21f421e8d115b2bbb273306d0573c6511/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1597.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0738dcf21f421e8d115b2bbb273306d0573c6511/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1599.png]
   SHOPPING CENTER. More than one commercial establishment planned, constructed
and managed as a total entity, with customer and employee parking provided on-
site, with provision for delivery separated from customer access. Buildings
constructed on outlots shall not be considered part of the SHOPPING CENTER
unless access and parking easements are provided.
   SIDEWALK CAFÉ. An outdoor dining area on a public sidewalk or right-of-way
where patrons consume food and beverages provided by an abutting food service
establishment. Such establishments include either table service in the outdoor
area or takeout items to be consumed there.
   SIGN, STANDARD OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURE. A permanent sign erected,
maintained, or used in the outdoor environment for the purpose of display of
commercial or non- commercial messages not appurtenant to the use of, products
sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is displayed. May be
referenced as an OFF-PREMISES SIGN or BILLBOARD.
   SPECIAL LAND USES. Those uses of land which are essentially compatible with
the uses permitted in a zoning district, but which possess characteristics or
locational qualities which require individual review and restriction in order
to avoid incompatibility with the character of the surrounding area, public
services and facilities, and adjacent uses of land.
   STACKED FLATS. A building containing two to four units, as specified within
the zone regulations, on a single lot with at least one unit entirely or
partially above another.
   STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS OR GAS FACILITY. Any tankage loading facilities
and buildings used for the storage and distribution of flammable liquids by
tank truck, tank car, or pipe line.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor or roof next above.
   STORY, HALF. The portion of a building between the eaves and the ridge lines
of a pitched roof which may or may not be used for tenant purposes.
   STREET. A public thoroughfare for vehicles which has been dedicated for
public use.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Alterations or repairs which may be made to any
structure without requiring the existing structure to comply with all the
requirements of this subchapter, provided that such work conforms to that which
is required of a new structure.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground.
   TAVERN. An establishment used primarily for the serving of liquor by the
drink to the general public for consumption on the premises and where food or
packaged liquors may be served or sold as accessory to the primary use.
   THEATER. A building or structure which contains an assembly hall for the
performing arts (dramatic dance, musical, or other live performances) and/or
for the showing of motion pictures.
   TRADE OR TECHNICAL SCHOOL. An institution offering instruction beyond high
school level with a course of study in vocational, technical, or other special
subjects, or a facility offering instruction at any level in martial arts,
arts, drama, dance, speech, music, or similar personal skills. This definition
does not apply to instruction in craft or fine arts in a single-family
residence only which is a permitted residential use pursuant to state law and
this chapter.
   TREE PRESERVATION STANDARDS. Any new development must preserve standing
trees on the property at the discretion of the Planning Commission.
   VEHICLE BODY SHOP. A premises where one or more of the following services
are provided for compensation: rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles;
collision service such as body, frame, or fender straightening and repair;
painting and undercoating of automobiles, including bumping, and refinishing.
   VEHICLE REPAIR GARAGE. A premises where general vehicle repairs including
engine rebuilding, but not including bumping, painting, or refinishing.
   VETERINARY CLINIC. A facility providing diagnosis, treatment, surgery, and
similar veterinary care for domestic animals with overnight boarding incidental
to treatment.
   VIDEO ARCADE. A facility dedicated to the playing of electronic, mechanical,
or table games which do not involve gambling.
   WAREHOUSE. A building or portion thereof whose principal use is storage of
goods, merchandise, or other property which may or may not be incidental to
retail sales on-site. As a type of storage, it is typically not accessible to
the general retail public, but may involve the pick-up of bulk goods not
readily stored on retail shelves or in the retail store proper or setting.
   WHOLESALE SALES ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment selling goods for resale,
usually in large quantities, as well as services incidental to the sale of
these goods. This shall not include the sale of heavy equipment, vehicles,
recreational vehicles, watercraft, or establishments where there is the
permanent exterior display of merchandise.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES. All structures and accessory facilities
relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of
transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but shall not be
limited to, radio and television broadcasting or relay towers, wireless or
cellular telephone communication receivers and transmitters, telephone
communication receivers and transmitters, telephone devices and exchanges,
microwave relay facilities and towers, telephone transmission equipment
buildings, and public, private, and commercial mobile radio service facilities.
This definition will not include satellite dishes under three feet in diameter.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES ATTACHED. Wireless communication
facilities affixed to existing structures, including but not limited to
existing buildings, towers, water tanks, or utility poles.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWER. A structure intended to support equipment used
to transmit and/or receive communication signals. This definition includes, but
is not limited to radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers,
common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, monopoles, freestanding
lattice structures, and guyed lattice structures.
   WOODYARD. A parcel of land where pulp wood and other logs are gathered from
various locations and stored for commercial sale or for transport to a
processing facility.
   YARD. An open space, which is on the same lot with a building and which is
unoccupied, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending the full width of a lot and situated between
the rear lot line and the rear line of a building projected to the side lines
of the lot.
   YARD, SIDE. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building
located between the building and the side lot line.
(Prior Code, § 1260.02) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009; Ord. passed 5-13-2021; Ord.
passed 9-8-2022; Ord. passed 11-10-2022; Ord. passed 4-13-2023)
§ 156.003 AMENDMENTS.
   All requests for re-zoning or for amendment of the zoning ordinance or
zoning map shall be referred to the Planning Commission for review and
recommendation. Upon receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission,
the City Council may, by ordinance, amend, supplement or change this
subchapter, according to the procedures established under state law. If a
proper protest against a proposed amendment, supplement or change is presented,
such amendment shall require at least five votes of the City Council for
approval.
(Prior Code, § 1262.01) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.004 ZONING COMPLIANCE PERMITS; CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   It is the intent of this subchapter to require a zoning compliance
permit for all new structures and uses, as well as changes in usage. The
regulations contained herein are intended to provide and promote the orderly
development of the city; safe and convenient traffic movement, both within a
site and in relation to access streets; the stability of land values and
investments by preventing the impairment or depreciation of land values, and
development by the erection of structures or additions or alterations thereto
without proper attention to setting or to unsightly or undesirable appearances;
harmonious relationship to buildings, other structures and uses, both within a
site and/or adjacent sites; and the conservation of natural amenities and
resources and to promote the public safety.
   (B)   No land use shall be commenced or changed and no structure shall be
erected or enlarged until the person conducting such use or erecting or
enlarging such structure has obtained a zoning compliance permit from the
Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   No zoning compliance permit shall be issued where it appears that any
land area required to conform to any provision of this subchapter is also
required as part of any adjoining property to keep the development or use
thereof in conformity with this subchapter, or to keep it from becoming more
non-conforming. The applicant for a zoning compliance permit shall agree that
neither he or she nor his or her successor in title, shall sell, convey, lease,
or otherwise dispose of any land surrounding a structure if such conveyance
will result in the structure being left on a lot which fails to meet the
minimum requirements set forth in this subchapter.
   (D)   Any zoning compliance permit based on any material false statement in
the application of supporting documents is absolutely void and shall be
revoked.
   (E)   Special or conditional uses and non-conforming uses and structures
shall require approval of the Planning Commission and become part of the zoning
compliance permit.
   (F)   Variances require the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (G)   The Zoning Administrator shall issue all zoning compliance permits and
shall clearly designate any and all conditions and variances, which have been
approved by the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Board of Appeals when
required by this or subchapter.
   (H)   If the applicant does not exercise the use of the zoning compliance
permit by completing any approved construction and/or use within two years
after its issue, the zoning compliance permit will become null and void.
   (I)   Any zoning compliance permit acted upon by the applicant or his or her
agents or successors will inure for the duration of the existing use and is
limited to those uses specified in the zoning compliance permit.
   (J)   It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any building or
premises or part thereof hereafter created, erected, or altered, or to change
or enlarge the use of any building or premises or part thereof, until a
certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the county.
(Prior Code, § 1262.02) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009) Penalty, see §
156.999
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
§ 156.015 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   A Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby established in and for the city.
The word “Board,” when used in this chapter, shall be construed to mean the
Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board shall consist of five members who shall be
appointed for terms of three years by the City Council. Two alternate members
may be appointed by the City Council, each for a term of three years. The
membership shall be representative of the population distribution and of the
various interests present in the city. All members of the Board shall serve
without compensation.
   (B)   One member may be a member of the City Council, but no City Council
member shall serve as Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (C)   One member may be a member of the Planning Commission. Such a member
shall not participate in a public hearing on or vote on the same matter that
the member voted on as a member of the Planning Commission, however, this
member may consider and vote on other unrelated matters involving the same
property.
   (D)   A member shall disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the
member has a conflict of interest. Failure to do so constitutes malfeasance in
office and may be grounds for removal.
   (E)   An employee or contractor of the City Council may not serve as a
member of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(Prior Code, § 1264.01) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.016 MEETINGS.
   Meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held as needed, at the call
of the Chairperson and as provided in the Board’s rules of procedure. There
shall be a fixed place of meeting and all meetings shall be open to the public.
The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its
proceedings showing the action of the Board and the vote of each member upon
each question considered. The presence of three regular members shall be
necessary to constitute a quorum.
(Prior Code, § 1264.02) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.017 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The jurisdiction of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall extend to the
hearing of appeals including the interpretation of the zoning map as well as
decisions upon all matters referred to the Board or upon which the Board is
required to decide pursuant to this Zoning Code. As apart of any decision, the
Board may impose conditions which shall become a part of any zoning permit
issued.
   (B)   The Board may call upon the City Manager to secure the assistance of
any city department in the performance of its duties and it shall be the duty
of such other departments to render such assistance as may be reasonably
required.
(Prior Code, § 1264.03) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.018 APPEALS.
   (A)   An appeal from a ruling of the Planning Commission or Zoning
Administrator under this subchapter concerning the enforcement of the
provisions of this subchapter may be made to the Board of Zoning Appeals within
such time as shall be prescribed by the Board in compliance with state statute.
The applicant shall file with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board
all documents concerning the appeal. The notice requirements under state law
shall be met as to the matters heard by the Board.
   (B)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal and
decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may
appear in person or by agent or attorney. The Board’s actions shall be in the
form of a resolution clearly setting forth the Board’s decision. The Board may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the
office, board, or commission from whom the appeal is taken.
   (C)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
being appealed.
(Prior Code, § 1264.04) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.019 VARIANCES.
   In addition to the general powers provided in §
156.017, the Board of Zoning Appeals may, in specific cases after public notice
and hearing, authorize by permit, a variation of the application of the height,
area or other dimensional regulations established in this subchapter, provided
that the variation is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the
regulations, as follows.
   (A)   A temporary building for commerce or industry, in a Residence
District, which is incidental to the residential development, such permit to be
issued for a period not to exceed one year.
   (B)   The erection and use of a building, or an addition to an existing
building of a public service corporation or for public utility purposes, in any
location, to a greater height or larger area than the district requirements
established in this subchapter, which the Board shall find reasonably necessary
for the public convenience.
   (C)   A building or use in an Industrial District otherwise excluded from
such district, provided that such building or use is distinctly incidental and
essential to a use permitted in an Industrial District, and provided, further,
that not more than 25% of the employees of the entire plant are engaged
therein.
   (D)   If there are practical difficulties in carrying out the strict letter
of the zoning ordinance, the Board may grant a variance relating to the
construction, structural changes or alteration of buildings or structures as to
dimensional requirements or other standards, provided that the spirit of the
zoning ordinance is observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice
done.
   (E)   In ruling upon any request for a variance, the procedures outlined in
§
156.018 for appeals shall be applied.
   (F)   In ruling upon any request for a variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall apply the standards set forth in §§
156.065 and
156.066 for the evaluation of special uses. No variance shall be granted if any
portion of the considerations in §§
156.065 and
156.066 would be violated.
(Prior Code, § 1264.05) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
ZONING MAP
§ 156.030 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the
following ten districts:
   (A)   Single-Family Residential District (R-1);
   (B)   Multiple-Family Residential District (R-2);
   (C)   Rural Residential District (RR);
   (D)   Business District (B-1);
   (E)   Business District (B-2);
   (F)   Industrial District (I);
   (G)   Public Area District;
   (H)   Mining District (M);
   (I)   Natural Resource District (NR); and
   (J)   Teal Lake Overlay District (TL).
(Prior Code, § 1266.01) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.031 ZONING MAP; DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries of the districts established in §
156.030 are hereby established as shown on a map entitled “Zoning Map, City of
Negaunee, Michigan,” dated December 12, 2019, which is on file in the office of
the Zoning Administrator and which is hereby made a part of this subchapter.
Except where specifically designated on said map, the district boundary lines
are intended to follow lot lines, the centerlines of streets or alleys, the
centerlines of streets or alleys projected, railroad right-of-way lines,
section lines, one-quarter section lines, one-eighth section lines, or the city
limits. Where a district boundary line does not coincide with lot lines, said
boundary line shall be dimensioned on the zoning map.
(Prior Code, § 1266.02) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
DISTRICTS
§ 156.045 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1).
   (A)   Intent. The Single-Family Residential District (R-1) is intended for
the establishment and preservation of quiet single-family residence
neighborhoods. The uses in the district are intended to keep the neighborhood
relatively quiet and free from unrelated traffic influences. The R-1 District
is designed to accommodate residential dwellings served by municipal water and
wastewater treatment services.
(Prior Code, § 1268.01)
   (B)   Permitted principal uses.
      (1)   Adult foster care family home, provided it is not within 1,500 feet
of another adult foster care family home;
      (2)   Day care home, family;
      (3)   Essential services;
      (4)   Recreational uses: community playground; picnic area; passive park;
      (5)    Residence, single-family;
      (6)   Accessory dwelling units; and
      (7)   Stacked flats.
(Prior Code, § 1268.02)
   (C)   Special land uses authorized by permit. The following uses of land and
structures may be permitted in this district by application for and the
issuance of a special land use permit as provided for in §§
156.065 and
156.066:
      (1)   Bed and breakfast establishment;
      (2)   Home occupation;
      (3)   Library;
      (4)   Planned unit development;
      (5)   Recreational uses: boat launch; cross-country ski trail; fields
(soccer, hockey, ballfields); fishing piers; ice rink; passive park; swimming
beach;
      (6)   Religious institutions;
      (7)   School;
      (8)   Wireless communication facility, attached; and
      (9)   Multi-family residential use
(Prior Code, § 1268.03)
   (D)   Accessory buildings and uses. Accessory structures normally associated
with permitted uses are allowed when located on the same lot or lots, subject
to the following conditions.
      (1)   Not more than two accessory buildings shall be permitted on the
lots served by the principal building.
      (2)   The total square footage of all accessory buildings shall not
exceed the total square footage of all floors of the principal building,
excluding basements. In no case shall a single accessory building exceed 1,200
square feet of floor area.
      (3)   All accessory buildings in excess of 150 square feet shall be
constructed of similar materials or have the same general appearance as the
principal building.
      (4)   The height of the accessory building shall not exceed 25 feet or
the height of the principal building, whichever is less.
      (5)   No portion of an accessory building shall be located in the front
of the principal building, except garages attached to the principal building.
No part of the accessory or principal building shall protrude into the setback
line.
      (6)   Accessory buildings shall not be occupied by or involved in the
conduct of a business or home occupation.
      (7)   No accessory building may be constructed or erected prior to the
construction or erection of the principal building on the same lot or lots.
(Prior Code, § 1268.04)
   (E)   General regulations.
      (1)   Height of buildings. No building or structure thereof shall be
erected or altered to a height exceeding 35 feet; except a permitted non-
residential structure may exceed this limit by one foot for each foot in excess
of ten feet that the building or structure is set back from all property lines.
      (2)   Lot area. No building shall be erected or altered unless it is on a
lot having an area of not less than 9,600 square feet. This regulation shall
not apply to lots already platted and recorded as of the effective date of this
section, where the owner of such platted lots does not own a sufficient amount
of adjacent land to permit compliance, provided that all other requirements of
the section are met.
      (3)   Lot frontage. Every lot shall have frontage of not less than 80
feet along a public street. This regulation does not apply to lots already
platted and recorded as of the effective date of this section where the owner
of the such platted lots does not own a sufficient amount of adjacent land to
permit compliance, provided all other requirements of this subchapter are met.
      (4)   Setbacks. There shall be a building setback line of not less than
20 feet or a setback line consistent with adjacent structures. On every corner
lot, the minimum setback distance shall be 20 feet on the short side of the lot
and may be as little as 15 feet on the long side of the lot, except for those
lots where the long side is parallel to the front of the majority of other lots
on the street, in which case the setback shall be 20 feet.
      (5)   Rear yard. Every lot shall have a rear yard of not less than 25
feet. Necessary buildings or structures for accessory uses shall not occupy
more than 40% of the required rear yard area, provided that where such rear
yard abuts on streets, no garage or other building for accessory use shall be
placed nearer than 15 feet from the line of such street. Further, regarding
corner lots, where such rear yard abuts on an adjacent lot to the rear, the
accessory building setback from such lot line shall be not less than five feet.
If alleys are present to the rear lot line of the property, no building or
accessory building shall be erected within feet of the alley right-of-way.
      (6)   Side yards. Every lot shall have two side yards, neither of which
shall be less than 10% of the width of the lot. The width of the lot shall be
determined at the front setback line of the structure to be built. If alleys
are present to the rear lot line of the property, no building or accessory
building shall be erected within five feet of the alley right-of-way.
      (7)   Building floor area. Every dwelling shall have a first floor area
of not less than 720 square feet if the dwelling is one story or one and one-
half stories in height, or 475 square feet if the dwelling is two stories in
height.
      (8)   Density. Not more than one principal building or structure shall be
permitted on any lot.
(Prior Code, § 1268.05) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009; Ord. passed 5-13-2021; Ord.
passed 11-10-2022)
§ 156.046 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2).
   (A)   The Multiple-Family Residential District (R-2).  Intended for the
establishment and preservation of residential areas with single- and multiple-
family dwellings. The uses in the district are to be compatible with the
residential character of the neighborhoods.
(Prior Code, § 1269.01)
   (B)   Permitted principal uses.
      (1)   Adult foster care family home;
      (2)   Day care home, family;
      (3)   Essential services;
       (4)   Recreational uses: community playground; picnic area;
      (5)   Residence, single-family;
      (6)   Residence, multiple-family; and
(Prior Code, § 1269.02)
      (7)   Accessory dwelling units.
   (C)   Special land uses authorized by permit. The following uses of land and
structures may be permitted in this district by application for the issuance of
a special land use permit as provided for in §§
156.065 and
156.066:
      (1)   Adult foster care small group home;
      (2)   Adult foster care large group home;
      (3)   Assisted living facility;
      (4)   Bed and breakfast establishment;
      (5)   Day care home, group;
      (6)   Home occupation;
      (7)   Library;
      (8)   Nursing home;
      (9)   Planned unit development;
      (10)   Recreational uses: boat launch, cross-country ski trails, fields
(soccer, hockey, ballfield), fishing piers, ice rink, passive park, ski trail,
swimming beach;
      (11)   Religious institutions;
      (12)   School;
      (13)   Temporary outdoor activity; and
      (14)   Wireless communications facility, attached.
(Prior Code, § 1269.03)
   (D)   Accessory buildings and uses. Accessory structures normally associate
with permitted uses when located on the same lot or lots, subject to the
following conditions.
      (1)   No more than two accessory buildings shall be permitted on the lot
served by the principal building.
      (2)   The total square footage of all accessory buildings shall not
exceed the total square footage of all floors of the principal building,
excluding basements. In no case shall a single accessory building exceed 1,200
square feet of floor area.
      (3)   All accessory buildings in excess of 150 square feet shall be
constructed of similar materials or have the same general appearance as the
principal building.
      (4)   The height of the accessory building shall not exceed 35 feet or
the height of the principal building, whichever is less.
      (5)   No portion of an accessory building shall be located in the front
of the principal building, except garages attached to the principal building.
No part of the accessory or principal building shall protrude into the setback
line.
      (6)   Accessory buildings shall not be occupied or involved in the
conduct of a business or home occupation.
(Prior Code, § 1269.04)
   (E)   General regulations.
      (1)   Height of buildings. No building or structure thereof shall be
erected or altered to a height exceeding 35 feet; except a permitted non-
residential structure may exceed this limit by one foot for each foot in excess
of ten feet that the building or structure is set back from all property lines.
      (2)   Lot area. No building shall be erected or altered unless it is on a
lot having an area of not less than 9,600 square feet. This regulation shall
not apply to lots already platted and recorded as of the effective date of this
section, where the owner of such platted lots does not own a sufficient amount
of adjacent land to permit compliance, provided that all other requirements of
the section are met.
      (3)   Lot frontage. Every lot shall have frontage of not less than 80
feet along a public street. This regulation does not apply to lots already
platted and recorded as of the effective date of this section where the owner
of the such platted lots does not own a sufficient amount of adjacent land to
permit compliance, provided all other requirements of this section are met.
      (4)   Setbacks. There shall be a building setback line of not less than
20 feet or a setback line consistent with adjacent structures. On every corner
lot, the minimum setback distance shall be 20 feet on the short side of the lot
and may be as little as 15 feet on the long side of the lot, except for those
lots where the long side is parallel to the front of the majority of other lots
on the street, in which case the setback shall be 20 feet.
      (5)   Rear yard. Every lot shall have a rear yard of not less than 25
feet. Necessary buildings or structures for accessory uses shall not occupy
more than 40% of the required rear yard area, provided that where such rear
yard abuts on streets, no garage or other building for accessory use shall be
placed nearer than 15 feet from the line of such street. Further, regarding
corner lots, where such rear yard abuts on an adjacent lot to the rear, the
accessory building setback from such lot line shall be not less than five feet.
If alleys are present to the rear lot line of the property, no building or
accessory building shall be erected within five feet of the alley right-of-way.
      (6)   Side yards. Every lot shall have two side yards, neither of which
shall be less than 10% of the width of the lot. The width of the lot shall be
determined at the front setback line of the structure to be built. If alleys
are present to the rear lot line of the property, no building or accessory
building shall be erected within five feet of the alley right-of-way.
      (7)   Building floor area. Every dwelling shall have a first floor area
of not less than 720 square feet if the dwelling is one story or one and one-
half stories in height, or 475 square feet if the dwelling is two stories in
height.
      (8)   Density. Not more than one principal building or structure shall be
permitted on any lot.
      (9)   Multi-family dwellings consisting of two units. Shall provide at
least four off-street parking stalls. A multi-family dwelling which proposes 16
or more off-street parking stalls shall also provide safe and convenient
facilities for non-motorized parking, which may include features such as a
bicycle rack, covered stalls for non-motorized vehicle parking, bike lockers,
or a similar feature.
      (10)   Multi-family dwellings of three or more dwelling units. Shall
require a site plan approved by the Planning Commission, pursuant to §§
156.125 through
156.130, including the following requirements.
         (a)   The minimum lot area required shall be increased by an
additional 300 square feet for each dwelling unit in excess of two.
         (b)   Each multi-family dwelling shall have two off-street parking
stalls per dwelling unit for each of the first four dwelling units, and one and
one-half off-street parking stalls for all dwelling units in excess of four.
         (c)   A site plan shall be submitted with the application for a
special land use permit, which site plan shall be drawn to scale and shall
contain and demonstrate the following:
            1.   The lot lines and dimensions of the lot upon which such multi-
family dwelling is to be erected;
            2.   The location and dimensions of the multi-family dwelling on
said lot;
            3.   The location and dimensions of all off-street parking stalls
provided for said multi-family dwelling
            4.   The location of all structures on lots abutting the lot upon
which the multi-family dwelling is to be constructed;
            5.   The size and location of any and all accessory buildings or
structures to be placed upon said lot; and
            6.   Such other information as may be reasonably required by the
Planning Commission as will enable it to make a determination as to whether the
proposed multi-family dwelling will comply with all of the standards described
in §§
156.065 through
156.066 and all other provisions of these codified ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 1269.05) (Ord. passed 7-9-2020; Ord. passed 5-9-2024)
§ 156.047 RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RR).
   (A)   Intent. The Rural Residential District is designed primarily for
single-family residential home use with lots larger than other areas of the
city. This is to create a more rural character to the district than found in
the R-1 and R-2 Districts. The larger lots are to ensure a safe, potable water
supply and/or adequate area for on-site wastewater treatment.
(Prior Code, § 1270.01)
   (B)   Permitted principal uses.
      (1)   Adult foster care family home;
      (2)   Day care home, family;
       (3)   Essential services;
      (4)   Residence, single-family; and
(Prior Code, § 1270.02)
      (5)   Accessory dwelling unit.
   (C)   Special land uses authorized by permit. The following uses of land and
structures may be permitted in this district by application for and the
issuance of a special land use permit as provided for in §§
156.065 and
156.066:
      (1)   Adult foster care small group home;
      (2)   Adult foster care large group home;
      (3)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (4)   Bed and breakfast establishment;
      (5)   Cemetery;
      (6)   Day care center;
      (7)   Day care home, group;
      (8)   Golf course;
      (9)   Health care facilities, in-patient;
      (10)   Home occupations;
      (11)   Library;
      (12)   Mobile home park;
      (13)   Planned unit development;
      (14)   Recreational uses: cross-country ski trail, fields (soccer,
hockey, ballfield), golf course, golf driving range, ice rink, mini-golf
course, passive park;
      (15)   Religious institution;
      (16)   Residence, multiple-family;
      (17)   School;
      (18)   Wireless communications facility; and
      (19)   Wireless communications facility, attached.
(Prior Code, § 1270.03)
   (D)   Accessory buildings and uses. Accessory structures normally associated
with permitted uses when located on the same lot or lots, subject to the
following conditions.
      (1)    No more than three accessory buildings shall be permitted on the
lots served by the principal building, two of these buildings may be accessory
dwelling units.
      (2)   An accessory building may occupy not more than 50% of a rear yard
area; provided, however, that the total floor area (being the entire area
enclosed within the exterior walls) of all detached accessory building on a
parcel of land, shall be limited as follows.
If the area of the parcel of land is: Then the maximum total floor area of all
                                      detached accessory buildings shall be:
                                        Then the maximum total floor area of
If the area of the parcel of land is:   all detached accessory buildings shall
                                        be:
Less than 2 acres                       1,200 sf
At least 2 acres but less than 3 acres  1,600 sf
At least 3 acres but less than 5 acres  2,000 sf
At least 5 acres but less than 8 acres  2,400 sf
At least 8 acres but less than 10 acres 3,000 sf
                                        4,000 sf plus 200 square feet for each
                                        acre increment above 10 acres up to a
10 acres or more*                       maximum of 8,000 square feet. By way of
                                        example, a property containing 12 acres
                                        of land may have 4,400 square feet of
                                        detached accessory buildings.
NOTES TO TABLE:
*When the total of all detached accessory buildings exceeds 4,000 square feet
in area, the applicant shall provide to the city’s Zoning Administrator a
restrictive covenant, such as a deed restriction, as recorded with the county’s
Register of Deeds indicating that any future division of the subject lot or
parcel shall meet the above limits for lot area and accessory building ground
floor area provided in §
156.047. Such instrument shall be provided to the city’s Zoning Administrator
prior to the issuance of a zoning permit.
 
      (3)   All accessory buildings in excess of 150 square feet shall be
constructed of similar materials or have the same general appearance as the
principal building, except for those used in farming operations.
      (4)   The height of the accessory building shall not exceed 35 feet.
(Prior Code, § 1270.04)
      (5)   Prior to zoning approving for an ADU, property owner must provide
approval for well and septic from the Marquette County Health Department.
   (E)   General regulations.
      (1)   Height of buildings. No building or structure thereof shall be
erected or altered to a height exceeding 35 feet, except a permitted structure
may exceed this limit by one foot for each foot in excess of ten feet that the
building or structure is set back from all property lines, except that no
building may exceed 75 feet.
      (2)   Lot area. No building shall be erected or altered unless it is on a
lot having an area of not less than one acre. This regulation shall not apply
to lots already platted and recorded as of the effective date of this section
where the owner of such platted lots does not own a sufficient amount of
adjacent land to permit compliance, provided that all other requirements of the
section are met.
      (3)   Lot frontage. Every lot shall have frontage of not less than 150
feet along a street. This regulation does not apply to lots already platted and
recorded as of the effective date of this section where the owner of such
platted lots does not own a sufficient amount of adjacent land to permit
compliance, provided all other requirements of this section are met.
      (4)   Setbacks. There shall be a building setback line of not less than
25 feet or a setback line consistent with adjacent structures. On every corner
lot, the minimum setback distance shall be 25 feet on the short side of the lot
and may be as little as 15 feet on the long side of the lot, except for those
lots where the long side is parallel to the front of the majority of other lots
on the street, in which case the setback shall be 25 feet.
      (5)   Rear yard. Every lot shall have a rear yard of not less than 25
feet. Necessary buildings or structures for accessory uses shall not occupy
more than 40% of the required rear yard area, provided that where such rear
yard abuts on streets, no garage or other building for accessory use shall be
placed nearer than 15 feet from the line of such street. Further, regarding
corner lots, where such rear yard abuts on an adjacent lot to the rear, the
accessory building setback from such lot line shall be not less than five feet.
If alleys are present to the rear lot line of the property, no building or
accessory building shall be erected within five feet of the alley right-of-way.
      (6)   Side yards. Every lot shall have two side yards, neither of which
shall be less than 10% of the width of the lot, or not less than 15 feet for
lots of 150 feet or more in width. The width of the lot shall be determined at
the front setback line of the structure to be built. If alleys are present to
the rear lot line of the property, no building or accessory building shall be
erected within five feet of the alley right-of-way.
      (7)   Building floor area. Every dwelling shall have a first floor area
of not less than 720 square feet if the dwelling is one story or one and one-
half stories in height, or 475 square feet if the dwelling is two stories in
height.
      (8)   Density. Not more than one principal building or structure shall be
permitted on any lot.
(Prior Code, § 1270.05) (Ord. passed 12-13-2014; Ord. passed 7-9-2020; Ord.
passed 5-9-2024)
§ 156.048 BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-1).
   (A)   Intent. The Commercial Business District (B-1) is intended to provide
for commercial uses which are appropriate for high density development, such as
in the Central Business District. Uses in this district occasionally occupy
buildings which share common walls and front directly on the sidewalks. Where
off-street parking is provided it is behind the business or at a nearby parking
lot. Residential uses are not permitted in the district, with the exception of
dwellings in the upper floors of commercial establishments and as a special
land use authorized by permit.
(Prior Code, § 1271.01)
   (B)   Permitted principal uses.
      (1)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (2)   Barber and beauty shop;
      (3)   Bed and breakfast establishments and bed and breakfast inn;
      (4)   Bowling alley;
      (5)   Business service establishment;
      (6)   Commercial printing;
      (7)   Conference center;
      (8)   Convenience retail;
      (9)   Cultural facility;
      (10)   Essential services;
      (11)   Flea market and farmer’s market;
      (12)   Fuel sales establishment;
      (13)   Funeral home;
      (14)   Greenhouse, greenhouse with nursery;
      (15)   Health care facility, out-patient or in-patient;
      (16)   Hotels, motels;
      (17)   Indoor recreational facility;
      (18)   Laundromat;
      (19)   Library;
      (20)   Lodge hall;
      (21)   Office building;
      (22)   Office parks;
      (23)   Personal service establishment;
      (24)   Public buildings;
      (25)   Religious institutions;
      (26)   Residence, upper floor commercial building;
      (27)   Restaurants with or without drive thru;
      (28)   Retail food establishment;
      (29)   Retail outlet store;
      (30)   Retail sales establishment;
      (31)   Sidewalk café;
      (32)   Tavern;
      (33)   Theater;
      (34)   Trade or technical schools;
      (35)   Veterinary clinic;
      (36)   Video arcade; and
      (37)   Wholesale sales establishment.
(Prior Code, 1271.02)
   (C)   Special land uses authorized by permit. The following uses of land and
structures may be permitted in this district by application for and the
issuance of a special land use as provided for in §§
156.065 and
156.066:
      (1)   Automobile sales or showrooms, new or used;
      (2)   Day care center;
      (3)   Dry cleaning establishment;
      (4)   Fairground;
      (5)   Food processing establishment;
      (6)   Motel, hotel, cabin and resort;
      (7)   Planned unit development;
      (8)   Recreational uses: campground; passive park;
      (9)   Recycling collection point;
      (10)   Residence, single-family;
      (11)   Residence, multiple-family;
      (12)   Retail warehouse outlet;
      (13)   Vehicle repair garage; and
      (14)   Wireless communication facilities, attached.
(Prior Code, § 1271.03)
   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Any accessory use or structure that is
normally associated with a permitted use.
(Prior Code, § 1271.04)
   (E)   General regulations.
      (1)   Site plan. No building permit, certificate of occupancy or zoning
compliance permit shall be issued authorizing any development on a lot in the
Business District (B-1) without first securing the approval of the Planning
Commission of a site plan pursuant to §§
156.125 through
156.130 and with all other requirements of this section.
      (2)   Obscuring wall, fence, or shrub. Whenever the parking plan for a
development in the Commercial Business 1 District (B-1) is laid out so as to
bring automobile headlights toward any residential land, an obscuring wall,
fence, or shrub four feet, six inches in height shall be provided along that
side of the parking area.
      (3)   Height of buildings. No building or structure shall exceed a height
of 75 feet.
      (4)   Prohibited uses. Any process or activity resulting in the emission
of odor, fumes, smoke, dust, excessive noise, or vibration, or of a character
generally detrimental and disturbing to the district as a whole shall be
prohibited, unless such processes or activities meet federal, state, and local
regulations pertaining to health and safety, and do not affect other
properties.
      (5)   Front facing doorways.
      (6)   Any new development must provide at least three non-motorized
bicycle parking spots.
      (7)   Tree preservation standards.
(Prior Code, § 1271.05) (Ord. passed 7-19-2012; Ord. passed 9-8-2022)
§ 156.049 BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-2).
   (A)   Intent. The Commercial Business District (B-2) is intended to provide
for a diversified, lower density commercial district, containing businesses
which may require larger lots or generate more traffic, lighting, or other
impacts on adjacent uses. Uses in the district are oriented toward automobile
traffic. Residential use may be permitted and could be an accessory use if
associated with a business, by application for and issuance of a special land
use permit, as provided in §§
156.065 and
156.066.
(Prior Code, § 1272.01)
   (B)   Permitted principal uses.
      (1)   Amusement parks, fairgrounds, miniature golf courses;
      (2)   Automobile wash facility;
      (3)   Automobile sales or showrooms, new or used;
      (4)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (5)   Barber and beauty shop;
      (6)   Bed and breakfast establishment;
      (7)   Boat livery;
      (8)   Bowling alley;
      (9)   Building material sales and storage;
      (10)   Business service establishment;
      (11)   Commercial printing;
      (12)   Conference center;
      (13)   Convenience retail;
      (14)   Cultural facility;
      (15)   Dry cleaning establishment, laundromat;
      (16)   Essential services;
      (17)   Flea market, farmer’s market;
      (18)   Fuel sales establishment;
      (19)   Funeral homes;
      (20)   Golf courses;
      (21)   Greenhouse, greenhouse with nursery;
      (22)   Health care facility, in-patient or out-patient;
      (23)   Laundromat;
      (24)   Library;
      (25)   Lodge hall;
      (26)   Mini-storage facility;
      (27)   Motel, hotel, cabins and resort;
      (28)   Office building;
      (29)   Office parks;
      (30)   Personal service establishment;
      (31)   Public building;
      (32)   Recycling collection point;
      (33)   Religious institution;
      (34)   Restaurant, with or without drive-thru;
      (35)   Retail food establishment;
      (36)   Retail outlet store;
      (37)   Retail sales establishment;
      (38)   Retail warehouse outlet;
      (39)   Shopping center;
      (40)   Tavern;
      (41)   Theater;
      (42)   Trade and technical school;
      (43)   Utility substation;
      (44)   Vehicle repair garage;
      (45)   Video arcade;
      (46)   Warehousing; and
      (47)   Wholesale establishment.
(Prior Code, § 1272.02)
   (C)   Special land uses authorized by permit. The following uses of land and
structures may be permitted in this district by application for and the
issuance of a special land use as provided for in §§
156.065 and
156.066:
      (1)   Adult foster care large group home;
      (2)   Assisted living facility, nursing home;
      (3)   Standard outdoor advertising structure used solely for advertising
or publicity purposes. The Planning Commission shall be guided by §§
156.065 and
156.066 when making decisions regarding standard outdoor advertising structures
as special land use.
         (a)   Such billboards shall not extend more than 15 feet above street
grade;
         (b)   Such billboards shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet from the
edge of the street right-of-way;
         (c)   There shall be a minimum distance of 1,000 feet between
billboards; and
         (d)   Billboards along public highway rights-of-way shall comply with
all laws, regulations and requirements of the state and its various agencies
and departments.
      (4)   Contractor yards;
      (5)   Day care center;
      (6)   Food processing establishment;
      (7)   Freight handling facility;
      (8)   Greenhouse with nursery;
      (9)   Kennels;
      (10)   Planned unit development;
      (11)   Recreational uses: boat launch; campground; fishing pier; mini-
golf;
      (12)   Recycling collection point;
      (13)   Residence, multiple-family;
      (14)   Residence, upper floor commercial building;
      (15)   Sidewalk café;
      (16)   Temporary outdoor facility;
      (17)   Use, building or structure constructed or erected within the Teal
Lake Overlay District (§
156.054 of these codified ordinances). Such proposed uses shall be evaluated
pursuant to the requirements in §§
156.065 and
156.066 and in the Teal Lake Overlay District;
      (18)   Veterinary clinic;
      (19)   Wireless communication facility;
      (20)   Wireless communication facility, attached; and
      (21)   Wireless communication towers.
(Prior Code, § 1272.03)
   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Any accessory use or structure that is
normally associated with a permitted use.
(Prior Code, § 1272.04)
   (E)   General regulations.
      (1)   Site plan. No building permit, certificate of occupancy, or zoning
compliance permit shall be issued authorizing any development on a lot in the
Business District (B-2) without first securing the approval of the Planning
Commission of a site plan pursuant to §§
156.125 through
156.130 demonstrating that such proposed development will comply with all of
the standards described in §§
156.065 and
156.066 and with all other requirements of this section.
      (2)   Obscuring wall, fence, or shrub. Whenever the parking plan for a
development in the Commercial Business 2 (B-2) District is laid out so as to
bring automobile headlights toward any residential land, an obscuring wall,
fence, or shrub four feet, six inches in height shall be provided along that
side of the parking area.
      (3)   Height of buildings. No building or structure thereof shall be
erected or altered to a height exceeding 50 feet except a permitted non-
residential structure may exceed this limit by one foot for each foot in excess
of ten feet that the building or structure is set back from all property lines.
      (4)   Lot area. No building shall be erected or altered unless it is on a
lot having an area of not less than 9,600 square feet. This regulation shall
not apply to lots already platted and recorded as of the effective date of this
section where the owner of such plated lots does not own a sufficient amount of
adjacent land to permit compliance, provided that all other requirements of the
section are met.
      (5)   Lighting. Lighting shall be installed so as to avoid shining on to
the waters of the lake or on to adjacent lots. Each light pole or structure,
including signs, shall be 30 feet in height or less.
      (6)   Lot frontage. Uses other than residential shall have no
requirements as to lot frontage, front yard, rear yard, side yard, or coverage.
      (7)   Prohibited uses. Any process or activity resulting in the emission
of odor, fumes, smoke, dust, excessive noise, or vibration, or of a character
generally detrimental and disturbing to the district as a whole, shall be
prohibited, unless such processes or activities meet federal, state, and local
regulations pertaining to health and safety, and do not affect other
properties.
(Prior Code, § 1272.04) (Ord. passed 2-3-2014)
§ 156.050 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I).
   (A)   Intent. The Industrial District (I) is intended to accommodate
establishments when the finished product generally consists of small machine
parts, small electronic equipment or similar items.
(Prior Code, § 1273.01)
   (B)   Permitted principal uses.
      (1)   Automobile wash facility;
      (2)   Automobile sales or showrooms, new or used;
      (3)   Bottling works;
      (4)   Building material sales and storage;
      (5)   Business service establishment;
      (6)   Commercial printing;
      (7)   Contractor yard;
      (8)   Essential services;
      (9)   Light manufacturing and assembly;
      (10)   Mini-storage facility;
      (11)   Office buildings;
      (12)   Office parks;
      (13)   Public building;
      (14)   Recycling center, junk yard, salvage yard;
      (15)   Recycling collection point;
      (16)   Recycling plant;
      (17)   Trade and technical school;
      (18)   Utility substation;
      (19)   Vehicle body shop;
      (20)   Vehicle repair garages; and
      (21)   Wholesale and warehousing facility.
(Prior Code, § 1273.02)
   (C)   Special land uses authorized by permit. The following uses of land and
structures may be permitted in this district by application for and the
issuance of a special land use as provided for in §§
156.065 and
156.066:
      (1)   Asphalt plant;
      (2)   Banks and financial institutions;
      (3)   Bowling alley;
      (4)   Conference center;
      (5)   Convenience retail;
      (6)   Food processing establishment;
      (7)   Freight handling facility;
      (8)   Fuel sales establishment;
      (9)   Gravel/sand pit;
      (10)   Greenhouse, greenhouse with nursery;
      (11)   Heavy manufacture and assembly;
      (12)   Marijuana establishment;
      (13)   Planned unit development;
      (14)   Retail warehouse outlet;
      (15)   Storage of flammable liquids or gas facility;
      (16)   Use, building or structure constructed or erected within the Teal
Lake Overlay District;
      (17)   Veterinary clinic;
      (18)   Wireless communication facility;
      (19)   Wireless communication facility, attached;
      (20)   Wireless communication tower; and
      (21)   Woodyard.
(Prior Code, § 1273.03)
   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Any accessory use or structure that is
normally associated with a permitted use.
(Prior Code, § 1273.04)
   (E)   General regulations.
      (1)   Site plan. No building permit, certificate of occupancy, or zoning
compliance permit shall be issued authorizing any development on a lot in the
Industrial District (I) without first securing the approval of the Planning
Commission of a site plan pursuant to §§ 
156.125 through
156.130 and with all other requirements of this subchapter.
      (2)   Height of buildings. No building or structure shall exceed a height
of 75 feet or six stories.
(Prior Code, § 1273.05) (Ord. passed 2-13-2020)
§ 156.051 PUBLIC AREA DISTRICT.
   (A)   Intent. The Public Area District (PA) is intended to establish and
preserve appropriate access for city, public, or quasi-public uses which are
designed to serve the entire community or specific section of it, except such
uses as constitute a nuisance in the place where conducted, and to allow the
necessary flexibility to address specific land use proposals regarding public
lands to make informed decisions in the best interests of the public, health,
safety, and welfare of the city and its residents.
(Prior Code, § 1274.01)
   (B)   Permitted principal uses. Land held for public use.
(Prior Code, § 1274.01)
   (C)   Special land uses authorized by permit.
      (1)   Cemeteries;
      (2)   Community school district facilities;
      (3)   Concessions;
      (4)   Essential services;
      (5)   Libraries;
      (6)   Municipal buildings;
      (7)   Municipal water/wastewater facilities;
      (8)   Planned unit development;
      (9)   Police and fire stations;
      (10)   Post offices;
      (11)   Public recreation facilities including parks, playgrounds, camps,
camp grounds, winter sports facilities, trails, golf courses, and similar
recreation facilities;
      (12)   Solid waste transfer stations;
      (13)   Temporary outdoor activities; and
      (14)   Wireless communications facilities.
(Prior Code, § 1274.03)
   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Any accessory use or structure that is
normally associated with a permitted use.
(Prior Code, § 1274.04)
   (E)   General regulations.
      (1)   Site plan. No building permit, certificate of occupancy, or zoning
compliance permit shall be issued authorizing any development on a lot in the
Public Area District (PA) without first securing the approval of the Planning
Commission of a site plan pursuant to §§
156.125 through
156.130 demonstrating that such proposed development will comply with all of
the standards described in §§
156.065 and
156.066 and with all other requirements of this section.
      (2)   Prohibited uses. Any process or activity resulting in the emission
of odor, fumes, smoke, dust, excessive noise, or vibration, or of a character
generally detrimental and disturbing to the district as a whole, shall be
prohibited, unless such processes or activities meet federal, state, and local
regulations pertaining to health and safety and do not affect other properties.
(Prior Code, § 1274.05) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.052 MINING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Intent. The Mining District is intended to accommodate uses associated
with ore mining, excavation or extractive processing. The district includes
caving grounds and abandoned shafts and mines.
(Prior Code, § 1275.01)
   (B)   Permitted principal uses.
      (1)   Gravel/sand pits; and
      (2)   Mining operations (extractive processing).
(Prior Code, § 1275.02)
   (C)   Special land uses authorized by permit. The following uses of land and
structures may be permitted in this district by application for and the
issuance of a special land use permit as provided for in §§
156.065 and
156.066:
      (1)   Recreational uses such as tracks (ORV, bicycle, BMX, motor cross,
go-carts, snowmobile, car, midget racing), motorized and non-motorized trails,
athletic fields, and similar uses;
      (2)   Uses such as building or structure constructed or erected within
the Teal Lake Overlay District (§
156.054 of these codified ordinances). Such proposed uses shall be evaluated
pursuant to the requirements in §§
156.065 and
156.066 and in the Teal Lake Overlay District;
      (3)   Wireless communication facility;
      (4)   Wireless communication facility, attached; and
      (5)   Woodyard.
(Prior Code, § 1275.03)
   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Any accessory use or structure that is
normally associated with a permitted use.
(Prior Code, § 1275.04)
   (E)   General regulations. No building or structure shall exceed a height of
75 feet or six stories.
(Prior Code, § 1275.05) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.053 NATURAL RESOURCE DISTRICT (NR).
   (A)   Intent. The Natural Resource District is intended to provide open
space in conjunction with recreational uses and other services and to preserve
the character of the land in the city which has outstanding scenic and/or
recreational qualities. Development shall only be authorized by issuance of a
special land use permit.
(Prior Code, § 1276.01)
   (B)   Special land uses authorized by permit. The following uses of land and
structures may be permitted in this district by application for and the
issuance of a special land use permit as provided for in §§
156.065 and
156.066:
      (1)   Non-motorized recreational uses such as archery range (outdoor),
natural campground, cross-county skiing or other such trails, fishing pier,
picnic area, passive park, swimming beach;
      (2)   Temporary outdoor activity;
      (3)   Nature center; and
      (4)   Essential services.
(Prior Code, § 1276.02) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.054 TEAL LAKE OVERLAY DISTRICT (TL).
   (A)   Intent. To prevent development near the shoreline of Teal Lake which
would have a detrimental effect upon the purity of the water, the character of
the lake, or the public enjoyment of the scenic views and the shoreline and
waters of Teal Lake.
(Prior Code, § 1278.01)
   (B)   Special land uses authorized by permit. Any permitted use, or special
land use, permitted by the underlying district, provided said use complies with
this sector and §§
156.065 and
156.066, special land uses. However, no building, structure, or parking lot
will be erected or placed within 200 feet of the high-water mark of Teal Lake,
without prior approval by the Planning Commission as a special land use in
accordance with §§
156.065 and
156.066.
(Prior Code, § 1278.02)
   (C)   District boundaries. Teal Lake shall be defined as encompassing all
the lake area as defined by law, which lies north of U.S. Highway 41. The
boundaries of the Teal Lake Overlay District shall be within a 200 foot
perimeter around Teal Lake, measured from the high-water mark of 1,367 feet.
(Prior Code, § 1278.03)
   (D)   General regulations. The following general regulations will apply to
all buildings or structures, in addition to all requirements of the underlying
zoning district.
      (1)   Rear yard. There shall be a setback line of not less than 50 feet
from the high-water mark of Teal Lake.
      (2)   Side yards.
         (a)   Every site shall have two side yards, neither of which shall be
less than 10% of the width of the sites.
         (b)   The width of the site shall be determined at the front setback
line of the structure to be built.
      (3)   Lighting.
         (a)   Lighting shall be installed so as to avoid shining on to the
waters of the lake or on to adjacent lots.
         (b)   Each light pole or structure, including signs, shall be 30 feet
in height or less.
(Prior Code, § 1278.04) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
SPECIAL LAND USES
§ 156.065 SPECIAL LAND USE APPROVAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Approval by Planning Commission required; standards. Whenever special
land uses are proposed, such uses shall be permitted only after review and
approval by the Planning Commission as established in §§
151.01 through
151.09.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall approve a special land use only upon a
finding of compliance with each of the following standards.
      (1)   The special land use shall be designed, constructed, operated, and
maintained in a manner harmonious with the character of adjacent property and
the surrounding area.
      (2)   The special land use shall not change the essential character of
the surrounding area.
      (3)   The special land use shall not interfere with the general enjoyment
of adjacent property.
      (4)   The special land use shall represent an improvement to the property
under consideration and the surrounding area in general.
      (5)   The special land use shall not be hazardous to adjacent property or
involve uses, activities, materials, or equipment which will be detrimental to
the health, safety, or welfare of persons or property through the excessive
production of traffic, noise, smoke, odor, fumes, or glare.
      (6)   The special land use shall be adequately served by essential public
facilities and services, or it shall be demonstrated that the person
responsible for the proposed conditional use shall be able to continually
provide adequately for the services and facilities deemed essential to the
conditional use under consideration.
      (7)   The special land use shall not place demands on public services and
facilities in excess of current capacity.
      (8)   The special land use shall provide context-appropriate design
features that are complimentary to the goal of facilitating complete streets.
This standard may be applied at the Planning Commission’s discretion, if in the
Commission’s opinion, it would enhance the mobility of users in and around the
development without creating a substantial financial burden on the developer.
(Prior Code, § 1280.01) (Ord. passed 7-9-2020)
§ 156.066 CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL; ENFORCEMENT; APPEALS; NOTICE.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may impose conditions with the approval of a
special land use which are necessary to ensure compliance with the standards
for approval and any other applicable standards contained in this subchapter.
Such conditions shall be considered an integral part of the special land use
permit and shall be enforced by the city’s Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Any decision made by the Planning Commission concerning special land
uses may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (C)   The notice requirements set forth in this subchapter and state law
shall be observed relative to the consideration of all special land uses by the
Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 1280.02) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
§ 156.080 INTENT.
   To permit greater flexibility in the use and design of structures and land
in situations where modifications of specific provisions of this subchapter
will not be contrary to its intent and purpose or significantly inconsistent
with the planning on which it is based and will not be harmful to the
neighborhood in which they occur. A planned unit development (PUD) should
result in development which maximizes the provision of open space, preserves
natural features, and provides a harmonious arrangement of structures and uses.
More than one principal use and/or structure per lot may be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 1281.01) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.081 ELIGIBILITY.
   In order to be approved by the Planning Commission, a proposed planned unit
development shall:
   (A)   On parcels at least two acres in size:
      (1)   Provide for open space and preservation of natural features;
clustered development and similar design methods are encouraged;
      (2)   Minimize the amount of impervious surfaces created; and
      (3)   Provide a harmonious and efficient arrangement of all structures
and uses in relation to topography, the size and type of plot, the character of
adjoining property, and the type and size of buildings. Arrangements of
buildings shall be done in such a way to utilize natural topography, existing
vegetation, and views within and beyond the site.
   (B)   On parcels over ten acres in size:
      (1)   Provide for open space and the preservation of natural features;
      (2)   Minimize the amount of new impervious surfaces created. The
developer shall take into consideration the impact of the size and location of
existing impervious surfaces when proposing new impervious surfaces; and
      (3)   Arrangements of proposed buildings shall be done in such a way to
utilize natural topography, existing vegetation, and views within and beyond
the site.
(Prior Code, § 1281.02) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.082 APPLICATION AND MODIFICATION POWERS.
   (A)   The applicant shall submit an application to the Planning Commission
in accordance with the procedures set forth herein.
   (B)   In acting upon the application, the Planning Commission may alter
setback requirements, building size limits, off-street parking regulations,
landscaping rules, and density and intensity limits. It may also authorize uses
not permitted in the district where the lot is located, providing such uses are
desirable or convenient for the users of the lot as developed or the immediate
neighborhood and provided that such uses are planned so as to assure that they
will not materially alter the existing character of the neighborhood. The
provisions of this subchapter shall be applied to the existing zoning district,
as defined on the zoning map, where the PUD is to be located.
(Prior Code, § 1281.03) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.083 PRELIMINARY CONFERENCE.
   Prior to preparing a formal application, the applicant shall meet with the
Zoning Administrator to discuss the proposed development and application
procedures. No decision regarding any proposed PUD is to be established at this
conference.
(Prior Code, § 1281.04) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.084 PRELIMINARY APPLICATION.
   (A)   (1)   Following the preliminary conference, the applicant shall
prepare and submit 12 copies of a preliminary application which consists of the
following written and graphic documents, together with any fee(s) which have
been imposed by the City Council.
      (2)   A written description of the proposed PUD, including:
         (a)   How the proposed PUD is consistent with the intent of this
subchapter, and with the eligibility criteria in §
156.081;
         (b)   A statement identifying all intended uses, including future
sales or leasing arrangements of all or portions of the proposed PUD;
         (c)   A legal description of the proposed PUD parcel;
         (d)   A listing of all owners, holders of easements, and other
interested parties; and
         (e)   A projected assessment of the proposed PUD demands on public
services and utilities, including, but not limited to, water, sewer, electrical
service, streets and roads, sidewalks, refuse disposal, and emergency services.
Non-residential proposals shall include an indication of the number of
employees, number of floors, and estimated usable floor area.
   (B)   A preliminary site plan shall be provided on 12 identical copies on
one or more sheets, at a scale adequate to illustrate the proposed activity,
and shall include the following information. If the preliminary site plan has
been prepared in digital format (.dwg, .dxf, and the like), a copy shall be
provided to the city:
      (1)   The legal description and street address of the lot(s);
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner, developer,
and/or designer;
      (3)   An area location map, the proposed use, zoning of adjacent parcels,
and existing zoning classification;
      (4)   Drawing date and revision date;
      (5)   North arrow and scale;
      (6)   The actual dimensions of the lot(s) as shown with a signature by a
licensed surveyor, engineer, architect, or registered landscape architect, with
survey stakes visible. The requirement for a survey may be waived if building
dimensions will not change as a result of the proposed activity;
      (7)   The relationship of the subject lot(s) to abutting properties;
      (8)   Depiction of all existing structures, including signs, on the
subject lot(s) shown to scale;
      (9)   The dimensions of all proposed structures on the subject lot(s),
including location, finished floor area, exterior buildings elevations, and
height of proposed buildings;
      (10)   Distances between existing structures and proposed structures on
the subject lot(s) and distance between lot lines and proposed structures;
      (11)   Use of all existing or proposed structures on the subject lot(s);
      (12)   The location of all proposed fences and planting screens or other
buffers;
      (13)   The location and right-of-way widths of all streets, alleys,
private road easements, and/or railroads located within or abutting the subject
lot(s);
      (14)   Named streets should be labeled;
      (15)   The location of all existing and proposed ingress/egress points,
sidewalks, driveways, and parking areas on the subject lot(s);
      (16)   The locations of existing ingress/egress points, driveways,
streets, alleys, and/or railroads within 300 feet of the boundaries of the
subject lot(s);
      (17)   The size and location of all existing and proposed public and
private utilities;
      (18)   The location of natural features affecting development, such as
rock outcrops, water, wetlands, and the like;
      (19)   The location of existing and proposed surface water impoundments
and surface water drainage patterns;
      (20)   The location and extent of all planned earth movement;
      (21)   The location of areas on the parcel that will be utilized for the
storage of snow and the resulting anticipated drainage patterns that will
result from the melting snow;
      (22)   The location of proposed lighting and the direction of the
illumination;
      (23)   The locations, sizes, and materials to be used for trash
receptacle areas and methods of screening said areas;
      (24)   Recreation areas and trails;
      (25)   Any other information necessary, in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator, to establish compliance with the provisions of this subchapter
or any other applicable ordinances; and
      (26)   A development schedule; a list of proposed covenants or deed
restrictions; any proposed maintenance agreements on open space or common
ownership areas; and a description of the type of financial guarantees to be
utilized to ensure PUD development.
(Prior Code, § 1281.05) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.085 WAIVER OF FINAL APPLICATION.
   The applicant may request that the requirement of this section for a final
application be waived, and include all of the information required for a final
application with the preliminary application. If, upon submittal, the Zoning
Administrator finds that all items required by §§
156.084 and
156.087 are included the requirement for a final application and final public
hearing may be waived. If the requirement for a final application is waived,
the public hearing notice and all other materials pertaining to the preliminary
application should clearly state that the final application requirement has
been waived, and that no further public hearings on this application are
anticipated.
(Prior Code, § 1281.06) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.086 APPROVAL OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   Within 60 days of the Zoning Administrator’s receipt of the complete
preliminary application the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing in
accordance with the requirements of this subchapter to review the preliminary
application. In making its review of any portion of the PUD preliminary
application, the Planning Commission shall determine whether the proposed PUD
is consistent with the standards outlined in §§
156.089 and
156.065 and other relevant provisions of this subchapter. Following the review,
the Planning Commission shall approve, approve with conditions or subject to
modifications, or deny the preliminary application. Action taken on the
preliminary application shall be specified in writing, including the reasons
for approval or denial of the application, and any conditions imposed as part
of approval with conditions.
   (B)   Approval of the preliminary application does not constitute recording
of the plan nor authorize the issuance of building permits.
   (C)   Within a maximum of nine months following preliminary approval, the
applicant shall file for final application as outlined below. For good cause,
the Planning Commission may extend this time period for up to six months. If
the applicant fails to apply for the final application for any reason, approval
or conditional approval shall be revoked.
(Prior Code, § 1281.07) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.087 FINAL APPLICATION.
   (A)   Following approval or approval with conditions of the preliminary
application, the applicant shall prepare and submit 12 copies of a final
application which shall include:
      (1)   All information as required by the Planning Commission for
preliminary approval or conditional approval of the preliminary application,
including modifications required to meet conditions imposed on the preliminary
application, if any;
      (2)   Signed copies of any preliminary plats, in accordance with the Land
Division Act (Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended);
      (3)   A detailed development time schedule;
      (4)   Deed restrictions or covenants of the parcel; and
      (5)   Any other plans, documentation, or specifications, as the Planning
Commission may require to ensure final engineering review and approval, which
may include building plans, elevation and perspective drawings, drainage, road,
or other facility designs, and letters of commitment or intent ensuring
adequate financing for public utilities and/or services.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall hold a second public hearing within 30
days of the Zoning Administrator’s receipt of the complete final application,
and shall determine whether or not the final plans substantially conform to the
approved preliminary development plan and are in proper form for final
recording. Action taken on the final application shall be specified in writing,
including the reasons for approval or denial of the application, and any
conditions imposed as part of approval with conditions.
(Prior Code, § 1281.08) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.088 AUTHORIZATION AND ISSUANCE OF SPECIAL LAND USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Where the Planning Commission determines that the final application is
consistent with this subchapter and other requirements thereof, and is in
proper form for recording, it shall authorize a PUD special land use permit for
development and use in accordance with the final accepted development plan. The
PUD special land use permit shall be issued on the condition that construction
will be commenced within 12 months of the date of issue. Authorizing the PUD
special land use permit shall not obligate the Planning Commission or the City
Council to enforce any deed restrictions or covenants of the development
parcel.
   (B)   The PUD special land use permit shall be issued following evidence of
recording of the PUD final development plan with the county’s Register of
Deeds.
(Prior Code, § 1281.09) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.089 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   All preliminary and final applications shall be evaluated with respect to
the following standards.
   (A)   Yard, setback, lot size, type of dwelling unit, height, and frontage
requirements and restrictions. May be waived for the PUD, provided, however,
that the spirit and intent of this subchapter as defined in the intent
statement, are incorporated within the total development plan. The Planning
Commission may determine that certain setbacks be established within all or a
portion of the perimeter of the site, and shall determine the suitability of
the total development plan in accordance with the intent of this subchapter.
   (B)   Access. Every structure or dwelling unit shall have access to a public
street, or to a private roadway built to city specifications and dedicated to
common use. A maintenance agreement shall be required for private roadways.
Every structure or dwelling unit shall have access to a public street, or to a
private roadway built to city specifications and dedicated to common use. A
maintenance agreement shall be required for private roadways. Non-motorized
facilities shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed
circulation system as established on the official map and/or master plan.
   (C)   Sidewalks. For areas of residential development and significant
pedestrian use, all streets and roadways within the PUD shall have a sidewalk
at least five feet in width on at least one side of the street or roadway,
unless otherwise excluded by the Planning Commission.
   (D)   Off-street parking. Parking convenient to all dwelling units and other
uses shall be provided. Common driveways, parking areas, walks, or steps may be
required together with appropriate lighting deemed by the Planning Commission,
in order to ensure the safety of the occupants and the general public.
Screening of parking and service areas may be required through use of trees,
shrubs, hedges, or screening walls. Safe and convenient facilities for parking
non-motorized vehicles shall be included in the development of the site, unless
otherwise excluded by the Planning Commission.
   (E)   Land usage. Structures and uses shown on the development plan shall be
arranged so as not to be detrimental to existing or proposed structures within
the development or surrounding neighborhood.
   (F)   Privacy. Each development shall provide visual and acoustical privacy
or provide for spatial separation for dwelling units. Fences, walks, barriers,
and landscaping or open space shall be used for the protection and aesthetic
enhancement of property and the privacy of its occupants, screening of
objectionable views, or uses and reduction of noise. The Planning Commission
has the right to deem what is reasonable in these situations.
   (G)   Off-street parking. Parking convenient to all dwelling units and other
uses shall be provided. Common driveways, parking areas, walks, or steps may be
required together with appropriate lighting deemed by the Planning Commission,
in order to ensure the safety of the occupants and the general public.
Screening of parking and service areas may be required through use of trees,
shrubs, hedges, or screening walls.
   (H)   Utilities. PUDs shall provide for the cost effective and necessary
installation of utilities (including, water, wastewater, cable television,
electricity, natural gas, and telephone). In certain circumstances due to
safety and/or aesthetics, the Planning Commission may require the installation
of utilities underground. In no instance shall the PUD place demands in excess
of the capabilities of the affected public facilities and services.
   (I)   Planting. The appeal and character of the site shall be preserved and
enhanced by retaining and protecting existing trees and other site features;
additional new landscaping shall be added where deemed appropriate and
necessary for privacy, shade, beauty of buildings and grounds, and to screen
out objectionable features. Plant materials used shall be appropriate for the
function they are to serve (i.e., parking lot trees or landscaping located
along the roadway need to be large and hearty enough to survive the harsh
environment and plantings for screening shall provide adequate buffer). Salt-
tolerant species shall be planted near roadways and parking lots. Landscaping
shall not block the views at intersections.
   (J)   Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be arranged so that it is deflected
away from adjacent properties and so than it does not impede the vision of
traffic along adjacent streets. Flashing or intermittent lights shall not be
permitted.
   (K)   Drainage. Appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure that removal
of surface waters will not adversely affect neighboring properties or nearby
bodies of water. Provisions shall be made to accommodate storm water, prevent
erosion, and the formation of dust. The use of detention/retention ponds may be
required. Surface water on all paved areas shall be collected at intervals so
that it will not obstruct the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or create
standing water.
   (L)   Screening. All loading and unloading areas and outside storage areas,
including refuse storage stations, shall be screened from view.
   (M)   The PUD. The PUD shall be consistent with the standards outlined in §
156.065 and other relevant provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 1281.10) (Ord. passed 7-9-2020)
§ 156.090 CHANGES IN APPROVED PUD.
   (A)   Changes in the location site or character of the building and
structures may be authorized by the Planning Commission, if required by
engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final
development plan was approved.
   (B)   Changes which cause a change in the use, character, or intent of the
development, an increase in the intensity of use, changes in the overall
coverage of the structures, or problems of traffic circulation, utility
services, or similar services, or a reduction in the approved open space, off-
street parking and loading space, or pavement width requirements may be
authorized by the Planning Commission following a public hearing. The public
hearing notice shall be published not less than 15 days prior to the public
hearing, in accordance with §
156.066(C).
   (C)   Changes which are approved must be made and recorded in accordance
with the procedures established for the recording of the initial final
development plan.
(Prior Code, § 1281.11) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION
§ 156.105 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this subchapter to offer an open space preservation
option to developers as authorized by Public Act 179 of 2001 for the purpose
of:
   (A)   Assuring the permanent preservation of open space, agricultural lands,
and other natural resources;
   (B)   Allowing innovation and greater flexibility in the design of
residential developments; and
   (C)   Encouraging a less sprawling form of development, thus preserving open
space. For the purpose of this chapter, the term OPEN SPACE shall refer to a
natural state preserving natural resources, natural features, or scenic or
wooded conditions; agriculture use; or a similar use or condition.
(Prior Code, § 1282.01) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.106 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA.
   To be eligible for open space preservation consideration, the applicant must
present a proposal for residential development that meets each of the
following.
   (A)   Minimum project size. The minimum size of an open space preservation
development shall be five acres of contiguous land.
   (B)   Unified control. The proposed development shall be under single
ownership or control, such that there is a single person or entity having
proprietary responsibility for the full completion of the project. The
applicant shall provide sufficient documentation of ownership or control in the
form of agreements, contracts, covenants, and/or deed restrictions that
indicate that the development will be completed in its entirety as proposed.
   (C)   Guarantee of open space. The applicant shall guarantee to the
satisfaction of the Planning Commission that all open space portions of the
development will be maintained in the manner approved. Documentation shall be
presented that binds all successors and future owners in fee title to
commitments set forth in the applicant’s proposal. This provision shall not
prohibit a transfer of ownership or control, provided notice of such transfer
is provided to the city and the land uses continue as approved in the open
space preservation site plan.
(Prior Code, § 1282.02) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.107 PROJECT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   A proposed open space preservation project shall comply with the following
project design standards.
   (A)   The open space preservation option is applicable only in the Rural
Residential District and restricted to residential development.
   (B)   Unless specifically waived or modified by the Planning Commission, and
excepting the minimum lot area, all zoning ordinance dimensional requirements
for the underlying zoning district and other city regulations shall remain in
full force.
   (C)   The developer shall maintain a minimum of 20% of the gross area of the
site as dedicated open space. Land dedicated for open space does not include a
golf course, street rights-of-ways, unbuildable land areas, or submerged land
areas but may include a recreational trail, picnic area, children’s play area,
greenway, or linear park. The dedicated open space may be, but is not required
to be, dedicated to the use of the public.
   (D)   The number of dwelling units allowable within an open space
preservation project shall be determined in the following manner: The applicant
shall prepare and present to the Planning Commission a design of the area that
is consistent with the existing city zoning requirements. The Planning
Commission shall review the design and determine the number of lots that could
be feasibly constructed on the property. This number, as determined by the
Planning Commission, shall be the maximum number of dwelling units allowable
for the open space preservation project.
   (E)   To encourage flexibility and creativity consistent with the open space
preservation concept, the Planning Commission may grant specific departures
from the requirements of the zoning ordinance for yard, lot, and bulk standards
as a part of the approval process. Any regulatory modification approved by the
Planning Commission shall result in a higher quality of development than would
be possible using conventional zoning standards. The regulatory modifications
are not subject to variance approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals. No part of
an open space preservation site plan may be appealed to the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
   (F)   The dedicated open space shall be set aside by the developer through
an irrevocable conveyance that is found acceptable to the Planning Commission,
such as:
      (1)    Recorded deed restrictions in perpetuity;
      (2)   Covenants that run perpetually with the land;
      (3)   A conservation easement established per the state’s Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Publi Act 451 of 1994, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 324.2140 et seq.; and
      (4)   Deeded property to the city.
   (G)   Such conveyance shall assure that the open space “will be protected
from all forms of development and shall never be changed to another use.” Such
conveyance shall:
      (1)   Indicate the proposed allowable use(s) of the dedicated open space;
      (2)   Require that the dedicated open space be maintained by parties who
have an ownership interest in the open space;
      (3)   Provide standards for scheduled maintenance of the open space; and
      (4)   Provide for maintenance to be undertaken by the city in the event
that the dedicated open space is inadequately maintained, or is determined by
the city to be a public nuisance, with the assessment of costs upon the
property owners of the development.
   (H)   The dedicated open space shall forever remain open space, subject only
to uses set forth on the approved site plan. Further subdivision of open space
land or its use for other than recreation or conservation shall be strictly
prohibited.
   (I)   Accessory structures related to a recreation or conservation use may
be erected within the dedicated open space, subject to the approved open space
preservation site plan. These accessory structures shall not exceed, in the
aggregate, 1% of the total required open space area.
   (J)   Direct access onto a public road shall be required for all
developments receiving approval under the open space preservation option.
   (K)   The developer shall be responsible for construction of roads providing
access into and circulation within the new development.
   (L)   The development shall be designed to promote the preservation of
natural features. If animal or plant habitats of significant value exist on the
site, the Planning Commission, as a condition of approval, may require that the
open space preservation site plan preserve these areas in a natural state and
adequately protect them as nature preserves or limited-access areas.
(Prior Code, § 1282.03) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.108 PROJECT STANDARDS.
   (A)   In considering any application for approval of an open space
preservation site plan, the Planning Commission shall make the determinations
on the basis of the standards for site plan approval set forth in §§
156.125 through
156.130.
   (B)   Site plan review as well as the following standards and requirements:
      (1)   Compliance with the project design standards in §§
155.060 through
155.066 and §§
155.175 through
155.179,
155.190 through
155.197,
155.210 through
155.219, and
155.160 and
155.161;
      (2)   The open space preservation project shall be designed to minimize
the impact of traffic generated by the proposed development on surrounding
uses;
      (3)   The proposed open space preservation project shall be protective of
the natural environment; and
      (4)   Compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 1282.04) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.109 APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS.
   (A)   The application for approval of an open space preservation proposal
shall be in accordance with procedures for consideration of a special use
permit. The required materials and fees shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator.
   (B)   Approval of an open space preservation proposal shall be upon issuance
of a special use permit following a public hearing. All improvements and uses
of the site shall conform with the approved open space preservation site plan
and comply fully with any conditions imposed by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   The applicant shall record an affidavit with the Register of Deeds
containing the full legal description of the project site specifying the date
of final city approval, and declaring that all improvements will be carried out
in accordance with the approved open space preservation site plan unless an
amendment is adopted by the Planning Commission. In addition, all deed
restrictions and easements shall be duly filed with the Register of Deeds of
the county and copies of recorded documents presented to the city.
   (D)   Following final approval of the open space preservation site plan by
the Planning Commission, a zoning compliance permit may be obtained. It shall
be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain all other applicable, city,
county, state, or federal permits.
   (E)   If construction has not commenced within 24 months of final approval,
all city approvals become null and void. The applicant may make written
application to the Planning Commission for an extension, not to exceed 12
months. A maximum of two extensions may be allowed.
   (F)   The Planning Commission may require that a performance guarantee be
deposited with the City Treasurer to insure completion of improvements.
(Prior Code, § 1282.05) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.110 REVISION OF APPROVED PLANS.
   (A)   Minor changes to an approved open space preservation site plan may be
permitted by the Planning Commission following normal site plan review
procedures outlined in §§
156.125 through
156.130, subject to the finding of all of the following:
      (1)   Such changes will not adversely effect the initial basis for
granting approval;
      (2)   Such minor changes will not adversely affect the overall open space
in light of the intent and purpose of such development as set forth in this
subchapter; and
      (3)   Such changes shall not result in the reduction of open space area
as required herein.
   (B)   Changes which are a substantial departure from the approved site plan
or alter the character or intent of the development will require the
resubmission of the proposal to the Planning Commission for a public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 1282.06) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
SITE PLAN REVIEW
§ 156.125 INTENT.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to require site plan review and
approval for all buildings, structures, and uses, because they can be expected
to have a significant impact on natural resources, traffic patterns, adjacent
parcels, and the character of future development. The regulations contained
herein are intended to provide and promote the orderly development of the city;
safe and convenient traffic movement, both within a site and in relation to
access streets; the stability of land values and investments, by preventing the
erection of structures, additions, or alterations thereto without proper
attention to setting, aesthetic considerations, or to unsightly or undesirable
appearances; harmonious relationship to buildings, other structures and uses,
both within a site and/or adjacent sites; the conservation of natural amenities
and resources; and to otherwise protect the general safety, health, and welfare
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 1283.01) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.126 SITE PLAN REQUIRED.
   (A)   A site plan shall be required and shall accompany the applications for
zoning compliance permits for:
      (1)   Any proposed construction;
      (2)   Any commencement of a new use;
      (3)   Any proposed change in use;
      (4)   Special land use permit;
      (5)   Variances;
      (6)   Any other request for zoning status where the Zoning Administrator
determines a site plan is necessary for accurate review or documentation of the
existing development; and
      (7)   When required by other city ordinances.
   (B)   For site plans pursuant to §
156.128, ten copies of the site plan shall be provided to the Zoning
Administrator. For site plans pursuant to §
156.127, one copy of the site plan shall be provided to the Zoning
Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 1283.02) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.127 SITE PLANS FOR SINGLE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS AND RESIDENTIAL
ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   The site plan drawing for single- and two-family dwellings and for their
alterations, accessory uses, and structures, as well as for applications
involving expansion of no more than 5% of the square footage of an existing
structure which does not involve a change in the use for said property, shall
show the following information:
   (A)   The legal description of the site and the property tax identification
number;
   (B)   All lot lines and dimensions of the lot;
   (C)   All roads, easements, driveways, and parking areas;
   (D)   All existing and proposed buildings, accessory buildings, and other
structures shall be shown and labeled;
   (E)   Proposed use of each building;
   (F)   Distances between buildings and all lot lines;
   (G)   Building dimensions;
   (H)   Natural features affecting development (rock, water, and the like);
   (I)   Well and septic locations; and
   (J)   A north arrow.
(Prior Code, § 1283.03) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.128 SITE PLANS FOR USES OTHER THAN SINGLE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
   (A)   The site plan drawing for applications involving expansion of no more
than 5% of the square footage of an existing structure which does not involve a
change in the use for said property shall show the following information:
      (1)   The legal description of the site and the property tax
identification number;
      (2)   All lot lines and dimensions of the lot;
      (3)   All roads, easements, driveways, and parking areas;
      (4)   All existing and proposed buildings, accessory buildings, and other
structures shall be shown and labeled;
      (5)   Proposed use of each building;
      (6)   Distances between buildings and all lot lines;
      (7)   Building dimensions;
      (8)   Natural features affecting development (rock, water, and the like);
      (9)   Well and septic locations; and
      (10)   A north arrow.
   (B)   Site plans meeting the following standards shall be required for all
applications other than those prepared pursuant to §
156.127, including applications for special land use permits and for variances.
      (1)   A survey prepared by a licensed surveyor depicting the location of
all lot lines, with survey markers erected on site. This requirement may be
waived by the Planning Commission upon request by the applicant, in the event
that the Planning Commission finds that the survey is unnecessary due to the
configuration of the property and/or existing development;
      (2)   A drawing to scale adequate to illustrate the proposed activity;
      (3)   A legal description of the lot; the property tax identification
number; the name, address, and telephone number of the owner, developer, and
designer;
      (4)   Date, north arrow, and scale;
      (5)   The actual dimensions of the proposed developed area (as shown by a
licensed surveyor, engineer, architect, or registered landscape architect, with
the survey stakes visible) showing the relationship of the subject property to
abutting properties;
      (6)   The location of all existing and proposed structures, including
signs, on the subject property and all existing structures on land immediately
adjacent to the site within ten feet of the site’s parcel lines. The location
of structures proposed for demolition;
      (7)   The location of all existing and proposed drives and parking areas;
      (8)   The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets,
alleys, and private easements;
      (9)   The location of proposed planting and screening, fencing, signs,
and advertising features;
      (10)   The height and floor area of all proposed structures;
      (11)   The size and location of all existing and proposed public and
private utilities and required landscaping;
      (12)   Any other information necessary to establish compliance with this
subchapter or any other applicable ordinances;
      (13)   Location of all existing and proposed surface water impoundments
and surface water drainage pattern. Indicate whether local, state, or federal
permits have been applied for;
      (14)   The location and extent of all earth movement which is planned.
Indicate if a sedimentation and erosion control permit has been applied for;
      (15)   The location on the parcel that will be utilized for the on-site
storage of snow and the resulting anticipated drainage pattern that will result
from the melting snow; and
      (16)   The location of proposed lighting and the direction of the
illumination.
(Prior Code, § 1283.04) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.129 REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a site plan, the Zoning Administrator shall conduct a
preliminary review to determine whether the site plan is in proper form and
contains all of the information required by this subchapter.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall review and approve or deny site plans,
or refer the site plan to the Planning Commission for further review under §§
156.127 and
156.128(A). Such review or referral shall be accomplished within ten working
days.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall review and take action on all site plans
except those addressed in §§
156.127 and
156.128(A) unless referred by the Zoning Administrator.
   (D)   For site plans which are to be reviewed by the Planning Commission,
the Zoning Administrator shall provide all site plan materials to the Planning
Commission, along with his or her preliminary review of its compliance with the
requirements in the applicable district under this subchapter, for the next
Planning Commission meeting, provided that the complete site plan is provided
to the Zoning Administrator ten days prior to the Planning Commission meeting.
   (E)   If a zoning permit has been denied and a variance is requested by the
applicant, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the site plans for zoning
variances. The Zoning Administrator shall forward the site plan materials to
the Zoning Board of Appeals for the meeting.
   (F)   The Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, and Zoning Board of
Appeals shall use the standards in §
156.130 in their review of site plans. For site plans pursuant to §§
156.127 and
156.128(A), the standards of §
156.130 shall be presumed to be satisfied if the site plan meets the
requirements set forth under “Accessory Buildings and Uses” and/or “General
Regulations” in §
156.045,
156.046, or
156.047, as applicable. Any denial of a site plan shall be in writing and
specify inadequacies or deficiencies in the site plan, and may indicate changes
which would result in approval.
   (G)   The applicant may appeal any denial to the Zoning Board of Appeals,
who shall use the standards contained in §
156.130 in its review. The review shall be limited to those materials submitted
to the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 1283.05) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.130 SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
   (A)   The proposed use shall conform to the uses permitted in that district.
   (B)   All elements of the site plan shall be harmoniously and efficiently
organized in relation to topography, the size and type of lot, the character of
adjoining property, and the type and size of buildings. The site development
shall not impede the normal and orderly development or improvement of
surrounding property for uses permitted in this subchapter.
   (C)   Special attention shall be given to proper site surface drainage so
that removal of storm waters will not adversely affect neighboring properties.
   (D)   The site plan shall provide reasonable visual and auditory privacy for
all dwelling units located therein or on adjoining properties. Fences, walks,
barriers, and landscaping shall be used, as appropriate, for the protection and
enhancement of property and for the privacy of its occupants.
   (E)   All buildings or groups of buildings shall be arranged to permit
emergency vehicle access to each building.
   (F)   Every structure or dwelling shall have access to a public street,
walkway, or other area dedicated to common use. Attention must be given to
assure that safe and efficient ingress and egress is provided and the placement
of driveways will not be a traffic concern.
   (G)   All loading or unloading and outside storage areas at developments
other than single- or two-family homes, including areas for storage of trash,
which face or are visible from residential properties, abut a residential zone
or public thoroughfares, shall be screened by a vertical fence consisting of
adequate structural (fence) or plant materials no less than six feet in height.
   (H)   All outdoor lighting, whether for illuminating parking areas,
buildings, signs, and/or other structures shall be shielded, shaded, designed,
and/or directed away from all adjacent Residential Districts and uses; and
further shall not glare upon or interfere with persons and vehicles using
public streets. Whenever the parking plan is so laid out as to bring automobile
headlights toward any residential land, an obscuring wall or fence four feet,
six inches in height shall be provided along that side of the parking area.
Flashing or intermittent lights shall not be permitted.
   (I)   Sufficient area shall be identified for the on-site storage of snow
and anticipated drainage that will result from the melting snow.
   (J)   Sufficient off-street parking shall be provided for residents,
customers, and employees and all anticipated uses.
   (K)   The site plan shall attempt to include context-appropriate design
features relative to the city’s goal of providing complete streets, as
established in the master plan and official city policies. This may include
connections to adjacent non-motorized facilities, providing non-motorized
parking features, and handicap accessibility improvements, unless otherwise
excluded by the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 1283.06) (Ord. passed 7-9-2020)
NON-CONFORMING USES
§ 156.145 ALTERATIONS.
   A non-conforming use is one that is restricted to an area that was non-
conforming at the time this subchapter was enacted or amended, subject to the
following provisions.
   (A)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this
subchapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located except as otherwise provided herein.
   (B)   Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any part of a
building which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use and which
existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this subchapter, but no such
use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
   (C)   If no structural alterations are made, any non-conforming use of a
structure, or of a structure and premises may be changed to another non-
conforming use provided that the Planning Commission, by making findings in the
specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more
appropriate to the district than the existing non-conforming use. In permitting
such change, the Planning Commission may require appropriate conditions and
safeguards in accordance with the purpose and intent of this subchapter.
   (D)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
non-conforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform
to the regulations applicable to the district in which such structure is
located, and the non-conforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
   (E)   When a non-conforming use of a structure, or of a structure and
premises in combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for 12 consecutive
months, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not
thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district
in which it is located.
   (F)   Where non-conforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal, or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the non-
conforming status of the land.
(Prior Code, § 1284.01) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.146 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   On any building devoted in whole or in part to any non-conforming use,
work may be done in any period of 12-consecutive months in the nature of
ordinary repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or
plumbing to an extent not to exceed 50% of the assessed value of the building,
provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of
passage or amendment of this subchapter shall not be increased. Nothing in this
subchapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe
condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official
charged with protecting the public safety, upon the order of such official.
   (B)   In the event that a building has been destroyed by fire or other
calamity, the building may maintain its non-conforming use status if the
building is rebuilt on the same footprint as the destroyed building within 12
months of the date of the calamity.
(Prior Code, § 1284.02) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.147 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   Home occupations may be conducted within a single- or two-family dwelling
unit in accordance with the following requirements.
   (A)   There shall be no exterior display other than one non-illuminated,
non-projecting sign, which shall not be more than two square feet in area and
which shall be attached to the wall of the building.
   (B)   Not more than one person who is not a resident of the dwelling shall
be involved in the home occupation.
   (C)   A generally recognized retail store similar to those permitted in the
Business Districts shall not be considered a home occupation.
   (D)   Home occupations shall not require exterior alterations or involve
construction features not customary in dwellings, or required use of mechanical
or electrical equipment which shall create a nuisance to the adjacent
neighborhood.
   (E)   Off-street parking shall avoid conflicts with adjacent dwelling units
and prevent congestion in the street. Home occupations shall not require a
loading/unloading area.
   (F)   Instruction in a fine art, craft, or music shall be considered a home
occupation.
   (G)   Not more than one-fourth of the living area of the dwelling unit and
less than one-half of the living area of the main floor shall be devoted to the
home occupation. No part of an accessory structure, either attached or detached
shall be used. In no instance shall one or more home occupations in any single
dwelling unit permanently occupy more than 300 square feet of the dwelling
unit.
   (H)   A home occupation shall not create a nuisance or endanger the health,
safety, welfare, or enjoyment of any other person in the area, by reason of
noise, traffic, safety hazards, dirt, dust, gas, vibration, glare, fumes, odor,
unsanitary or unsightly conditions, fire hazards, or the like, involved in or
resulting from such home occupation.
   (I)   There shall be no outdoor storage of items supportive of the home
occupation.
   (J)   Walk-in retail trade shall be prohibited. All wholesale, jobbing, or
retail business shall be conducted entirely by mail, email, or telephone.
   (K)   All electrical motors and equipment used in the conduct of the home
occupation shall be shielded so as not to cause radio or television
interference for adjoining properties.
   (L)   Activities of a registered primary caregiver under the state’s Medical
Marijuana Act to assist with a patient’s medical use of marijuana, other than
growing marijuana plants for the patient, shall be considered a business and,
if conducted from a residence in the R-1, R-2, or RR Districts, subject to this
section on home occupations.
(Prior Code, § 1285) (Ord. passed 7-9-2012)
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
§ 156.160 RIGHT TO LIGHT.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall build any structure in any
single-family, two-family, or rural residential zone in the city without
complying with all of the provisions of this section.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall build or place any structure
taller than the height set forth in the applicable zoning district, unless the
structure comes within the exceptions set forth in division (C) below.
   (C)   An applicant must obtain approval from the Planning Commission for a
building higher than the limitation set forth in division (B) above, where the
applicant can show any one of the following conditions.
      (1)   There is an existing principal residence building on an adjacent
lot and the roof of the building will not be shaded by the building for more
than one hour in any day at any time of the year, except one hour after sunrise
and one hour before sunset.
      (2)   There is an adjacent lot with no principal residence building and
the proposed building will not shade any part of the lot on which the building
is permitted by law and by applicable restrictions on the real estate, at a
height of 18 feet, for more than one hour in any day at any time of the year,
except one hour after sunrise and one hour before sunset.
      (3)   The adjacent lot is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes and
is not in use for residential purposes.
   (D)   New subdivisions may be designed with innovative ways of preventing
shading of residential buildings. Any design will be deemed to comply with the
requirements of this section if that design results in no roof of any residence
building being shaded for more than one hour in any day at any time of year,
except one hour after sunrise and one hour before sunset.
(Prior Code, § 1286.01) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.161 HEIGHT EXPECTATIONS.
   Chimneys, cooling towers, elevators, windmills, penthouses, stacks, towers,
shaft houses, tanks, monuments, cupolas, and mechanical appurtenances
pertaining to or necessary to a permitted use in the district in which they are
located shall not be included in calculating the height of the principal
structure.
(Prior Code, § 1286.02) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.162 EXTERNAL WOOD AND SOLID FUEL BURNING BOILERS.
   (A)   It is the intent of this section to safeguard the health, comfort,
living conditions, safety, and welfare of the citizens by regulating the air
pollution and fire hazards of outdoor wood, and solid fuel burning boilers.
   (B)   Stand-alone wood and solid fuel fired heating/boiler systems shall
conform to the following requirements:
      (1)   Minimum setback of 50 feet from all lot lines;
      (2)   Minimum lot size of two acres;
      (3)   Minimum chimney height of 15 feet, measured from grade to chimney
top;
      (4)   Associated wood or solid fuel storage and stove shall be located in
rear of lot; and
      (5)   Installation and use shall be as per manufacturer’s requirements,
except as noted above.
(Prior Code, § 1286.04) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.163 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   (A)   It is the intent of this section to recognize that the city has a
clear and identifiable interest in accommodating the communication needs of
residents and businesses but also has an interest in regulating highly visible
structures such as large, high communication towers. It is the city’s interest,
also, to induce, to the extent reasonable, cooperative use and collocation of
such towers and their associated facilities and structures.
   (B)   Wireless communication facilities located by special land use permit
in the R-1, R-2, RR, B-1, B-2, I, M, and PA Districts are subject to the
following qualifying conditions and/or regulations and to the considerations of
§§
156.065 and
156.066.
      (1)   The height of the wireless communication facility shall not exceed
175 feet from the ground to the highest point of the facility.
      (2)   All sites must contain a minimum area sufficient to contain the
wireless communication facility and all related accessory uses.
         (a)   If the property is undeveloped or occupied by a non-residential
use, it must have a minimum area of two and one-half acres.
         (b)   If the property is occupied by a residential use, it must have a
minimum area of 20 acres.
      (3)   The site shall have legal documented access to a public road.
      (4)   Any wireless communication tower must be set back from all property
lines a distance equal to its height, unless engineering plans and
specifications have been certified by a licensed mechanical, civil,
professional engineer or architect, or other engineer licensed and competent in
assessing the structural integrity of such towers, verifying a safe fall zone.
All towers shall be certified by licensed engineer to verify that the
structural design will meet federal standards to withstand wind speeds and
icing under 100-year event conditions in the area.
      (5)   Accessory structures shall not exceed a total of 600 square feet of
gross building area.
      (6)   No wireless communication facility shall be approved unless the
applicant is able to establish in writing that any existing tower, structure,
or facility is not available for co-utilization based upon technical inadequacy
or lack of capacity, unreasonable or prohibitive cost, denial by owner, or
other practical impediment to use or access.
      (7)   There shall not be displayed on the wireless communication facility
advertising or identification of any kind intended to be visible from the
ground or other structures, except as required for emergency purposes.
      (8)   The wireless communication facility shall be maintained in a
predominant color, coating, or material which matches the exterior
surroundings. The predominant color scheme shall be designed to minimize off-
site visibility of the structure.
      (9)   All wireless communication facilities must comply with the
standards of the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications
Commission, and the airport zoning ordinance for the county and all applicable
state or local codes.
      (10)   Any wireless communication tower or antenna that is not operated
for continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned and the owner
of such tower or antenna shall remove the same within 90 days of receiving an
abandonment notification from the city. Failure to remove an abandoned tower or
antenna within 90 days shall be grounds for the city to remove the tower or
antenna at the owner’s expense. The Planning Commission may require the
applicant to post a bond in an amount equal to the reasonable cost of removal
for the tower and/or antenna. If a bond is to be required, the Planning
Commission shall include the requirement as a condition of approval.
      (11)   Minimum spacing between wireless communication facilities
containing one or more towers shall be one mile in order to prevent a
concentration of facilities in one area.
      (12)   Wireless communication facilities shall not be artificially
lighted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
      (13)   The base of any tower and any cable supports shall be fenced with
a minimum six- foot high security fence and all fencing shall be screened with
landscaping. Accessory structures shall match the construction characteristics
of other existing buildings in the surrounding area.
      (14)   All wireless communication facilities shall be inspected after
being constructed and then once every three years for compliance with all
ordinance, structural, and operational requirements and shall be certified as
in compliance by a licensed mechanical, civil, professional engineer or
architect, or other engineer licensed and competent in assessing the structural
integrity of such towers, and said certification shall be submitted to the
city.
      (15)   The Planning Commission may require additional setback distances
as part of a special land use permit approval or for towers located within
1,000 feet of property zoned for residential use.
(Prior Code, § 1286.05) (Ord. passed 11-12-2009)
§ 156.164 FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES.
   (A)   Fences, walls, and hedges are permitted in any zoning district
provided that they comply with the following requirements and restrictions.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FENCE. Any partition, structure, wall, retaining wall, or gate erected as
a dividing marker, barrier, or enclosure, including hedges, encircling either
wholly or any portion of any area, or within or along the bounds of any portion
of a lot or parcel.
      HEIGHT. The distance from the grade to the top of the highest point of
the fence at any given point along the fence.
      PROTECTIVE MEASURES FENCE. A fence erected for the express purpose of
protecting an enclosed area and the property therein, or a fence intended to
deny access to a dangerous property or location.
   (C)   Any fence, wall, or hedge must be completely contained inside the
owner’s property line, with a finished side facing the abutting property.
Adjoining property owners may enter into an agreement, which may be recorded at
the Register of Deeds, to place a fence on the lot line and provide an easement
for fence maintenance.
   (D)   Fences or walls on all lots in all Residential Zoning Districts which
enclose property and/or are within a required side or rear yard, shall not
exceed eight feet in height, measured from the surface of the ground and shall
not extend toward the front of the lot nearer than the front of the house or
the minimum required front yard set-back, whichever is greater. Fences up to
four feet in height may be erected from the front edge of the dwelling to
within two feet of the sidewalk (or of the right-of-way line if there is no
sidewalk), unless the fence is of chain-link, split-rail, or other “see
through” material, in which case it may be up to six feet in height. Fences,
walls, or hedges shall be placed so that they are contained at least five feet
from the right-of-way line of an alley.
   (E)   No property owner shall allow a hedge, fence or other material to
intrude into the public sidewalk space, over the lot line, or into the street
right-of-way, in the space from the ground to eight feet above the ground, nor
to block clear sight lines of vehicles on streets and driveways.
   (F)   Fences shall be constructed such that posts and framework are on the
interior or fence owner’s side of the fence and so that the sheeting or face of
the exterior, as seen from the adjoining properties or street, is the more
presentable and attractive side of the fence.
   (G)   All fences shall be maintained in good condition, including, but not
limited to paint, stain, repair of damaged portions, rusted metal, holes, loose
components, and sagging.
   (H)   Fences must be maintained so as not to endanger life or property. Any
fence which through lack of repair, type of construction, or otherwise,
imperils life or property, shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
   (I)   Requirements in this section for fences, walls, and hedges are not
intended to restrict landscaping features that exist or may be planted as a
part of the beautification of any premises provided such planting does not
obstruct the vision of drivers on streets or driveways nor interfere with clear
sight lines at corners or adjacent driveways and does not obstruct natural
light and air on adjacent premises.
   (J)   Any violation of the provisions of this section is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance which may be enjoined or abated and may subject the
violator to civil damages, fines, and penalties, including the costs of
abatement, as provided in the city’s nuisance ordinance. The city specifically
reserves the right to contract for the removal and clean-up of nuisance
fencing, walls, or hedges and to assess the cost thereof to the property owner.
In the event that said cost remains unpaid for more than 30 days, it shall be
spread upon the tax roll in the manner prescribed for utility arrears and the
city shall have all other rights of collection allowed under state law.
   (K)   All swimming pools shall be fenced in compliance with the state’s
Building Codes.
   (L)   Fences containing barbed wire, concertina, or similar wire, shall not
be allowed in any district, except that barbed wire which is part of a
protective measures fence approved pursuant to this subchapter will be allowed
according to the conditions under which it is approved. Electrified fences may
be allowed only in the Rural Residential District for the purpose of containing
animals provided that proper signage is maintained.
   (M)   A protective measures fence shall not be allowable in Residential
Districts and shall constitute a special use in all Non-Residential Districts.
A protective measures fence may only be constructed pursuant to a finding by
the Planning Commission of a need for such fence. In approving such a fence,
the Planning Commission shall determine that the definition of protective
measure fence is met and there is no reasonable alternative to the erection of
the fence. The owner of a protective measures fence may be granted permission
to erect necessary and reasonable barriers along the uppermost edge of such
fence including barbed wire. The applicant may appeal a denial or conditions of
an approval by the Planning Commission to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (N)   A fence site plan review is required for all fences in Residential
Zones (R-1, R-2, RR), said fence site plan review will require a fee as set by
City Council.
   (O)   Fences or walls on all lots in all Business Zoning Districts shall not
exceed eight feet in height without approval of the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 1286.07) (Ord. passed 7-9-2020)
SIGNS
§ 156.175 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   No sign or part thereof may be constructed, erected, placed, altered,
or maintained within the city, except as specifically or by necessary
implication, authorized by this subchapter.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MANSARD ROOF. A roof, or structure on a building imitating a roof, which
is at an angle of 60 degrees or greater from the horizontal.
      PLAQUE. Commemorative. An inscribed tablet of brass or other non-
corrosive metal or stone, identifying a place of historical or cultural
significance.
      RESIDENTIAL NAMEPLATE. A sign identifying a multiple-family residential
structure or identifying the occupants of one- and two-family structures.
   (C)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be interpreted or construed to give
rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular sign
and this subchapter is hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment,
change, or modification as may be necessary to preserve or protect the public
health, safety, or welfare.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, relocate, or
structurally alter or repair any sign or other advertising structure within the
city, as defined by this or subchapter without first obtaining a zoning permit.
All signs shall be subject to the Building Code, the city’s zoning ordinance,
and all illuminated signs shall be subject to the provisions of the state’s
Electrical Code. (See § 156.187 for maintenance exceptions which do not require
a zoning permit)
(Ord. passed 2-13-2014) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.176 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   A zoning permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator prior
to the issuance of a building permit.
   (B)   Application for a zoning permit shall be made upon forms provided by
the Zoning Administrator and shall contain or have attached the following
information:
      (1)   Name, address, telephone number, and signature of the applicant
(person or firm erecting the sign);
      (2)   Name, address, telephone number, and signature of the owner of the
land on which the sign is to be erected;
      (3)   A scale drawing showing the position of the sign in relation to
nearby buildings, signs, structure, and lot lines. All dimensions are to be
included;
      (4)   A copy of the plans, specifications, and method of construction and
attachment to the building or in the ground; and
      (5)   Upon demand of the Zoning Administrator, a copy of calculations
showing the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure as required
by the state’s Building Code.
   (C)   Such additional information as required by the Zoning Administrator to
show full compliance with this and all other laws and ordinances of the city,
including stamped drawings.
   (D)   The Zoning Administrator shall review all applications for a zoning
permit. No more than ten working days shall be required to review an
application. Reasons for any denial shall be set forth in writing and shall
include any changes which would make the plan acceptable. The applicant may
appeal any denial to the Planning Commission, then Board of Appeals.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2014)
§ 156.177 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Zoning permits shall not be required for the following signs provided
that said signs meet all other requirements of this subchapter, including but
not limited to those in §
156.181. Approval of the property owner is required prior to the erection of a
sign.
   (B)   It is the responsibility of the party erecting the sign to determine
if a building permit is required:
      (1)   No more than one real estate sign per site, not to exceed an area
of six square feet in Residential Districts, 32 square feet in all other
districts, which advertise the sale, rental, or lease of the premises upon
which the sign is located. The sign shall be removed within five days of the
sale or rental;
      (2)   Political campaign signs may be erected up to 45 days before an
election. There shall be no limit in the number of such signs on each site.
Such signs shall be removed within five days after the election;
      (3)   Residential nameplate not to exceed two square feet in area;
      (4)   Temporary signs identifying construction sites for which a building
permit has been issued. One sign per premises shall be permitted not to exceed
ten square feet for single-family and two- family structures or 64 square feet
for all other structures. The sign shall be removed within five days after the
occupancy of the structure. Temporary signs identifying home improvement
activities for which no permit is required. One on-premises sign per premises
not to exceed six square feet, which may be in place while the work is in
progress. In no case shall such a sign be in place for more than 14 days;
      (5)   Special decorative displays used for holidays, public
demonstrations, or promotion of civic welfare or charitable purposes, on which
there is no commercial advertising;
      (6)   Any sign or notice required by state, federal, or local laws;
      (7)   On-premises signs of a non-advertising, non-identification nature
designed exclusively to control access or use, to warn, or to direct traffic or
pedestrians shall be a maximum of 20 square feet;
      (8)   Any number of official governmental unit flags may be located on
any site. Only one corporate flag or pennant may be displayed. Support
structures shall meet the requirements of either pole or projecting signs; and
      (9)   Commemorative plaques which are firmly attached to a structure.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2014)
§ 156.178 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SIGNS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to place a sign or handbill on any property
without the approval of the property owner. No signs or handbills shall be
posted on any tree or utility pole.
   (B)   No signs shall be located on any street or street corner which would
obscure the vision of drivers using said streets, or conflict with traffic-
control signs or signals in any location. No sign shall obstruct the vision of
drivers at any driveway, parking lot, or other route providing access to any
land use.
   (C)   No sign shall be illuminated by other than electrical means. All flood
or spot lighting for illumination of signs shall be directed away from and
shall be shielded from any residence. Illumination shall be so arranged as to
not adversely affect driver visibility on adjacent thoroughfares.
   (D)   No signs shall have blinking, fluttering lights, exposed bulbs, or
other illuminating devices which have a changing light intensity or brightness
of color and will conform to MDOT and federal highway regulation.
   (E)   Prior to the erection of a sign overhanging a public right-of-way, the
person erecting such sign shall receive the approval of the proper governmental
agency (city, county, or state) having jurisdiction over such right-of-way.
   (F)   No signs other than traffic-control or directional signs erected by a
unit of government shall be allowed on any right-of-way. Portable sidewalk
signs shall be permitted when they meet the requirements of §
156.179(F) and (G) except on state highway rights-of-way, including the
business routes.
   (G)   Any sign mounted on a roof shall be included within the overall height
limitations; a mansard roof shall be considered a wall for the purpose of
applying this regulation. (See §
156.179.)
   (H)   No signs in Residential Zoning Districts may be closer to side or rear
lot lines than specified in the minimum set-back requirements of the district
in which they are located. (See city’s zoning ordinances and map.)
   (I)   Any portion of a sign may be of the changeable copy type provided that
all changeable characters are securely attached to the face of the sign.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2014) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.179 REGULATIONS BASED UPON SIGN TYPE.
   (A)   Pole signs.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to erect any portion of a pole sign to a
height of greater than 30 feet above the level of the nearest street in the
Business Districts. The maximum height for all other districts shall be 20 feet
above the height of the nearest street.
      (2)   There shall be a minimum unobstructed distance of ten feet between
the bottom of any display area and the ground for any sign located at the
right-of-way. For every two and one-half feet the sign is set back from the
right-of-way, the base of the display area may be lowered by one foot.
      (3)   Pole signs in any Business District that are within 100 feet of a
Residential District must be no greater than 20 feet above the height of the
nearest street.
   (B)   Ground signs.
      (1)   No sign shall be located closer to a side lot line than the
distance specific for side yards in that district by the zoning ordinance.
      (2)   No portion of a ground sign may exceed eight feet in height.
      (3)   For every additional ten feet that a sign is set back from the
required front yard, the height/width of the ground sign may be increased by
10%. This increase in sign size shall not apply to off- premises signs.
   (C)   Wall signs. A wall sign shall not project more than 15 inches from the
wall.
   (D)   Projecting signs.
      (1)   No portion of a projecting sign shall be less than eight feet above
grade.
      (2)   The clear distance between a projecting sign and the wall to which
it is attached may not be greater than two feet. All projecting signs shall be
designed, installed, and erected in such a manner that there shall be no
visible angle iron or wire support structures above the roof line or parapet.
      (3)   No sign may project over an alley or private driveway.
      (4)   No sign shall be located closer than ten feet to any intersecting
rights-of-way.
      (5)   A projecting sign may not extend above the top of the wall on which
it is attached by more than six feet, but in no case shall more than 20% of the
sign area be above the top of the wall.
   (E)   Canopy and marquee signs.
      (1)   Canopy and marquee signs shall be placed at least ten feet above
the sidewalk and shall be at least two feet, measured horizontally from an
established curb.
      (2)   Signs attached to the face of a marquee or canopy which are
parallel to the flow of traffic shall meet the requirements of wall signs.
Additionally, the sign may not project more than six inches from the face of
the canopy and the sign may not exceed three feet in height.
      (3)   Signs attached to the sides of a marquee or canopy which are not
parallel to the flow of traffic shall meet the requirements of projecting
signs.
      (4)   Where signs are suspended under canopies or marquees, the following
conditions shall apply.
         (a)   Signs shall not be greater than six square feet.
         (b)   There shall not be more than one such sign per business or
office.
         (c)   Signs shall be at least eight feet above the sidewalk and at
least two feet measured horizontally from any established curb.
   (F)   Sidewalk signs.
      (1)   Sidewalk signs shall be permitted during the hours a business is
open to the public and may only be placed on the street from dawn until dusk.
      (2)   The maximum height shall be four feet and the sign shall not occupy
more than nine square feet of sidewalk. The sign shall be sturdy, stable, and
of heavy enough construction on its own to withstand typical winds without
flipping over or sliding.
      (3)   Sidewalk signs shall not be illuminated by any means except natural
light, building lights, and existing street lights.
      (4)   At all times of the year, sidewalk signs shall be placed directly
in front of the business and shall allow a minimum of four feet of unobstructed
sidewalk for pedestrians. Sidewalk signs shall not be placed within 25 feet of
an intersection, measured perpendicularly from the intersecting curb. During
the winter months, the sidewalk shall be completely clear of snow prior to
placement and sidewalk signs shall not be placed on snow banks.
      (5)   The owner of the sign and the owner of the site upon which it is
located must assume all liability for damage and injury caused by the sign.
      (6)   Sidewalk signs shall be exempt from the total sign area
calculation.
      (7)   There shall be one sidewalk sign allowed for each business.
   (G)   Flexible signs.
      (1)   Signs of fabric, thin plastic, or other flexible material may be
erected as pole, ground or wall signs provided that all requirements for those
types of signs are met. No ropes or guy wires may be fastened so as to cause a
hazard.
      (2)   Flexible signs shall be removed at the first evidence of wear or
deterioration.
   (H)   Standard outdoor advertising (billboards). Standard outdoor
advertising structures are allowed only in areas zoned B-2 and must conform to
the following regulations.
      (1)   No standard outdoor advertising structure may be erected within 200
feet of any public park, recreation facility, lake, stream, school, church, or
residential lot located on the same side of the street.
      (2)   No standard outdoor advertising structure shall be located within
ten feet of any intersection.
      (3)   No standard outdoor advertising structure shall be closer than 300
feet to another off-premises sign.
      (4)   Standard outdoor advertising structures may have one or two faces.
Said faces may be placed back to back if not more than 36 inches apart, or may
be placed in a “V” with a maximum angle of 30 degrees and a maximum separation
of 30 inches at the vertex.
      (5)   No standard outdoor advertising structures shall exceed 300 square
feet in area or 30 feet in height.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2014)
§ 156.180 SIGNS PERMITTED BY ZONING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Signs permitted by zoning district. District designations shall be
determined from the official zoning map.
   (B)   Residential Districts.
      (1)   For each residential unit in a Single-Family or General Residential
District: One name plate not exceeding two square feet shall be permitted.
      (2)   For all conditional uses in the R-1, R-2, and RR Districts, except
home occupations, group day care facilities, and non-conforming uses which are
not residential there shall be permitted: One ground sign and/or one wall sign
not to exceed a combined area of 32 square feet. Day care centers in any
district shall be permitted to erect a four square foot nameplate.
      (3)   Multiple-family development: One sign not to exceed six square feet
for the purpose of identifying an office located on the site, plus:
         (a)   One sign not exceeding two square feet for each development
containing four or fewer dwelling units;
         (b)   For each development containing more than four but fewer than 50
dwelling units, one sign not to exceed ten square feet shall be permitted; and
         (c)   For each development containing 50 or more dwelling units, one
sign not to exceed 20 square feet shall be permitted for each driveway
providing access to the site. Said signs must be within 50 feet of the driveway
and not be within 100 feet of another such sign on the same site.
      (4)   For each subdivision, signs advertising lots for sale may be
erected and maintained until the lots are sold. The sign shall not be erected
within 100 feet of an occupied residence.
         (a)   One sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area shall be permitted
for subdivisions with 20 or less lots.
         (b)   One or two signs not to exceed 64 square feet total area shall
be permitted for subdivisions with more than 20 lots.
      (5)   There shall be no off-premises signs.
   (C)   Industrial and Business Districts.
      (1)   For establishments located in the Business and Industrial
Districts, one square foot of sign shall be allowed per liner foot of site
frontage.
      (2)   Only on-premises signs shall be permitted in the B-1 Districts.
Signs in the B-2 and Industrial Districts may be on-premises or off-premises,
but must meet all requirements of this subchapter.
      (3)   For each office structure containing more than one occupant office,
a directory sign containing the names of all offices may be located at each
common public entrance to the structure. Said directory signs shall not be
larger than two square feet for each establishment, with maximum size of 20
square feet for each directory.
      (4)   Not more than one pole or ground sign per 300 feet of site frontage
with not more than three projecting signs and with no restrictions on the
number of wall signs per site.
   (D)   Natural resources.
      (1)   Business uses in the Natural Resources Districts shall meet the
following sign requirements:
         (a)   Height and area:
            1.   Pole signs: not to exceed 30 feet in height of 150 square feet
in area;
            2.   Projecting signs: not to exceed 20 square feet in area;
            3.   Ground signs: not to exceed 150 square feet in area; and
            4.   Wall signs: no size restrictions except as established in §
156.179(C) of this chapter.
         (b)   In no case shall the area of all advertising signs on a site
exceed one square foot of sign for each linear foot of site frontage.
         (c)   Number: Not more than one pole, ground, or projecting sign per
site with no restrictions on the number of wall signs per site.
      (2)   Signs for residential uses shall meet the requirements for signs in
the Residential District (see division (B) above);
      (3)   For all non-business and non-residential uses in this district, the
following shall be permitted per site:
         (a)   Ground signs: not to exceed 20 square feet;
         (b)   Pole signs: not to exceed 20 square feet;
         (c)   Projecting signs: not to exceed 20 square feet; and
         (d)   Wall signs: not to exceed 40 square feet.
      (4)   There shall be no off-premises signs.
   (E)   Outdoor athletic facilities in all districts. Signs placed on the
field or the facility where games are played are subject the following
conditions:
      (1)   Height and area:
         (a)   Ground signs may not exceed eight feet in height or 36 square
feet per sign;
         (b)   Wall signs may not exceed eight feet in height or 36 square feet
per sign;
         (c)   Pole signs are not permitted; and
         (d)   Illuminated signs are not permitted.
      (2)   Only the side of the sign facing the playing field may contain
advertising. The other side must be painted.
      (3)   Lighted scoreboards may be illuminated only during time of
organized play. Said scoreboards may not exceed 200 square feet in size and may
be no taller than 20 feet in height.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2014)
§ 156.181 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS AND ABANDONED SIGNS.
   Non-conforming signs are those which do not comply with size, placement,
construction, or other provisions or regulations of this subchapter which were
lawfully established prior to the adoption of this subchapter.
   (A)   The display face of a non-conforming sign may be modified as necessary
to renew or update the message.
   (B)   Non-conforming signs shall not be structurally altered so as to change
the shape or size of the sign.
   (C)   Abandoned, non-conforming signs shall be removed by the property owner
within 30 days.
      (1)   Any sign which pertains to an event, time, or purpose which has
occurred shall be deemed to have been abandoned 30 days after the event.
      (2)    Any sign which is located on property which becomes vacant and
unoccupied or is applicable to a business which has been temporarily suspended
because of a change in ownership or management shall not be deemed abandoned
unless the property remains vacant or the business remains inactive for a
period of 12 months.
   (D)   Changes or additions shall not be made to any signs on a site so as to
increase their total non-conformity.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2014)
§ 156.182 MAINTENANCE.
   Every sign shall be maintained in a safe structural condition at all times,
including the replacement of defective parts and peeling, faded, or broken
display faces and structural members.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2014)
§ 156.183 SIGN REMOVAL.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the property owner by first-
class mail describing the sign and specifying the violation involved.
   (B)   The property owner shall remove said sign or request the issue to be
heard by the Planning Commission within 15 days of mailing of the letter. An
appeal stays all proceedings unless the official from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the Planning Commission that a stay would cause imminent peril to
life or property.
   (C)   If at the expiration of the time limit in said notice, the owner has
not complied with the requirements thereof, or appealed the decision of the
Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall carry out the requirements
of the notice. The costs of such abatement may be charged against the premises
and the owner thereof in accordance with the provisions of §§
95.07 and
95.08 of the city’s code.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2014)
§ 156.184 DANGEROUS SIGNS.
   In the case of a sign which presents imminent danger to life or property the
sign owner, or if he or she cannot be reached, a responsible city official may
take immediate action as is necessary to remove the danger with the cost being
borne by the owner.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2014)
§ 156.185 APPEALS.
   The Board of Appeals as provided in the subchapter shall constitute the
Board of Appeals to pass on matters pertaining to the terms of this subchapter.
The term of office, quorum, meetings, records, and procedures shall be as
specified in the subchapter.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2014)
OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
§ 156.200 PARKING MINIMUM ADJUSTMENTS.
   Parking minimums may be adjusted by the Planning Commission if the requestor
can show the minimum is not needed.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2011)
§ 156.201 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Except in non-residential units in the B-1 District, there shall
be provided off-street parking for motor vehicles, and the minimum number of
parking spaces to be provided shall be as shown in the following list.
Developments which include more than one use must provide the parking required
for each use.
Use Spaces Required
Use                                     Spaces Required
Accessory dwelling unit                 1 space per ADU
                                        1 per employee (1 x maximum number of
Adult foster care/large group home      employees per shift) and 1 per 3
                                        residents
Assisted living facility                1 per rentable unit plus 1 x the
                                        maximum number of employees per shift
Automobile sales or showrooms, new or   1.5 per employee
used
Banks and financial institutions        1 per 150 sf of floor area
Barber and beauty shop                  2 plus 1.5 per chair
                                        1 space per room for transient guests
Bed and breakfast establishment         in addition to spaces required for
                                        single-family dwellings.
                                        1 space per room for transient guests
Bed and breakfast inn                   in addition to spaces required for
                                        single-family dwellings.
Bowling alleys                          5 per lane in addition to spaces
                                        required for restaurant facilities
Cultural facility                       1 per 1,000 sf of floor area
Day care center                         1 space per 5 children
Fuel sales establishment                1 per employee
Funeral home                            1 per 50 sf of floor area
Golf courses                            4 per hole in addition to spaces
                                        required for restaurant or bar
Health care facilities, out-patients    1 per 100 sf of floor area
Hotels                                  1.2 per room in addition to spaces
                                        required for restaurant
Indoor recreation facility              .35 times the seating capacity
Laundromats                             .33 per machine
Mobile home park                        2 per mobile home and 1 per 300 sf for
                                        offices
                                        1 per employee (2 x maximum number of
Nursing home                            employees per shift) and 1 per 3
                                        residents
Public buildings                        .35 times the seating capacity
Recreation facility                     .35 times the seating capacity
Religious institutions                  .35 times the seating capacity
Residence, single-family                2 per dwelling unit
Residence, multiple-family              2 per dwelling unit
Restaurants with or without drive-      1.2 per 100 sf of floor area
through
Retail sales establishment - furniture, 1 per 500 sf of floor area
appliance, carpet sales
Rooming house including sororities,     1 per resident
fraternities, dormitories
Taverns                                 1.2 per 100 sf of floor area
Theaters                                .35 times the seating capacity
Vehicle body shop                       1 space-per bay and 1 per employee
Vehicle repair garage                   1 per employee, plus 2 per lift
Warehouses                              1 per employee
 
      (2)   For uses not specifically listed above, the requirements listed
below are applicable.
 
Use                                  Spaces Required
Office building                      1 per 300 sf of floor area
Other commercial and industrial uses 1 per employee
Retail food establishment            1 per 200 sf of floor area and outdoor
                                     sales space
Retail sales establishment           1 per 200 sf of floor area and outdoor
                                     sales space
 
   (B)   With the exception of residential housing of four units or less, the
following shall also apply:
      (1)   Where calculation in accordance with the foregoing list results in
requiring a fractional space, any fraction less than one-half shall be
disregarded and any fraction of one-half or more shall require one space.
      (2)   Required off-street parking shall be provided on the lot to which
it pertains. All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of a
maneuvering lane. Backing directly onto a street is prohibited.
      (3)   The use of any required parking space for the storage of any motor
vehicle for sale, or for any other purpose other than the parking of motor
vehicles is prohibited.
      (4)   All required parking spaces shall be clearly defined by use of a
car wheel or bumper stops, and/or painted lines.
      (5)   No off-street parking shall be constructed or altered until
approval has been issued by the city’s Planning Commission under site plan
review.
      (6)   Handicap parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
applicable Building Code and shall be provided in sufficient number.
   (C)   For a use not specifically identified in this subchapter, the off-
street parking facilities shall be in accordance with a use which the Zoning
Administrator considers as similar in type.
   (D)   The following minimum design standards shall be observed in laying out
off-street parking facilities.
 
Parking Angle Stall Width Aisle Width Parking Stall Length Curb to Curb
0 to 15       9 ft.       12 ft.      23 ft.               30 ft.
16 to 37      9 ft.       11 ft.      19 ft.               47 ft.
38 to 57      9 ft.       13 ft.      19 ft.               54 ft.
58 to 74      9 ft.       18 ft.      19 ft.               61 ft.
75 to 90      9 ft.       24 ft.      19 ft.               63 ft.
Note: Minimum aisle width is 24 feet for two-way traffic.
 
   (E)   Loading spaces required under this subchapter shall be at least 50
feet long and 12 feet wide. Every lot used for commercial or industrial
purposes and having a building or buildings with a total floor area of at least
10,000 square feet and every lot used for office purposes on which there is a
building or buildings having a total floor area of at least 20,000 square feet
shall be provided with off-street loading space. An additional off-street
loading space shall be required for every additional 20,000 square feet of
floor area or fraction thereof.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2011; Ord. passed 5-9-2024)
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to a civil
penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each infraction. A separate
infraction shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. Such penalty provisions do not preclude any other civil
action against the violator’s injunctive or such other relief as may be
available in law or in equity.
   (B)   In addition to the penalty provided for in division (A) above, any
violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance which may
be enjoined.
(Prior Code, § 1262.99)
USE TABLES
Click here for link to Zoning_Use_Tables
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0738dcf21f421e8d115b2bbb273306d0573c6511/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1611.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0738dcf21f421e8d115b2bbb273306d0573c6511/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1613.png]
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
      
II.   REZONINGS
      
III.   PARK DESIGNATIONS
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        5-11-2017   Granting a franchise to SEMCO Energy Gas Company for a
                     period of 30 years.
                    
 
TABLE II: REZONING
 
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
-    8-10-  Rezoning lots in Teal Lake Development Company’s First Addition to Business
     2017   District (B-1).
     1-10-  Rezoning various parcels from RR (Rural District) to IND (Industrial); from
-    2019   PA (Public Area) to IND (Industrial); from RR (Rural Residential) to IND
            (Industrial); from R-2 (Residential-2) to B-2 (Business-2).
     12-14- Rezoning parcel numbers 52-53-535-012-00, 52-53-536-005-30, 52-53-536-005-00,
-    2019   52-53-601-007-00, 52-53-501-006-00, 52-53-601-004-00, 52-53-601-009-00, 52-
            53-601-002-00 from Residential District 2 (R-2) to Business District 2 (B-2).
-    6-12-  Rezoning Lots 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15 Blk 2 of Pioneer Iron Company’s
     2025   second add 0.904281 acres to Business District 2 (B-2).
           
 
TABLE III: PARK DESIGNATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
--       -           Designating Teal Lake Beach and Miner’s Park as city
                     parks.
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Michigan Codified Laws Annotated
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MICHIGAN CODIFIED LAWS ANNOTATED
M.C.L.A. Cites Code Section
M.C.L.A. Cites               Code Section
15.264                       Ch. 30
15.231 to 15.246             112.04;
                             112.20
28.421 et seq.               Ch. 130
28.601 through 28.616        31.01
29.1 et seq.                 Ch. 90
29.5a                        Ch. 130
35.401 through 35.404        32.06
38.551 et seq.               Ch. 31
38.1501 et seq.              Ch. 30;
                             Ch. 32
                             Ch. 50;
46.171 et seq.               Ch. 51;
                             Ch. 53
54.231 to 54.239             155.126
67.34                        Ch. 50
67.38                        Ch. 51
103.4                        Ch. 93
                             Ch. 30;
                             Ch. 32;
117.3                        Ch. 33;
                             Ch. 52;
                             Ch. 95;
                             95.01
117.3(k)                     Ch. 90;
                             Ch. 150
117.4a                       Ch. 30;
                             Ch. 31
                             Ch. 30;
117.4b                       Ch. 50;
                             Ch. 51
117.4b et seq.               Ch. 52
117.4d et seq.               Ch. 30;
                             Ch. 32
                             Ch. 30;
117.4e                       Ch. 31;
                             Ch. 50
                             Ch. 50;
117.4f                       Ch. 51;
                             Ch. 52;
                             Ch. 91
117.4g                       Ch. 30
                             Ch. 30;
                             Ch. 31;
117.4i                       Ch. 32;
                             Ch. 95;
                             Ch. 151
117.5                        Ch. 30;
                             Ch. 32
117.5b                       10.01;
                             Ch. 155
117.14a                      Ch. 30
117.17                       Ch. 30;
                             Ch. 32
117.19                       Ch. 30;
                             Ch. 32
117.20                       Ch. 30;
                             Ch. 32
117.27a                      Ch. 33
117.28                       Ch. 30;
                             Ch. 32
117.32                       Ch. 30;
                             Ch. 32
117.33                       Ch. 30;
                             Ch. 32
117.34                       Ch. 31
117.35                       Ch. 50;
                             Ch. 51
117.35a                      Ch. 30
123.67                       Ch. 30
123.301 et seq.              Ch. 53
123.361 et seq.              Ch. 53
125.51 et seq.               Ch. 151;
                             Ch. 155
125.230 et seq.              Ch. 152
125.401 et seq.              Ch. 95
125.445                      Ch. 151
125.653 et seq.              Ch. 30
125.694b                     Ch. 30
125.731 et seq.              Ch. 30
125.741 et seq.              Ch. 152
125.981 et seq.              Ch. 30
125.991 et seq.              Ch. 152
125.1001 et seq.             Ch. 152
125.1101 et seq.             Ch. 152
125.1501 et seq.             Ch. 150
125.2301 et seq.             156.002
125.3101 et seq.             Ch. 151
125.3801                     Ch. 151
125.3815 et seq.             Ch. 151
125.3871                     Ch. 151;
                             Ch. 155
125.4101 et seq.             Ch. 30
125.4217(2)                  34.02
128.1 et seq.                Ch. 91
128.41 et seq.               Ch. 91
141.101 through 141.138      50.28
141.103                      50.01
247.183 et seq.              Ch. 30
247.321 to 247.329           151.22
247.651 et seq.              112.28
257.1 et seq.                70.03
257.715a                     Ch. 30
257.951 et seq.              70.03
287.261 et seq.              96.05
324.101 et seq.              70.03
324.2150 et seq.             156.107
324.4101                     155.126
324.11506                    53.01
324.81101 et seq.            70.13
324.90101                    155.126
333.26421 et seq.            156.002
333.27101 et seq.            113.03
333.27951 et seq.            113.03
397.11 et seq.               Ch. 30
397.205                      30.06
397.207                      Ch. 30
397.213 et seq.              Ch. 30
400.583                      Ch. 30
400.584                      Ch. 30
400.701 et seq.              156.002
431.201                      Ch. 110
431.202                      Ch. 110
432.101 et seq.              Ch. 30
436.1101 et seq.             Ch. 110;
                             Ch. 130
436.2111 et seq.             Ch. 110;
                             Ch. 130
450.691 et seq.              Ch. 30
451.2101 et seq.             155.161
480.11 et seq.               70.03
484.2102                     112.03
484.2251                     112.20
484.3101 et seq.             112.01;
                             112.03
484.3104(2)                  112.31
484.3104(3)                  112.23
484.3105(1)                  112.21
484.3105(5)                  112.25
484.3106(1)                  112.20;
                             112.21
484.3106(2)                  112.20;
                             112.21
484.3106(5)                  112.20
484.3106(6)                  112.21
484.3106(7)                  112.24
484.3108                     112.26;
                             112.27
484.3110(4)                  112.28
484.3110(5)                  112.29
484.3113(1)                  112.27
484.3113(4)                  112.27
484.3113(6)                  112.30
484.3115                     112.21
484.3115(3)                  112.21
484.3115(4)                  112.21
486.51 et seq.               Ch. 51
486.101 et seq.              Ch. 51
500.3102 et seq.             70.03
500.3123                     Ch. 30
554.1 et seq.                Ch. 130
                             155.001;
                             155.046;
560.101 through 560.293      155.126;
                             155.140;
                             155.143;
                             155.999
                             151.21;
560.101 et seq.              151.22;
                             155.161
560.112                      155.179
560.112 through 560.120      155.001
560.113 through 560.119      155.001
600.101 et seq.              35.01
600.2913                     Ch. 130
600.2940                     Ch. 95
600.3801 et seq.             Ch. 95
600.8395                     70.10
600.8396                     35.15
600.8396 through 600.8707(6) 35.01
600.8701 et seq.             10.02
600.8705                     35.02
691.1401 et seq.             Ch. 93
722.111 through 722.128      156.002
750.50 et seq.               96.08
750.71 et seq.               Ch. 90;
                             Ch. 130
750.146 et seq.              Ch. 30
750.167 et seq.              Ch. 130
750.200 et seq.              Ch. 130
750.211a                     Ch. 90;
                             Ch. 130
750.222 et seq.              Ch. 130
750.301 et seq.              Ch. 130
750.327 et seq.              Ch. 130
750.335 et seq.              Ch. 110
750.356 et seq.              Ch. 130
750.377a                     Ch. 130
750.377b                     Ch. 130
750.448 et seq.              Ch. 110;
                             Ch. 130
750.466 et seq.              Ch. 95
750.493 et seq.              Ch. 95
750.507 et seq.              Ch. 30
764.9c                       10.10
                             
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2021 Code
Prior Code 2021 Code
202.03     10.02
206.01     33.01
206.02     33.03
206.03     33.04
206.04     33.02
206.05     33.05
248.01     31.01
250.01     31.15
250.02     31.16
250.03     31.17
250.04     31.18
250.05     31.19
250.06     31.20
260.01     32.01
260.02     32.02
260.03     32.03
260.04     32.04
260.05     32.05
260.06     32.06
260.07     32.07
276.01     30.06
276.02     30.06
276.03     30.06
276.04     30.06
276.05     30.06
284.01     30.02
284.02     30.02
284.03     30.02
284.04     30.02
284.05     30.02
284.06     30.02
286.01     30.03
286.02     30.03
286.03     30.03
286.04     30.03
288.01     30.04
288.02     30.04
288.03     30.04
288.04     30.04
288.05     30.04
288.06     30.04
288.07     30.04
292.01     35.01
292.02     35.02
292.03     35.02
292.04     35.02
292.05     35.15—
           35.20
292.06     35.03
604.01     130.02
668.01     130.03
672.01     130.04
672.02     130.05
672.03     130.06
672.04     130.07
672.05     130.08
682.01     95.25
682.02     95.26
682.03     95.27
682.04     95.28
682.05     95.29
682.06     95.30
694.01     130.01
804.01     110.01
804.02     110.02
876.01     152.01
876.02     152.02
876.03     152.03
876.04     152.04
876.05     152.05
876.06     152.06
876.07     152.07
876.08     152.08
876.09     152.09
876.10     152.10
876.11     152.11
876.12     152.25
876.13     152.12
876.14     152.26
876.15     152.27
876.16     152.28
876.17     152.29
1020.01    93.01
1020.02    93.02
1020.03    93.03
1020.04    93.04
1020.05    93.05
1020.06    93.06
1020.07    93.07
1020.08    93.08
1020.09    93.09
1020.10    93.10
1060.01    53.01
1060.02    53.02
1060.03    53.03
1060.04    53.04
1060.05    53.05
1060.06    53.06
1060.07    53.07
1060.08    53.08
1060.09    53.09
1062.01    91.01
1062.02    91.02
1062.03    91.03
1062.04    91.04
1062.05    91.05
1062.06    91.06
1062.07    91.20
1062.08    91.21
1062.09    91.22
1062.10    91.23
1062.11    91.24
1062.12    91.25
1062.13    91.26
1062.14    91.27
1062.15    91.28
1062.16    91.29
1062.17    91.30
1062.18    91.31
1062.19    91.32
1062.20    91.33
1062.21    91.34
1062.22    91.45
1062.23    91.46
1062.24    91.47
1064.01    92.01
1064.02    92.02
1064.03    92.03
1064.04    92.04
1064.05    92.05
1064.06    92.06
1064.07    92.07
1064.08    92.08
1064.09    92.09
1064.10    92.10
1220.01    151.01
1220.02    151.02
1220.03    151.03
1220.04    151.04
1220.05    151.05
1220.06    151.06
1220.07    151.07
1220.08    151.08
1220.09    151.09
1230.01    151.20
1230.02    151.21
1230.03    151.22
1230.04    151.23
1230.05    151.24
1230.06    151.25
1230.07    151.26
1230.08    151.27
1230.99    151.99
1240.01    155.120
1240.02    155.121
1240.03    155.122
1240.04    155.123
1240.05    155.124
1240.06    155.125
1240.07    155.126
1242.01    155.140
1242.02    155.141
1242.03    155.142
1242.04    155.143
1242.05    155.144
1242.06    155.145
1244.01    155.001
1244.02    155.015—
           155.019
1244.03    155.030—
           155.034
1244.04    155.045—
           155.049
1244.05    155.002
1244.06    155.003
1246.01    155.080—155.086
1246.02    155.060
1246.03    155.061
1246.04    155.100—
           155.105
1246.05    155.062
1246.06    155.063
1246.07    155.064
1246.08    155.065
1246.09    155.066
1248.01    155.175—
           155.179
1248.02    155.190—
           155.197
1248.03    155.210—
           155.219
1248.04    155.160
1248.05    155.161
1260.01    156.001
1260.02    156.002
1262.01    156.003
1262.02    156.004
1262.99    156.999
1264.01    156.015
1264.02    156.016
1264.03    156.017
1264.04    156.018
1264.05    156.019
1266.01    156.030
1266.02    156.031
1268.01    156.045
1268.02    156.045
1268.03    156.045
1268.04    156.045
1268.05    156.045
1269.01    156.046
1269.02    156.046
1269.03    156.046
1269.04    156.046
1269.05    156.046
1270.01    156.047
1270.02    156.047
1270.03    156.047
1270.04    156.047
1270.05    156.047
1271.01    156.048
1271.02    156.048
1271.03    156.048
1271.04    156.048
1271.05    156.048
1272.01    156.049
1272.02    156.049
1272.03    156.049
1272.04    156.049
1272.05    156.049
1273.01    156.050
1273.02    156.050
1273.03    156.050
1273.04    156.050
1273.05    156.050
1274.01    156.051
1274.01    156.051
1274.03    156.051
1274.04    156.051
1274.05    156.051
1275.01    156.052
1275.02    156.052
1275.03    156.052
1275.04    156.052
1275.05    156.052
1276.01    156.053
1276.02    156.053
1278.01    156.054
1278.02    156.054
1278.03    156.054
1278.04    156.054
1280.01    156.065
1280.02    156.066
1281.01    156.080
1281.02    156.081
1281.03    156.082
1281.04    156.083
1281.05    156.084
1281.06    156.085
1281.07    156.086
1281.08    156.087
1281.09    156.088
1281.10    156.089
1281.11    156.090
1282.01    156.105
1282.02    156.106
1282.03    156.107
1282.04    156.108
1282.05    156.109
1282.06    156.110
1283.01    156.125
1283.02    156.126
1283.03    156.127
1283.04    156.128
1283.05    156.129
1283.06    156.130
1284.01    156.145
1284.02    156.146
1285       156.147
1286.01    156.160
1286.02    156.161
1286.04    156.162
1286.05    156.163
1286.07    156.164
1420.01    150.01
1420.02    150.02
1420.02    150.20—
           150.24
1420.03    150.03
1420.04    150.04
1420.05    150.05
1420.06    150.06
1420.07    150.07
1610.01    90.01
1610.02    90.02
1610.03    90.03
1610.05    90.04
1610.06    90.05
           
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        - -         TSO Table III
-        10-8-1998   30.04
                     112.01—
2002-2   12-12-2002  112.07;
                     112.20—
                     112.31
-        3-13-2003   51.26;
                     51.99
-        2-20-2006   95.30
2007-1   1-11-2007   31.16
-        6-12-2008   30.06
-        5-14-2009   52.43
                     156.001—
                     156.004;
                     156.015—
                     156.019;
                     156.030;
                     156.031;
                     156.045;
                     156.051—
                     156.054;
                     156.066;
-        11-12-2009  156.080—
                     156.088;
                     156.090;
                     156.105—
                     156.110;
                     156.125—
                     156.129;
                     156.145;
                     156.146;
                     156.160—
                     156.163
2010-1   3-11-2010   92.11;
                     92.12
-        7-14-2011   156.200;
                     156.201
-        9-8-2011    95.25
-        7-9-2012    156.147
-        7-19-2012   156.048
                     51.40—
-        7-18-2013   51.46;
                     51.99
-        2-3-2014    156.049
-        2-13-2014   156.175—
                     156.185
-        12-13-2014  156.047
-        2-9-2017    30.06
-        4-13-2017   33.02
-        5-11-2017   TSO Table I
-        8-10-2017   TSO Table II
1428     11-8-2018   150.08
                     153.01—
                     153.09;
                     153.20—
                     153.24;
-        12-13-2018  153.30—
                     153.34;
                     153.36;
                     153.37;
                     153.99
-        1-10-2019   TSO Table II
                     52.01—
                     52.08;
                     52.20—
-        1-10-2019   52.26;
                     52.40—
                     52.46;
                     52.99
-        3-14-2019   154.01—
                     154.13
                     50.01—
                     50.10;
                     50.25—
                     50.32;
                     50.45—
-        4-11-2019   50.49;
                     50.99;
                     51.01—
                     51.06;
                     51.20—
                     51.25;
                     51.99
                     34.01;
-        8-8-2019    34.02;
                     151.03
                     94.01—
                     94.04;
                     95.01—
-        11-14-2019  95.10;
                     95.99;
                     113.01—
                     113.08;
                     150.08
-        12-12-2019  30.05
-        12-14-2019  TSO Table II
-        2-13-2020   156.050
-        7-9-2020    155.175
-        7-9-2020    155.212
-        7-9-2020    156.046
-        7-9-2020    156.047
-        7-9-2020    156.065
-        7-9-2020    156.089
-        7-9-2020    156.130
-        7-9-2020    156.164
                     96.01—
-        3-11-2021   96.13;
                     96.99
-        5-13-2021   156.002;
                     156.045
-        2-10-2022   30.01
-        9-8-2022    156.002;
                     156.048
-        11-10-2022  156.002;
                     156.045
-        - -2023     30.06
-        3-9-2023    51.55—
                     51.62
-        3-9-2023    153.08,
                     153.30
-        4-13-2023   156.002
-        10-12-2023  30.05
                     70.01—
-        11-9-2023   70.19;
                     70.99
-        2-8-2024    94.04
                     156.046,
-        5-9-2024    156.047,
                     156.201
                     36.01—
-        3-13-2025   36.11,
                     36.99
-        6-12-2025   TSO Table II
-        9-11-2025   50.08
-        10-9-2025   154.11
                    
 
 
Comprehensive Ordinance List
Publisher's Note: The following table lists all ordinances provided by the City
for codification since the completion of the first edition (2022) code. The
table includes links to the ordinances (as maintained in PDF format) and
references to the code sections affected (where applicable). For other
legislation, please contact the City of Negaunee.
 
Ordinances that amend the Code and are not yet effective have their
identifiying information highlighted in yellow. Changes made by those
ordinances are not incorporated into the text of the Code until the amending
ordinances are effective. Ordinances that do not affect the code have been
grayed out.
 
Jump to:
Ordinances
Ordinances
Ord. No. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No. Date                        Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                                     Business District (B-1)
--       9-17-2022                    
                                     156.002, 156.048
                                     Sing-Family Residential District (R-1)
--       11-17-2022                   
                                     156.002, 156.045
                                     Amending Water Ordinance: Wells
--       3-9-2023, eff. 3-17-2023     
                                     Adding 51.55 - 51.62
                                     Amending Property Maintenance Code
--       3-9-2023, eff. 3-17-2023     
                                     153.08, 153.30, Repealing 153.25, 153.26,
                                     153.27, 153.28, 153.29, 153.35
                                     Amending Zoning
--       4-13-2023, eff. 4-29-2023    
                                     156.002
                                     Downtown Development Authority
--       10-12-2023, eff. 10-23-2023  
                                     30.05
                                     Traffic Code
--       11-9-2023, eff. 11-19-2023   
                                     70.01-70.19; 70.99
                                     Public Tree Care
--       2-8-2024, eff. 2-21-2024     
                                     94.04
                                     Accessory Dwelling Units
--       5-9-2024, eff. 5-20-2024     
                                     156.046, 156.047, 156.201
                                     Establishing a Code of Ethical Standards
--       3-25-2025, eff. 3-27-2025    
                                     Chapter 36
                                     Zoning Map amendment
--       7-6-2025, eff. 7-8-2025      
                                     156.031
                                     Sewer Ordinance
--       9-11-2025, eff. 9-29-2025    
                                     50.08
                                     Certificate of compliance
--       10-9-2025, eff. 10-21-2025   
                                     154.11
                                    
                                    
 
 
