VILLAGE OF PINCKNEY, MICHIGAN
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-13 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 178, passed 9-8-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 84
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE VILLAGE OF PINCKNEY,
MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN;
PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF
AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING FOR THE AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN SECTIONS OF THE
CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE
THE VILLAGE OF PINCKNEY ORDAINS:
Section 1.   The Code entitled “Village of Pinckney Code of Ordinances,”
published by American Legal Publishing Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1
through 153, each inclusive, is adopted.
Section 2.   All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or
before May 12, 2008, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued
in force by reference therein, are repealed.
Section 3.   The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed
to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent
ordinance that is repealed by this Ordinance.
Section 4.   Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person
convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or
regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $500, imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or
both; however, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a
violation of any provision of such Code that substantially corresponds to a
violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of
imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500,
imprisonment for a term of not more than 93 days, or both. Except as otherwise
provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of such Code that are
continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a
separate offense and with respect to other violations of such Code, each
violation constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section,
unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of
any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory
ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the village may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation
of licenses or permits.
Section 5.   Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to
indicate the intention of the village to make the same a part of the Code shall
be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code
includes the additions and amendments.
Section 6.   Ordinances adopted after May 12, 2008, that amend or refer to
ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they
amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.
Section 7.   Savings clause. This Ordinance shall in no manner affect pending
litigation, either civil or criminal, founded or growing out of any ordinance,
resolution, order or parts thereof, are hereby repealed.
Section 8.   Validity and severability. Should any portion of this Ordinance be
found invalid for any reason, such a holding shall not be construed as
affecting the validity of the remaining portions of the Ordinance.
Section 9.   Effective date. This Ordinance shall become effective 15 days from
its adoption by the Village of Pinckney Village Council and publication.
                                                                                                                                                 Rebecca
A. Foster, Village President            Amy M. Salowitz, Village Clerk
   Village Council Member                                             offered
the foregoing Ordinance, and moved its adoption. The motion was seconded by
Village Council Member                             , and upon being put to a
vote, the vote was as follows:
Rebecca A. Foster, President                                          
Linda E. Lavey, Trustee                                          
Robert MacDonald, Trustee                                          
Kurt W. Mohrmann, Trustee                                          
Thomas F. Pais, Trustee                                          
Bobby J. Stone, Trustee                                          
Barry M. White, Trustee                                          
   The President thereupon declared this Ordinance approved and adopted by the
Village Council of the Village of Pinckney this 26th day of January, 2009.
   I hereby certify that the foregoing constitutes a true and complete copy of
Ordinance No.        adopted by the Village Council of the Village of Pinckney,
County of Livingston, Michigan, at a regular meeting held on January 26, 2009.
                                                                            
                                 Village Clerk
ORDINANCE NO. 106
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE VILLAGE OF PINCKNEY,
MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN;
PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF
AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING FOR THE AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN SECTIONS OF THE
CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE.
THE VILLAGE OF PINCKNEY ORDAINS:
Section 1.   The Code entitled “Village of Pinckney Code of Ordinances,”
published by American Legal Publishing Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1
through 153, each inclusive, is adopted.
Section 2.   All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or
before April 11, 2011, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued
in force by reference therein, are repealed.
Section 3.   The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed
to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent
ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.
Section 4.   Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person
convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule,
or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $500.00, imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days,
or both; however, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a
violation of any provision of such Code that substantially corresponds to a
violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of
imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00,
imprisonment for a term of not more than 93 days, or both. Except as otherwise
provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of such Code that are
continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a
separate offense and with respect to other violations of such Code, each
violation constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section,
unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of
any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory
ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the Village may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and
revocation of licenses or permits.
Section 5.   Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to
indicate the intention of the Village to make the same a part of the Code shall
be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code
includes the additions and amendments.
Section 6.   Ordinances adopted after April 11, 2011,that amend or refer to
ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they
amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.
Section 7.   Savings clause. This ordinance shall in no manner affect pending
litigation, either civil or criminal, founded or growing out of any ordinance,
resolution, order, or parts thereof, hereby repealed.
Section 8.   Validity and severability. Should any portion of this ordinance be
found invalid for any reason, such a holding shall not be construed as
affecting the validity of the remaining portions of the ordinance.
Section 9.   Effective date. This ordinance shall become effective fifteen (15)
days from its adoption by the Village of Pinckney Village Council and
publication.
                                             
Rebecca A. Foster, Village President
                                             
Amy M. Salowitz, Village Clerk
   Village Council Member                                              offered
the foregoing Ordinance, and moved its adoption. The motion was seconded by
Village Council Member                             , and upon being put to a
vote, the vote was as follows:
Rebecca A. Foster, President                                          
Linda E. Lavey, Trustee                                          
Robert MacDonald, Trustee                                          
Heather Menosky, Trustee                                          
Kurt W. Mohrmann, Trustee                                          
Thomas F. Pais, Trustee                                          
Barry M. White, Trustee                                          
   The President thereupon declared this ordinance approved and adopted by the
Village Council of the Village of Pinckney this 13th day of June, 2011.
   I hereby certify that the foregoing constitutes a true and complete copy of
Ordinance No. 106 adopted by the Village Council of the Village of Pinckney,
County of Livingston, Michigan, at a regular meeting held on June 13, 2011.
                                            
Amy Salowitz, Village Clerk
ORDINANCE NO. 114
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE VILLAGE OF PINCKNEY,
MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN;
PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF
AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING FOR THE AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN SECTIONS OF THE
CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE.
THE VILLAGE OF PINCKNEY ORDAINS:
   Section 1.   The Code entitled “Village of Pinckney Code of Ordinances,”
published by American Legal Publishing Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1
through 153, each inclusive, is adopted.
   Section 2.   All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or
before March 12, 2012, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued
in force by reference therein, are repealed.
   Section 3.   The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be
construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a
subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this Ordinance.
   Section 4.   Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person
convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or
regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $500.00, imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or
both; however, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a
violation of any provision of such Code that substantially corresponds to a
violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of
imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00,
imprisonment for a term of not more than 93 days, or both. Except as otherwise
provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of such Code that are
continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a
separate offense and with respect to other violations of such Code, each
violation constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section,
unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of
any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory
ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the Village may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation
of licenses or permits.
   Section 5.   Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as
to indicate the intention of the Village to make the same a part of the Code
shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code
includes the additions and amendments.
   Section 6.   Ordinances adopted after March 12, 2012, that amend or refer to
ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they
amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.
   Section 7.   Savings Clause. This ordinance shall in no manner affect
pending litigation, either civil or criminal, founded or growing out of any
ordinance, resolution, order or parts thereof, hereby repealed.
   Section 8.   Validity and Severability. Should any portion of this ordinance
be found invalid for any reason, such a holding shall not be construed as
affecting the validity of the remaining portions of the Ordinance.
   Section 9.   Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective fifteen
(15) days from its adoption by the Village of Pinckney Village Council and
publication.
                                                                            
                  Rebecca A. Foster, Village President
                                                                             
                  Amy M. Salowitz, Village Clerk
   Village Council Member _______________ offered the foregoing Ordinance, and
moved its adoption. The motion was seconded by Village Council Member
_______________, and upon being put to a vote, the vote was as follows:
 
Rebecca A. Foster, President _______
Linda E. Lavey, Trustee      _______
Robert MacDonald, Trustee    _______
Heather Menosky, Trustee     _______
Kurt W. Mohrmann, Trustee    _______
Thomas F. Pais, Trustee      _______
Barry M. White, Trustee      _______
 
   The President thereupon declared this Ordinance approved and adopted by the
Village Council of the Village of Pinckney this 27th day of August, 2012.
   I hereby certify that the foregoing constitutes a true and complete copy of
Ordinance No. ____ adopted by the Village Council of the Village of Pinckney,
County of Livingston, Michigan, at a regular meeting held on
                       .
                                                                             
                  Amy Salowitz, Village Clerk
ORDINANCE NO. 122
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE VILLAGE OF PINCKNEY,
MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN;
PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF
AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING FOR THE AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN SECTIONS OF THE
CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE.
THE VILLAGE OF PINCKNEY ORDAINS:
   Section 1.   The Code entitled “Village of Pinckney Code of Ordinances,”
published by American Legal Publishing Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1
through 153, each inclusive, is adopted.
   Section 2.   All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or
before June 24, 2013, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued
in force by reference therein, are repealed.
   Section 3.   The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be
construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a
subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this Ordinance.
   Section 4.   Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person
convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or
regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $500.00, imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or
both; however, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a
violation of any provision of such Code that substantially corresponds to a
violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of
imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00,
imprisonment for a term of not more than 93 days, or both. Except as otherwise
provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of such Code that are
continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a
separate offense and with respect to other violations of such Code, each
violation constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section,
unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of
any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory
ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the Village may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation
of licenses or permits.
   Section 5.   Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as
to indicate the intention of the Village to make the same a part of the Code
shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code
includes the additions and amendments.
   Section 6.   Ordinances adopted after June 24, 2013, that amend or refer to
ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they
amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.
   Section 7.   Savings Clause. This ordinance shall in no manner affect
pending litigation, either civil or criminal, founded or growing out of any
ordinance, resolution, order or parts thereof, hereby repealed.
   Section 8.   Validity and Severability. Should any portion of this ordinance
be found invalid for any reason, such a holding shall not be construed as
affecting the validity of the remaining portions of the Ordinance.
   Section 9.   Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective fifteen
(15) days from its adoption by the Village of Pinckney Village Council and
publication.
                                                                            
                  Linda E. Lavey, Village President
                                                                             
                  Amy M. Salowitz, Village Clerk
   Village Council Member _______________ offered the foregoing Ordinance, and
moved its adoption. The motion was seconded by Village Council Member
_______________, and upon being put to a vote, the vote was as follows:
 
Linda E. Lavey, President  _______
Jessica Aseltine, Trustee  _______
W. Robert Burwell, Trustee _______
Robert MacDonald, Trustee  _______
Heather Menosky, Trustee   _______
Kurt. W. Mohrmann, Trustee _______
Thomas F. Pais, Trustee    _______
 
   The President thereupon declared this Ordinance approved and adopted by the
Village Council of the Village of Pinckney this 14th day of October, 2013.
   I hereby certify that the foregoing constitutes a true and complete copy of
Ordinance No. ____ adopted by the Village Council of the Village of Pinckney,
County of Livingston, Michigan, at a regular meeting held on  October 14, 2013
.
                                                                             
                  Amy Salowitz, Village Clerk
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   How code designated and cited
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section catchlines and other headings
   
10.04   Certain ordinances not affected by code
   
10.05   Continuation of ordinances
   
10.06   Prior rights, offenses and the like
   
10.07   Ordinances repealed not reenacted
   
10.08   Amendments to code
   
10.09   Supplementation of code
   
10.10   Appearance tickets
   
10.11   Separability of provisions
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   This code shall constitute and be designated as the “Village of Pinckney
Code of Ordinances.”
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Terms used in this code, unless otherwise specifically defined, have
the meanings prescribed by the statutes of the state for the same terms.
   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BOARD OF TRUSTEES or BOARD.  The Board of Trustees of the Village of
Pinckney.
      CIVIL INFRACTION. An act or omission that is prohibited by this code or
any ordinance of the village, but which is not a crime under this code or any
other ordinance of the village, and for which civil sanctions, including
without limitation, fines, damages, expenses and costs may be ordered, as
authorized by Public Act 236, Ch. 87 of 1961, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8701
through 600.8735, as amended. A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser
included offense of any criminal offense in this code.
      CODE.  The Village of Pinckney Code as designated in §
10.01.
      COMPUTATION OF TIME.  The time within which an act is to be done, as
provided in this code or in any order issued pursuant to this code, when
expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last, except that if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be
excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a
legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.
      COUNTY.  County of Livingston, Michigan.
      JUVENILE. Any person under 17 years of age.
      MINOR. A person under 21 years of age.
      OFFICER, DEPARTMENT, BOARD AND THE LIKE. Whenever any officer,
department, board or other public agency is referred to by title only, the
reference shall be construed as if followed by the words “of the Village of
Pinckney, Michigan.” Whenever, by the provisions of this code, any officer of
the village is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty,
reference to the officer shall mean and include the officer or his or her
deputy or authorized subordinate.
      ORDINANCES. The ordinances of the Village of Pinckney and all amendments
thereto.
      PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation. Whenever the word PERSON is used in any section of this code
prescribing a penalty or fine, as applied to partnerships or associations, the
word includes the partners, or members thereof, and as applied to corporations
the word includes officers, agents or employees thereof who are responsible for
any violations of the section. The singular includes the plural. The masculine
gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
      STATE. The term THE STATE or THIS STATE shall be construed to mean the
State of Michigan.
      VILLAGE COUNCIL. The term VILLAGE COUNCIL, or COUNCIL as used in this
code shall mean the legislative authority of the Village of Pinckney as
established by Chapter V of 1985 Public Act (M.C.L.A. §§ 65.1 through 65.8), as
amended, being the Village’s Charter.
§ 10.03 SECTION CATCHLINES AND OTHER HEADINGS.
   (A)   The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in
boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the
sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of the sections, nor
as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be
so deemed when any of the sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted.
   (B)   No provision of this code shall be held invalid by reason of
deficiency in any catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, article
or division.
§ 10.04 CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.
   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any
ordinance not in conflict with or inconsistent with this code.
   (A)   Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the village, or
authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the village or any evidence of the
village’s indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the village;
   (B)   Containing any administrative provisions of the Board of Trustees;
   (C)   Granting any right or franchise;
   (D)   Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening,
paving, widening, vacating and the like, any street or public way in the
village;
   (E)   Making any appropriation;
   (F)   Levying or imposing taxes;
   (G)   Establishing or prescribing grades in the village;
   (H)   Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefore;
   (I)   Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the village;
   (J)   Extending or contracting the boundaries of the village;
   (K)   Prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any village
officers or employees;
   (L)   Prescribing specific parking restrictions, no-parking zones, specific
speed zones, parking meter zones and specific stop or yield intersections or
other traffic ordinances pertaining to specific streets;
   (M)   Pertaining to re-zoning; and
   (N)   (1)   Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general
and permanent nature; and all ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in
full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code.
      (2)   The ordinances are on file in the Village Clerk’s office.
§ 10.05 CONTINUATION OF ORDINANCES.
   The provisions of this code, so far as they are the same in substance as
those of heretofore existing ordinances, shall be construed as a continuation
of these ordinances and not as new enactments.
§ 10.06 PRIOR RIGHTS, OFFENSES AND THE LIKE.
   Any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired, or
liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time of
adoption of this code shall not be affected by the adoption, but may be
enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same
extent as if the adoption had not been effected.
§ 10.07 ORDINANCES REPEALED NOT REENACTED.
   No ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore repealed shall be
considered preordained or reenacted by virtue of this code, unless specifically
reenacted. The repeal of any curative or validating ordinances shall not impair
or affect any cure or validation already effected thereby.
§ 10.08 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   (A)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made by
amending the provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in the following language: “That section _____ of the Village of Pinckney
Code, is hereby amended to read as follows:...” The new provisions shall then
be set out in full as desired.
   (B)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added,
the following language shall be used: “That the Village of Pinckney Code is
hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which the section
reads as follows:...” The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
§ 10.09 SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.
   (A)   By contract or by village personnel, supplements to this code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the Board of Trustees.
A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general
parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all
changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary,
replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new
pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be
current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in
the supplement.
   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages.
   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make
formal, non-substantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included
in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a
unified code. For example, the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement and make changes
in catchlines, headings and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be
inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subdivision numbers;
      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to
“this chapter,” “this article,” “this division” and the like, as the case may
be, or to “sections _____ to _____” (inserting section numbers to indicate the
sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance
incorporated into the code); and
      (5)   Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code; but in no case
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
§ 10.10 APPEARANCE TICKETS.
   The following public servants are hereby authorized to issue and serve
appearance tickets with respect to ordinances of the village, as provided by
Public Act 147 of 1968, being M.C.L.A. §§ 764.9a through 764.9e, as amended,
when the public servant has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
committed an offense in violation of a village ordinance:
   (A)   Police officers;
   (B)   Police Chief;
   (C)   Zoning Administrator;
   (D)   Code Enforcement Officer;
   (E)   Village Manager; and
   (F)   Village President.
§ 10.11 SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   Each section, paragraph, sentence, clause and provision of this code is
separable and if any provision shall be held unconstitutional or invalid for
any reason, the decision shall not affect the remainder of this code, or any
part thereof, other than that part affected by the decision.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this code for which a penalty is
not otherwise specified, either in that provision or elsewhere in the code,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in any court of
competent jurisdiction shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500, or to
imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than 90 days, or to
both the fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
   (B)   Provisions of this code prescribing any penalty shall not apply to the
failure of any village officer or employee to perform an official duty.
   (C)   The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction
shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this code or any ordinance,
plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under
Public Act 736 of 1961, Ch. 87, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.101 through 600.9911, as
amended and other applicable laws.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal
civil infraction violation by this code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a
violation shall be not less than $125 nor more than $500, plus costs and other
sanctions, for each infraction. Costs shall include all expenses, direct and
indirect, to which the village has been put in connection with the municipal
civil infraction. In no case, however, shall costs of less than $10 nor more
than $500 be ordered.
      (2)   Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a
person of any requirement or provision of this code or any ordinance. As used
in this section, REPEAT OFFENSE means a second (or any subsequent) civil
infraction violation of the same requirement or provision (i) committed by a
person within any three-year period (unless some other period is specifically
provided by this code or any ordinance) and (ii) for which the person admits
responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless otherwise
specifically provided by this code or any ordinance for a particular civil
infraction violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as
follows:
         (a)   The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall
be no less than $200 and no more than $500, plus costs.
         (b)   The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $400 and no more than $500,
plus costs.
         (c)   Repeat offenses are determined on the basis of the date of the
commission of the offenses.
   (D)   A violation includes any act which is prohibited, made or declared to
be unlawful or an offense by this code or any ordinance; and any omission or
failure to act where the act is required by this code or any ordinance.
   (E)   Each act of violation and each day on which any violation of this code
or any ordinance continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject
to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense.
   (F)   In addition to any remedies available at law, the village may bring an
action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent
or abate any violation of this code or any village ordinance. The penalty or
sanction shall be in addition to the abatement of the violating condition, any
injunctive relief, revocation of any permit or license, or other process.
   (G)   The penalties and sanctions provided by this section, unless another
penalty or sanction as expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any
section of this code and/or any addition to this code whether or not the
penalty or sanction is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance.
(Ord. 115, passed 1-14-2013)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   VILLAGE OFFICIALS
      
31.   VILLAGE ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: VILLAGE OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Method of changing the terms of office for Village Trustees
   
30.02   Nonpartisan elections
   
30.03   Compensation of officers
Village Treasurer
   
30.15   Appointment
   
30.16   Duties
   
30.17   Reports
   
30.18   Vouchers
   
30.19   Handling of money
Village Manager
   
30.35   Establishment of Office
   
30.36   Appointment of Village Manager
   
30.37   Vacancies; acting Village Manager
   
30.38   Compensation
   
30.39   Duties
   
30.40   Purchasing responsibilities
   
30.41   Dealing with employees
Village Clerk
   
30.55   Nomination and appointment
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 METHOD OF CHANGING THE TERMS OF OFFICE FOR VILLAGE TRUSTEES.
   The terms of office of the current Village Trustees, which will all expire
simultaneously on November 19, 2006, pursuant to the amended Michigan law
(M.C.L.A § 168.644g), will be changed to the four-year staggered terms as
required by the amendments to the statutory Village Charter (M.C.L.A.§ 62.5),
being the General Law Village Act, Act 3 of 1895, as amended, by adjusting the
terms of office for Village Trustees as follows:
   (A)   The election of successors for the Village Trustees, whose terms of
office expire on November 19, 2006, will be held as part of the 2006 November
general election; and the three candidates for the office of Village Trustee
receiving the highest number of votes shall hold office from November 20, 2006,
and continuing for a period of four years, or until their successors have been
elected and qualified. The candidates for the office of Village Trustee
receiving the fourth, fifth and sixth highest number of votes in the 2006
November general election shall hold office from November 20, 2006, and
continuing for a period of two years, or until their successors have been
elected and qualified.
   (B)   The election of successors for the three Village Trustees whose terms
of office expire on November 19, 2008, will be held as part of the 2008
November general election, with each elected successor being elected for a
four-year term of office commencing November 20, 2008.
   (C)   After 2008, three Village Trustees shall be elected for a term of four
years, and until their successors are qualified, at each biennial village
election to be held with the even year November general election; as provided
in Ch. II, § 5 of the amended Village Charter (General Law Village Act 3 of
1895, being M.C.L.A § 62.5, as amended).
(Ord. 65, passed 2-14-2002)
§ 30.02 NONPARTISAN ELECTIONS.
   (A)   Authorization. As authorized by § 3(1) and (2), Ch. III of Public Act
3 of 1895, being M.C.L.A. §§ 61.1 through 75.12, as amended, village elections
in the Village of Pinckney shall hereafter be nonpartisan.
   (B)   Elimination of village primary. From and after the effective date
hereof, the village will not conduct a primary election for the election of
village officers.
   (C)   Election procedure.
      (1)   At any election of village officers the person receiving the
highest number of votes cast for that office shall be declared the elected
winner for a single office.
      (2)   If more than one Trustee position is open, the first opening will
go to the person who receives the highest number of votes, the second opening
will go to the persons who receives the second highest number of votes and if
there are more than two positions available, this procedure shall be followed
until all positions are filled.
(Ord. 59, passed 7-23-2001; Ord. passed - -)
§ 30.03 COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   President and Trustees. The President and Trustees shall each receive
compensation as established by resolution of the Council, which shall be
adopted no less than annually simultaneously with the annual budget of the
village. Such compensation may include a base salary, or a per diem rate for
attending Council meetings and other meetings in fulfillment of the duties of
the President and Trustees, or both. The resolution may also provide for
reimbursement of any expenses incurred in the performance of their official
duties pursuant to policies as may be established from time to time by
resolution of the Village Council.
   (B)   Time of payment; other conditions. The President and Trustees shall be
paid monthly. The Council may, by resolution, authorize the President or a
Trustee to perform, with or without compensation, other additional services for
the village that are not within the normal official duties of the President or
Trustee offices as may be deemed appropriate by the majority of the Council.
Any compensation for such additional services shall increase the President or
Trustee compensation only during the time periods that Council has authorized
such additional services. The President or Trustees shall receive no other
compensation for their official duties as President or Trustee services
performed for and on behalf of the village during the term of office except
compensation provided by a resolution adopted pursuant to this section.
   (C)   Other officials and employees. All other village officers and
employees shall receive such compensation as the Council may from time to time
establish by resolution or contracts of employment.
(Ord. 109, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 175, passed 1-13-2025)
VILLAGE TREASURER
§ 30.15 APPOINTMENT.
   The Office of Village Treasurer is hereby established by this subchapter to
provide that the Treasurer shall be nominated by the President and confirmed by
a two-thirds vote of the Council. The term of office shall be at the pleasure
of the Council. Compensation shall be as established by the Council and
benefits shall be provided in Art. IV of the Village Personnel Policies and
Procedures Manual.
(Ord. 52, passed 11-9-1998)
§ 30.16 DUTIES.
   The Treasurer shall do all of the following:
   (A)   Have the custody of all monies, bonds other than official bonds filed
with the Clerk under Ch. II of Public Act 3 of 1895, being M.C.L.A. §§ 61.1
through 75.12, as amended, mortgages, notes, leases and evidences of value
belonging to the village;
   (B)   Receive all money belonging to and receivable by the corporation;
   (C)   Keep an account of all receipts and expenditures;
   (D)   Collect and keep an account of all taxes and monies appropriated,
raised or received for each fund of the village and keep a separate account for
each;
   (E)   Pay check disbursement authorizations out of the particular fund
raised for the purpose for which the disbursement was authorized;
   (F)   Perform duties prescribed by Public Act 3 of 1985, as amended, related
to assessing property and levying taxes; and
   (G)   Perform other duties as may be specified in the Village Charter, the
Council or as otherwise specified by law or this subchapter.
(Ord. 52, passed 11-9-1998)
§ 30.17 REPORTS.
   The Treasurer shall report to the Clerk on the first Monday of each month,
if required, a report of the amounts received and credited to each fund, on
what account received, the amounts paid out from each fund during the preceding
month and the amount of money remaining in each fund on the day of the
Treasurer’s report. The Treasurer shall also provide to the Village Council
annually within 45 days after the end of the fiscal year, and as often and for
the period as the Council shall require, a full and detailed account of the
receipts and disbursements of the treasury since the date of the Treasurer’s
last annual report, classifying them by the funds to which the receipts are
credited and out of which the disbursements are made and the balance remaining
in each fund.
(Ord. 52, passed 11-9-1998)
§ 30.18 VOUCHERS.
   The Treasurer shall take vouchers for all money paid from the treasury,
showing the amount and fund from which payment was made. Upon settlement with
the proper officers of the village, the Treasurer shall file the vouchers with
the Clerk.
(Ord. 52, passed 11-9-1998)
§ 30.19 HANDLING OF MONEY.
   The Treasurer shall keep all the village money in depository accounts
authorized by law. The Treasurer shall not use, either directly or indirectly,
the village money, warrants or evidences of debt, for the Treasurer’s own use
or benefit, or for the benefit of any other person. On proof of the violation,
the Council shall declare the office vacant and appoint a successor.
(Ord. 52, passed 11-9-1998)
VILLAGE MANAGER
§ 30.35 ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE.
   In accordance with the authority for the appointment of the village officers
as the Council shall deem necessary for the execution of the powers granted to
the village contained in § 2 of Ch. 11 and § 8 of Ch. V of Public Act 3 of
1895, as amended, being M.C.L.A §§ 61.1 through 75.12, which is the Charter of
the village, there is hereby established the Office of Village Manager.
(Ord. 35, passed 7-17-1989; Ord. 176, passed 1-13-2025)
§ 30.36 APPOINTMENT OF VILLAGE MANAGER.
   (A)   The Council may appoint a Village Manager for an indefinite term and
the Council may, by contract, enter into other terms and conditions as the
Manager and Council deem appropriate. The Manager shall serve at the pleasure
of the Council and may be removed by the affirmative vote of four or more
Council members, but only after a hearing before the Council. The President
may, for cause, suspend the Manager with full pay until the hearing. The action
of the Council in removing the Manager shall be final.
   (B)   The Manager shall be selected solely on the basis of administrative
and executive abilities with special reference to training and experience.
   (C)   When the Council has authorized employment of a Village Manager, the
Council shall, within 180 days of the effective date of such authorization or
within 180 days after a vacancy exists in the position, employ a Village
Manager.
   (D)   When the Council has not authorized the employment of a Village
Manager, the Village President shall assume the duties of the Village Manager
as provided under Charter §§ 64.1, 64.2, and 64.3 (M.C.L.A. §§ 64.1 through
64.3), including expressly the duties and responsibilities of the Village
Manager as established within the Code of Ordinances, Village of Pinckney,
Michigan. The Village President may, with the concurrence of the Village
Council, delegate some of these responsibilities to other village employees or
contractors.
(Ord. 35, passed 7-17-1989; Ord. 176, passed 1-13-2025)
§ 30.37 VACANCIES; ACTING VILLAGE MANAGER.
   (A)   When a vacancy exists in the Office of Village Manager and the Village
Council has authorized the employment of a Village Manager, the Manager's
responsibilities shall be assumed by the Village President until the position
is filled. The Village President may, with the concurrence of the Village
Council, delegate some or all of these responsibilities to other village
employees or contractors during the period of vacancy.
   (B)   The Village Council may appoint or designate an acting Manager during
the period of a vacancy in the office of Village Manager or during the absence
of the Manager from the village.
(Ord. 35, passed 7-17-1989; Ord. 176, passed 1-13-2025)
§ 30.38 COMPENSATION.
   The Village Manager shall receive compensation as the Council shall
determine annually by resolution or contract.
(Ord. 35, passed 7-17-1989)
§ 30.39 DUTIES.
   (A)   The Village Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the
village and shall be responsible to the Village Council for the efficient
administration of all affairs of the village, all departments and over all
public property belonging to the village.
   (B)   The Manager shall have the following functions and duties:
      (1)   Attend all meetings of the Village Council and committees thereof
and take part therein but without a vote;
      (2)   Be responsible for personnel management and shall issue, subject to
Council approval, personnel rules applicable to all village employees. The
Manager shall have the following responsibilities:
         (a)   To appoint, suspend or remove all appointed administrative
officers and department heads, subject to Council approval. The Manager shall
recommend to the Council the salary of wages to be paid each official; and
         (b)   To appoint, suspend or remove all other employees of the
village. All the action shall be based on merit and taken pursuant to personnel
rules approved by the Council. The Manager shall fix the salaries or wages of
all employees;
      (3)   Exercise administrative control over all departments including the
Police Department and the Department of Public Works. The Chief of Police and
the head of the Department of Public Works shall be subject to the direction of
the Manager;
      (4)   Exercise administrative responsibility over the accounting,
budgeting, personnel, purchasing and related management functions of the
Village Clerk and Village Treasurer;
      (5)   Shall be required to attend all meetings of village boards and
commissions, including the Village Planning Commission with the right to take
part therein but without a vote, and may be appointed to also serve as the
Zoning Administrator;
      (6)   Prepare and administer the budget as provided for in the Uniform
Budgeting and Accounting Act, Public Act 2 of 1968, as amended, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 141.421 through 144.440a;
      (7)   Be the Purchasing Agent of the village;
      (8)   Prepare and maintain an administrative code defining the duties and
functions of the several officers and departments of the village, subject to
approval by the Council;
      (9)   Investigate all complaints concerning the administrative of the
village, and shall have authority at all times to inspect the books, records
and papers of any agent, employee or officer of the village;
      (10)   Make recommendations to the Council for the adoption of the
measures as may be deemed necessary or expedient for the improvement or
betterment of the village; and
      (11)   Perform other duties required from time to time by the Village
Council.
(Ord. 35, passed 7-17-1989; Ord. 176, passed 1-13-2025)
§ 30.40 PURCHASING RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The Village Manager shall act as the Purchasing Agent for the village
offices and departments. The Manager may delegate some or all of the duties as
Purchasing Agent to other officers or employees, provided that the delegation
shall not relieve the Manager of the responsibility for the proper conduct of
those duties.
   (B)   The Village Manager shall have the authority to purchase any product
or service the cost of which does not exceed $5,000 provided that funds have
been appropriated. The cost of the product of service shall not exceed the
unencumbered balance of the appropriation for that account. Except as herein
after provided, the Village Manager shall not purchase any product or service
the cost of which exceeds the above dollar amount without prior approval of the
Village Council. The Village Manager may promulgate rules governing the
purchase of products or services.
   (C)   The Village Manager shall have the authority to purchase any product
or service regardless of its cost when the purchase is necessitated by an
emergency condition. EMERGENCY CONDITION is defined to mean any event which
presents an imminent threat to the public health or safety, or any event which
would result in the disruption of a village service which is essential to the
public health or safety.
(Ord. 35, passed 7-17-1989; Ord. 176, passed 1-13-2025)
§ 30.41 DEALING WITH EMPLOYEES.
   Neither the Council nor the Village President shall attempt to influence the
employment of any person by the Village Manager or in any way interfere in the
management of departments under the jurisdiction of the Manager. Except for
purpose of inquiry, the President, Council and its members shall deal with
departments under the jurisdiction of the Village Manager through the Manager.
(Ord. 35, passed 7-17-1989)
VILLAGE CLERK
§ 30.55 NOMINATION AND APPOINTMENT.
   As authorized by section 1(3), Chapter II of the 1895 PA 3, as amended, the
Village Clerk shall be chosen by nomination by the Village President and
appointment by a majority vote of the Village Council. The appointed Village
Clerk shall serve at the pleasure of Council, and shall serve until the Clerk’s
successor is appointed and qualified. The Village Clerk will report and be
responsible to the Village President for the official function and activities
of the Clerk’s position and for the day to day operations of the department and
office, except as otherwise expressly required by law.
(Ord. 80, passed 4-14-2008)
CHAPTER 31: VILLAGE ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Reserve Police Force
   
31.01   Establishment and purpose
   
31.02   Administration and control
   
31.03   Appointment of reserve police officers
   
31.04   Oath of reserve police officers
   
31.05   Compensation
   
31.06   Benefits
   
31.07   Uniforms and insignia
   
31.08   Rules and regulations
   
31.09   Authority and duties
   
31.10   Regular police force
Downtown Development Authority
   
31.25   Title
   
31.26   Determination of necessity; purpose
   
31.27   Definitions
   
31.28   Creation of authority
   
31.29   Termination
   
31.30   Description of downtown district
   
31.31   Powers of authority
   
31.32   Board of Directors
   
31.33   Fiscal year adoption of budget
Miscellaneous Organizations
   
31.45   Cable Television Commission
   
31.46   Planning Commission
RESERVE POLICE FORCE
§ 31.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   In order to provide for the village's civil defense, disaster control and
the safety and welfare of the citizens, there is hereby authorized the
establishment of an organized police reserve force. These reserve police
officers shall perform police duties at the times as deemed necessary by the
Village President or the Chief of Police, including, but not limited to times
of emergency, danger, civil unrest, natural disaster, riot or special events,
for the promotion of public safety and welfare and the preservation of law and
order. The total strength of the organized police reserve force shall be such
as, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, shall be necessary to supplement the
regular police force.
(Ord. 67, passed 10-10-2005)
§ 31.02 ADMINISTRATION AND CONTROL.
   All reserve police officers shall be under the general supervision and
control of the Chief of Police; subject to the rules, regulations and policies
of the Police Department and the village; and shall at all times carry on their
activities in conjunction with one or more of the village's certified police
officers in the manner required by law.
(Ord. 67, passed 10-10-2005)
§ 31.03 APPOINTMENT OF RESERVE POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   Reserve police officers shall be appointed by the Chief of Police who
shall develop and promulgate rules, regulations and qualifications for reserve
police officers, and plan and effectuate a training program as it relates to
the duties and responsibilities of reserve police officers; provided, however,
that all the members shall:
      (1)   Be of sound physical condition, and be of good moral character in
accordance with State of Michigan Public Act 203 of 1965, as amended, being
M.C.L.A §§ 28.601 et seq.;
      (2)   Be citizens of the United States;
      (3)   Be at least 21 years of age;
      (4)   Be free of felony convictions;
      (5)   Be properly licensed to operate a motor vehicle on the public
highways of the state; and
      (6)   Possess the mental and emotional maturity, wisdom and judgment
deemed necessary and appropriate for the proper performance of assigned duties
as determined by the Chief of Police.
   (B)   Before receiving the oath of office, the reserve police officer shall
be trained in traffic control, first aid, resuscitation, hazardous materials
accidents, report writing and the other subjects which the Chief of Police
considers appropriate.
   (C)   All members of the Pinckney Reserve Police Officer System, who were
members at the time of the adoption of this subchapter, shall continue in their
position without the need of any further appointment.
   (D)   A member of the police reserve may terminate his or her appointment by
submitting a written resignation to the Chief of Police, and the appointment
may be suspended or terminated by the Chief of Police at any time, with or
without cause and for any reason whatsoever.
(Ord. 67, passed 10-10-2005)
§ 31.04 OATH OF RESERVE POLICE OFFICERS.
   Before beginning duty, each reserve police officer shall take an oath
administered by the Village Clerk. In that oath, the officer shall swear to
perform the duties and to observe the limitations described in this subchapter
and to abide by the rules and regulations adopted by the Chief of Police. A
copy of the oath shall be signed and maintained in the village's records.
(Ord. 67, passed 10-10-2005)
§ 31.05 COMPENSATION.
   Reserve police officers shall perform their duties as a voluntary public
service and without monetary compensation.
(Ord. 67, passed 10-10-2005)
§ 31.06 BENEFITS.
   Reserve police officers shall be entitled to the rights and benefits
provided under the Worker's Compensation Act of Michigan, being Public Act 317
of 1969, being M.C.L.A. §§ 418.101 through 418.941, as amended; provided,
however, that reserve police officers, in order to be entitled to the benefits
of the Worker's Compensation Act of Michigan, shall have been injured or killed
while on duty and acting within the scope of their appointment as reserve
police officers.
(Ord. 67, passed 10-10-2005)
§ 31.07 UNIFORM AND INSIGNIA.
   (A)   Reserve police officers shall wear badges, dress and insignia as the
Chief of Police shall direct, and shall be equipped in the manner which the
Chief of Police shall deem necessary for the proper discharge of their duties.
   (B)   The Chief of Police may require the carrying of firearms while the
reserve police officers are on duty. All equipment issued by the village shall
remain the property of the village.
(Ord. 67, passed 10-10-2005)
§ 31.08 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The reserve police and all members thereof shall be subject to and governed
by the rules and regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police, relating to
the functions, operations and procedures of the Police Department.
(Ord. 67, passed 10-10-2005)
§ 31.09 AUTHORITY AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The organized police reserve force is not intended to replace or
supplant the duly sworn members of the Village Police Department, but shall
supplement their efforts in maintaining public safety and to assist in times of
emergency and danger. Reserve police officers may perform the functions as may
be delegated from time to time to them by the Chief of Police; provided,
however, that the appointment of an individual as a reserve police officer
under this subchapter is not to be construed as providing any additional power
of arrest than that granted to private persons under statutory provisions of
the state. Nor shall the provisions of this subchapter be construed as
authority or power to carry weapons contrary to the statutory provisions of the
state. It is intended that the members of the organized police reserve force
shall be available for duties such as, but not limited to:
      (1)   Directing traffic;
      (2)   Desk assignments, including the duties as answering the telephone
and writing reports;
      (3)   Assisting at the scene of accidents and fires;
      (4)   Assisting in crime prevention and crime analysis;
      (5)   Patrolling and providing security at special events;
      (6)   Assisting in maintaining law and order at events where a large
number of persons have assembled;
      (7)   Assisting the Fire Department by handling crowds at fires; and
      (8)   Handling of service type calls and similar noncritical tasks.
   (B)   It shall be grounds for immediate dismissal for any member of the
police reserve force to falsely represent that he or she has authority, to wear
his or her uniform or insignia or to use any of the equipment furnished to him
or her, except during the performance of actual authorized reserve police duty.
No reserve police officer shall be deemed to be on authorized reserve police
duty until the member shall have been specifically ordered to the duty by the
Chief of Police, his or her authorized designee or the Village President.
(Ord. 67, passed 10-10-2005) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 31.10 REGULAR POLICE FORCE.
   Membership in the police reserve force shall not constitute membership in
the regularly constituted Village Police Department, nor shall any member of
the police reserve force be entitled to any right or privilege of members of
the regularly constituted Village Police Department, nor to any other
prerequisite or emolument attaching to membership in the regularly constituted
Village Police Department, excepting the state worker's compensation benefits
to which they may be entitled by law.
(Ord. 67, passed 10-10-2005)
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
§ 31.25 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Downtown Development Authority of the
Village of Pinckney.
(Ord. 41, passed 4-22-1991)
§ 31.26 DETERMINATION OF NECESSITY; PURPOSE.
   The Village Council hereby determines that it is necessary for the best
interest of the public to create a public body corporate which shall operate to
halt property value deterioration, eliminate the causes of that deterioration,
increase property tax evaluation where possible in the business district of the
village and promote economic growth, pursuant to Public Act 197 of 1975, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1651 through 125.1680, as amended.
(Ord. 41, passed 4-22-1991)
§ 31.27 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (B)   The terms, used in this subchapter shall have the same meaning as
given to them in Act 197 or as hereinafter in this section provided unless the
context clearly indicates to the contrary. As used in this subchapter:
      ACT 197. Act 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan 1987, as amended.
      AUTHORITY. The Downtown Development Authority of the Village of Pinckney
created by this subchapter.
      BOARD. The Board of Directors of the Authority. The governing body of the
Authority.
      CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER. The President or the duly appointed designee of
the President of the Village of Pinckney.
      COUNCIL. The Village Council of the Village of Pinckney.
      DOWNTOWN DISTRICT. The Downtown District designated by this subchapter,
as now existing or as hereinafter amended and which the Authority shall
exercise its power.
      VILLAGE. The Village of Pinckney, Livingston County, Michigan.
(Ord. 41, passed 4-22-1991)
§ 31.28 CREATION OF AUTHORITY.
   There is hereby created pursuant to Act 197, a Downtown Development
Authority for the village. The Authority shall be a public body corporate and
shall be known and exercise its powers as Downtown Development Authority of the
Village of Pinckney. The Authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any
court in the state and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out
the purpose of its incorporation as provided by this subchapter and Act 197.
The enumeration of the power in this subchapter or in Act 197 shall not be
construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the authority of the
Authority consistent with the Statutes of the State of Michigan.
(Ord. 41, passed 4-22-1991)
§ 31.29 TERMINATION.
   Upon completion of its purposes, the Authority may be dissolved by the
Council. The property and assets of the Authority after dissolution and
satisfaction of its obligation shall revert to the village.
(Ord. 41, passed 4-22-1991)
§ 31.30 DESCRIPTION OF DOWNTOWN DISTRICT.
   The Downtown District shall consist of the territory of the village
described in Exhibit 1, attached to Ord. 41, as if fully set forth herein. This
designation shall be subject to the changes as may hereinafter be made pursuant
to this subchapter and Act 197.
(Ord. 41, passed 4-22-1991)
§ 31.31 POWERS OF AUTHORITY.
   The Downtown Development Authority shall have all powers, except the power
to levy a tax that is provided by law including Act 197 that the authorities
may wield.
(Ord. 41, passed 4-22-1991)
§ 31.32 BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
   The Authority shall be under the supervision and control of the Board. As
authorized by M.C.L.A. § 125.1654(8), the Planning Commission, as established
pursuant to Village Code §
31.32, as amended, shall serve as the Downtown Development Authority Board of
Directors.
(Ord. 41, passed 4-22-1991; Ord. 86, passed 2-9-2009; Ord. 129, passed 4-11-
2016)
§ 31.33 FISCAL YEAR ADOPTION OF BUDGET.
   (A)   The fiscal year of the Authority shall be set by resolution as may be
adopted by Council at a later time.
   (B)   The Board shall prepare annually a budget and submit it to the Council
for approval in the manner and at the time as the general budget for the
village is presented. The Board shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal
year until the budget has been approved by the Council. The Board may, however,
temporarily adopt a budget in connection with the operation of any improvements
which have been financed by revenue bonds where required to do so by the
ordinance authorizing the revenue bond.
   (C)   The Authority shall submit financial reports to the Council on a
monthly basis. The Authority shall be audited annually by the same independent
auditors auditing the village records, and those independent auditors shall
provide a report to the Council concerning the activities of both the village
and the Authority.
(Ord. 41, passed 4-22-1991)
MISCELLANEOUS ORGANIZATIONS
§ 31.45 CABLE TELEVISION COMMISSION.
   (A)   Establishment; membership; terms. There is hereby established a
permanent Cable Television Commission in and for the village, which Commission
shall be appointed by the President, subject to the advice and consent of
Council and shall be comprised of a Chairperson and two members. The President
shall initially appoint the Chairperson for a one-year term and one member for
a two-year term and the other member for a three-year term. At the expiration
of the initial terms, the President shall appoint successors for three-year
terms each, so that one person on the Commission shall be reappointed or
replaced on the second Monday in April of each year after the completion of the
initial terms.
   (B)   Purposes. The purposes of the Cable Television Commission shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Establish its own rules and procedures, subject to ratification by
Council, and to periodically evaluate those rules and submit any necessary
changes to Council for approval;
      (2)   Create an ordinance to be submitted to the Council which would
regulate the operation of cable television throughout the village in accordance
with the preemptive mandate of the Cable Communications Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C.
§§ 521 et seq.; and regulations consistent with the provision of the Federal
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. Law No. 102-385 and the Federal
Communication Commission's rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto;
      (3)   Study the technology and advise the Village Council on the current
state of the art for the utilization of broadband cable systems in the best
interest of the village. This may include, but is not limited to, the delivery
of television programming, data collection and transmission, voice
transmission, data communication, security system monitoring and other modes
that may arise in the future;
      (4)   Regulate cable television franchisees and rates in accordance with
federal, state and local authority and conduct hearings as necessary to receive
evidence, suggestions and complaints from citizens regarding performance of the
franchises as well as testimony regarding performance of franchisees as well as
the need for services;
      (5)   Have the other responsibilities as the Council may from time to
time direct; and
      (6)   When the Village Council establishes a Cable Television Commission,
the Commission shall have all of the authority of the Franchising Authority and
shall act as the agent of the Village Council as it relates to an ordinance for
Cable Television Rate Regulation.
(Ord. 47, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 31.46 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   A Village Commission is hereby created pursuant to the provisions of
Public Act 285 of 1931, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.31 through 125.45, as amended. It
shall be known as the Pinckney Planning Commission.
   (B)   (1)   The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members. One
member shall be a member of the Village Council who shall be selected by the
Council to serve as a member ex officio and six members shall be appointed by
the Village President subject to the approval of the Village Council by
majority vote. An appointed member shall not hold another municipal office,
except that one appointed member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
      (2)   The appointed members of the Planning Commission shall have three-
year staggered terms with new terms commencing on January 1. The initial
appointments after the adoption of this section, and in 2007, may have their
terms varied in length to establish three-year staggered terms thereafter. An
appointed member shall hold office until his or her successor has been
appointed. The term of the Council member shall be determined by the Council,
but the term shall not exceed the Council member’s term of office as a Village
Council member.
      (3)   Vacancies in appointed member positions occurring for reasons other
than through expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the
Village President, subject to the approval of the Village Council. Vacancies in
the Council member position occurring for reasons other than through expiration
of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Village Council.
      (4)   The Village Council member shall have full voting rights on the
Planning Commission.
      (5)   All appointed members of the Village Planning Commission, excluding
the Village Council member, shall serve as such with compensation as the
Village Council shall prescribe.
      (6)   To assist in addressing the Downtown Development Authority
functions of the Planning Commission, the Village President, subject to the
approval of the Village Council by majority vote, may appoint two ad hoc non-
voting members in addition to the members provided for in division (B)(2),
above. The non-voting ad hoc members shall be persons having an interest in
property located in the DDA downtown district or officers, members, trustees,
principals, or employees of a legal entity having an interest in property
located in the downtown district, and these appointees may be individuals who
are not qualified electors of the village. The ad hoc non-voting members shall
not be counted for determining a quorum or as to the number of required votes
to pass a measure, and shall not vote, but otherwise may participate in the
Commission's deliberations.
   (C)   Removal of member. After a public hearing, an appointed member of the
Planning Commission, other than the member selected by the Council, may be
removed by the President for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in
office. The Village Council may for like cause remove the member selected by
the Council.
   (D)   Meetings and records. The Pinckney Planning Commission shall annually
elect its Chairperson from amongst the appointed members and create and fill
the other of it offices as it may determine. The Commission shall hold not less
than four regular meetings each year. It shall adopt rules for transaction of
business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and
determinations, which record shall be a public record and open to inspection in
the office of the Village Clerk.
   (E)   Contracts for services. The Pinckney Planning Commission may contract
with village planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for the
specialized services as it may require. In addition, the services of regular
village employees may be obtained as found necessary for its work. Provided,
however, the Pinckney Planning Commission shall not expand any funds or enter
into any contracts or agreements for expenditures in excess amounts appropriate
by the Village Council. The Village Council may appropriate the funds for
village planning as it may deem advisable.
   (F)   Powers and duties of Pinckney Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall have the powers concerning the preparation and adoption of a
master plan or any part thereof, the making of surveys as a basis for the plan,
the approval of public improvements, the carrying out of educational and
publicity programs, zoning and the approval of plans and the other rights,
powers, duties and responsibilities of Zoning and Planning Commissions as are
provided in Act 33 of 2008, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3801 through 125.3885, as
amended; and in Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 through 125.3702,
as amended; and as provided in the Village Code, as amended, including within
Ch. 152: Zoning. The Planning Commission shall also serve as the Downtown
Development Authority Board of Directors and shall have all rights, powers,
duties and responsibilities as are provided in Act 197 of 1975, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 125.1651 through 125.1681, as amended, and as provided in the Village Code
§§
31.25 through
31.33 and §
153.01, as amended.
   (G)   Gifts. The Pinckney Planning Commission may receive gifts for purposes
of carrying out its objectives and may expend and funds received in the form of
a gift in such a manner as it may deem proper.
   (H)   Reports and recommendations. The Pinckney Planning Commission shall
make reports and recommendations to the Village Council; provided, however,
that no recommendation shall be binding upon the Village Council.
(Ord. 19, passed 9-2-1971; Ord. passed 5-9-1983; Ord. 76, passed 1-1-2007; Ord.
93, passed 2-8-2010; Ord. 129, passed 4-11-2016; Ord. 174, passed 4-22-2024)
CHAPTER 32: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
Special Assessments
   
32.01   Definitions
   
32.02   Initiation of proceedings
   
32.03   Petitions; investigations by the Village Clerk
   
32.04   Survey and report
   
32.05   Determination on the project; notice
   
32.06   Hearing on necessity
   
32.07   Special assessment roll
   
32.08   Clerk to file assessment roll
   
32.09   Meetings to review special assessment roll; objections in writing
   
32.10   Changes and corrections in assessment roll
   
32.11   Lien established
   
32.12   Failure to receive notice
   
32.13   Installments and due date
   
32.14   Publication of notice to pay
   
32.15   Delinquent special assessments
   
32.16   Additional assessments; refunds
   
32.17   Additional procedures
   
32.18   Collection of special assessments
   
32.19   Contested assessments
   
32.20   Reassessment for benefits
   
32.21   Deferred payments of special assessments
   
32.22   Anticipatory borrowing and bond issues; general obligation bonds
   
32.23   Single lot assessments
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
§ 32.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
    ASSESSOR. The Village Assessor of the Village of Pinckney.
   CLERK. The Village Clerk.
   COST. When referring to any public improvement, shall include the cost of
surveys, services, lands, plans, condemnation, spreading of rolls, notices,
advertising, financing, construction and legal fees and all other costs
incident to the making of the improvements, the special assessments therefore
and the financing thereof.
   COUNCIL. The Village Council of the Village of Pinckney.
   ENGINEER. The Engineer of the Village of Pinckney, or any person, firm or
association of registered engineers employed by the Village of Pinckney in that
capacity.
   IMPROVEMENT. Any public betterment and/or any improvement upon public
property which results in special benefit to the real property in the vicinity
of the improvement.
   OWNER. The last recorded title holder(s) of any lot or parcel of land.
   RESOLUTION. A resolution adopted by a two-thirds vote of the members elect
of the Council.
   TREASURER. The Village Treasurer of the Village of Pinckney.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Pinckney.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.02 INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS.
   Proceedings to provide for any public improvements to be financed in whole
or part by a special assessment tax may be initiated by resolution of the
Council or by a petition signed by the owners of more than 50% of the
assessable frontage, lots or acreage, as the case may be, who may be subject to
any special assessment tax or may be initiated, without the petition being
first filed, upon resolution of the Council determining that an improvement
shall be made and financed in whole or in part by special assessment. All
improvements hereunder shall be made at the discretion of the Council solely
and no petition shall be mandatory or directive in nature.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.03 PETITIONS; INVESTIGATIONS BY THE VILLAGE CLERK.
   All petitions for public improvements shall be investigated by the Village
Clerk to determine whether a sufficient number of valid signatures have been
obtained and, if the investigation discloses a deficiency, the petition shall
be returned to the circulator with notice of that fact.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.04 SURVEY AND REPORT.
   Before the Council shall consider the making of any local public
improvement, the same shall be referred to the Village Clerk or Village
Engineer as may be appropriate, directing that person to cause to be prepared a
report which shall include necessary plans, profiles, specifications and
detailed estimates of cost, an estimate of the life of the improvements, a
description of the assessment district or districts, and the other pertinent
information will permit the Council to decide the cost, extent and necessity of
the improvement proposed and what part or proportion thereof should be paid by
special assessments upon the property especially benefitted and what part, if
any, should be paid by the village at-large. The Council shall not finally
determine to proceed with the making of any local public improvement until the
report of the Clerk or Engineer has been filed, nor until after a public
hearing has been held by the Council for the purpose of hearing objections to
the making of the improvement.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.05 DETERMINATION ON THE PROJECT; NOTICE.
   (A)   After the Clerk or Engineer has presented the report required in §
32.04 for making any local public improvement as requested in the resolution of
the Council, and the Council has reviewed the report, a resolution may be
passed tentatively determining the necessity of the improvement, setting forth
the nature thereof, prescribing what part or proportion of the cost of the
improvement shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially
benefitted, determination of benefits received by affected properties, and what
part, if any, shall be paid by the village at-large; designating the limits of
the special assessment district to be affected, designating whether to be
assessed according to frontage or other benefits, placing the complete
information on file in the office of the Clerk, where the same may be found for
examination, and directing the Clerk to give notice of public hearing on the
proposed improvement, at which time and place opportunity will be given by one
publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the village and by
first class mail to each owner of, or person in interest in the property to be
assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the village, the
publication and mailing to be made at least ten full days prior to the date of
the hearing.
   (B)   The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular,
adjourned or special meeting of the Council.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.06 HEARING ON NECESSITY.
   At the public hearing on the proposed improvement, all persons interested
shall be given an opportunity to be heard, after which the Council may modify
the scope of the local public improvement in such a manner as it shall deem to
be in the best interest of the village as a whole; provided that if the amount
of work is increased or additions are made to the district, then another
hearing shall be held pursuant to notice prescribed in §
32.05. If the determination of the determination of the Council shall be to
proceed with the improvement, a resolution shall be passed approving the
necessary profiles, plans, specifications, assessment district and detailed
estimates of cost and directing the Assessor to prepare a special assessment
roll in accordance with the Council's determination and report the same to the
Council for confirmation.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.07 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL.
   The Assessor shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and parcels of
land within the designated district benefitted by the proposed improvement and
assess to each lot or parcel of land the proportionate amount benefitted
thereby.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.08 CLERK TO FILE ASSESSMENT ROLL.
   When the Assessor shall have completed the assessment roll, he or she shall
file the same with the Clerk for presentation to the Council for review and
certification by it.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.09 MEETINGS TO REVIEW SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL; OBJECTIONS IN WRITING.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the special assessment roll, the Council, by
resolution, shall accept the assessment roll and order it to be filed in the
office of the Clerk for public examination, shall fix the time and place the
Council will meet to review the special assessment roll and direct the Clerk to
give notice of a public hearing for the purpose of affording an opportunity for
interested persons to be heard. The notice shall be given by one publication in
a newspaper published or circulated within the village and by first class mail
addressed to each owner of, or person in interest in the property to be
assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the village, the
publication and mailing to be made at least ten full days prior to the date of
the hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular,
adjourned or special meeting of the Council. At this meeting, all interested
persons or parties shall present in writing their objections, if any, to the
assessments against them.
   (B)   At the Council's discretion, the hearing on the special assessment
role and the public hearing on the necessity of the special assessment may be
combined where appropriate.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.10 CHANGES AND CORRECTIONS IN ASSESSMENT ROLL.
   (A)   The Council shall meet at the time and place designated for the review
of the special assessment role, at the meeting or a proper adjournment thereof,
shall consider all objections thereto submitted in writing.
   (B)   The Council may correct the roll as to any special assessment or
description of any lot, parcel of land or other errors appearing therein; or it
may, by resolution, annul the assessment roll and direct that new proceedings
be instituted.
   (C)   The same proceedings shall be followed in making a new roll as in the
making of the original roll.
   (D)   If, after hearing all objections and making a record of the changes as
the Council deems justified, the Council determines that it is satisfied with
the special assessment roll and that assessments are in proportion to benefits
received, it shall thereupon pass a resolution reciting the determinations,
confirming the roll, placing it on file in the office of the Clerk and
directing the Clerk to attach his or her warrant to a certified copy thereof
within ten days, therein commanding the Assessor to spread and the Treasurer to
collect the various sums and amounts appearing thereon as directed by the
Council.
   (E)   The roll shall have the date of confirmation endorsed thereon and
shall from that date be final and conclusive for the purpose of the improvement
to which it applies, subject only to adjustment to conform to the actual cost
of the improvement, as provided in §
32.16.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.11 LIEN ESTABLISHED.
   All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll, including
any part thereof deferred as to payment, shall from the date of confirmation of
the roll, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land
assessed until paid.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.12 FAILURE TO RECEIVE NOTICE.
   (A)   Failure of any owner to receive any notice required to be sent under
the provisions of the Village Charter and this subchapter shall not invalidate
any special assessment or special assessment roll.
   (B)    Nor shall, to the extent permitted by law, any failure on the part of
the Treasurer to give any required notice, cause any invalidation of any
special assessment roll of the village assessment thereupon nor excuse the
payment of interest or penalties.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.13 INSTALLMENTS AND DUE DATE.
   All special assessments levied hereunder shall become due upon confirmation
of the special assessment roll and the annual installments shall not exceed 30
in number as the Council may determine at the time of confirmation and if in
annual installments, the Council shall determine the first installment to be
due upon confirmation or on the following July 1 and subsequent installments on
July 1 of succeeding years.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.14 PUBLICATION OF NOTICE TO PAY.
   The assessment roll shall be transmitted by the Clerk to the Treasurer for
collection immediately after its confirmation, and the Treasurer shall give
notice by one publication in a local newspaper.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.15 DELINQUENT SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   Any assessment, or part thereof, remaining unpaid on October 1 following the
date when the same became delinquent, shall be reported as unpaid by the
Treasurer to the Council. Any delinquent assessment, together with all accrued
interest, shall be transferred and reassessed on the next annual village tax
role in a column headed “Special Assessments” with a penalty as provided by
State Statute for General Delinquent Village Taxes added thereto, and when so
transferred and reassessed upon the tax roll, shall be collected in all
respects as provided for the collection of village taxes.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.16 ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENTS; REFUNDS.
   The Clerk shall, within 60 days after the completion of each local or
special public improvement, compile the actual cost thereof and certify the
same to the Assessor who shall adjust the special assessment roll to correspond
therewith. Should the assessment prove larger than necessary by 5% or less, the
same shall be reported to the Council which may place the excess in the Village
Treasury or make a refund thereof pro rata according the assessment. If the
assessment exceeds the amount necessary by more than 5%, the entire excess
shall be credited to owners of the property as shown by the village assessment
roll upon which the assessment has been levied, pro rata according to the
assessment; provided, however, that no refunds of special assessments may be
made which impair or contravene the provision of any outstanding obligation or
bond secured in whole or part by the special assessments. When any special
assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the cost of the improvement
for which it was made, the Council may make any additional pro rata assessment,
but the total amount assessed against any one parcel of land shall not exceed
the benefits received by the lot or parcel of land.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.17 ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES.
   In any case where the provisions of this subchapter may prove to be
insufficient to carry out fully the making of any special assessment, the
Council shall provide by ordinance, any additional steps or procedures
required.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.18 COLLECTION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   In the event bonds are issued in anticipation of the collection of special
assessments, all collections on each special assessment roll or combination of
rolls shall be set in a separate fund for the payment of the principal and
interest on the bonds so issued in anticipation of the payment of the special
assessments, and shall be used for no other purposes.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.19 CONTESTED ASSESSMENTS.
   No suit or action of any kind shall be constituted or maintained for the
purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment:
   (A)   Unless within 45 days after the confirmation of the special assessment
roll, written notice is given to the Council of intention to file the suit or
action, stating the grounds on which it is claimed the assessment is illegal;
and
   (B)   Unless the suit or action shall be commenced within 90 days after
confirmation of the roll.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.20 REASSESSMENT FOR BENEFITS.
   Whenever the Council shall deem any special assessment invalid or defective
for any reason whatever, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall have
adjudged the assessment to be illegal for any reason whatever, in whole or in
part, the Council shall have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the
same purpose for which the former assessment was made, whether the improvement
or any part thereof has been completed and whether any part of the assessment
has been collected or not. All proceedings on the reassessment and for the
collection thereof shall be made in the manner as provided for the original
assessment. If any portion of the original assessment shall have been collected
and not refunded, it shall be applied upon the reassessment and the
reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount
reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the
person making the payment.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.21 DEFERRED PAYMENTS OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The Council may provide for the deferred payment of special assessments from
persons who, in the opinion of the Council and Assessor, by reason of poverty,
are unable to contribute toward the cost thereof. In all such cases as a
condition to the granting of the deferred payments, the village shall require
mortgage security on the real property of the beneficiary payable on or before
his or her death, or in any event on the sale or transfer of the property.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.22 ANTICIPATORY BORROWING AND BOND ISSUES; GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS.
   The Village Council may borrow money and issue bonds of the village,
therefore, in anticipation of the payment of special assessments in one or more
special assessment districts, which bonds may be an obligation of the special
assessment district or may he or she both an obligation of the special
assessment district and a general obligation of the village. The Village
Council may issue general obligation bonds to defray that portion of the cost
and expense of a local public improvement chargeable to the village at-large.
(Ord. 32, passed 4-14-1986)
§ 32.23 SINGLE LOT ASSESSMENTS.
   When any expense shall have been incurred by the village upon or in respect
to any single premises, which expense is chargeable against the premises and
the owner thereof under the provisions of this code, the Village Charter, or
law of the state, and is not of that class required to be pro-rated among the
several lots and parcels of land in a special assessment district, an account
of the labor, material and service for which such expense was incurred,
verified by the Village President, or the President’s designee, with a
description of the premises upon or in respect to which the expense was
incurred, and the name of the owner, if known, shall be reported to the Village
Treasurer, who shall immediately charge and bill the owner, if known. The
treasurer at the end of each quarter shall report to the Village Council all
sums so owing to the village and which have not been paid within 30 days after
the mailing of the bill therefor. The Council shall, at such times as it may
deem advisable, direct the Village Treasurer to prepare a special assessment
roll covering all such charges reported to it together with a penalty and
administrative fee of 10%. The roll shall be filed with the Village Clerk, who
shall advise the Council of the filing of the same, and the Council shall then
set a date for the hearing of objections to such assessment roll. The
assessment roll shall be open to public inspection for a period of ten days
before the Council shall meet to review the roll and hear complaints. The
Village Clerk shall give notice of the roll for public inspection and of the
meeting of the Council to hear complaints to the owners of and persons having
an interest in property affected by first class mail at their addresses as
shown on the last tax roll of the village, at least ten full days prior to the
date of the hearing. Such special assessments and all interest and charges
thereon, shall, from the date of confirmation of the roll by the Council, be
and remain a lien upon the property assessed, of the same character and effect
as a lien created by general law for state and county taxes, until paid. The
same penalty and interest shall be paid on such assessments, when delinquent
from such date after confirmation as shall be fixed by the Council, as are
provided by the Village Charter to be paid on delinquent general village taxes
and such assessments, with penalties and interest, shall be added by the
Treasurer to the next general village tax roll and shall thereafter, be
collected and returned in the same manner as general village taxes.
(Ord. 102, passed 4-11-2011)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWERS
      
53.   STORMWATER
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Accumulation; garbage, rubbish, construction waste and ashes
   
50.03   Dumping of garbage, rubbish, construction waste and ashes
   
50.04   Duty of owners, occupants or other persons in charge of any building,
residence or lot
   
50.05   Alleys, streets and lots
   
50.06   Collection
   
50.07   Containers
   
50.08   Disposal of abandoned property by owners and other parties
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASHES. The solid residue of combustion fuel used in heating and cooking
operations as occurring in households, apartments, offices or other business
places, but not to include residue from industrial plants or operations.
   COMMERCIAL RUBBISH. Miscellaneous waste and materials resulting from any
business and industrial operations of every kind, excludes construction and
trade wastes which has been abandoned as worthless and, having no property
value or which would constitute a nuisance when allowed to accumulate.
   CONSTRUCTION WASTE. Miscellaneous waste and materials resulting from
construction, alterations, repairs, demolitions, renovations and includes
earth, offensive dirt and fill dirt from excavating which has been abandoned as
worthless and having no property value, or which would constitute a nuisance
when allowed to accumulate.
   DOMESTIC RUBBISH. Waste material and refuse of every character from normal
household or living conditions, including but not limited to, house dirt and
trash, except garbage. In general, rubbish is paper, rags, bottles, tin, cans,
glass, cardboard, plastic, worn-out clothing, furniture, excelsior, offensive
dirt and the like, which waste material and refuse has been abandoned as
worthless and having no property value or which would constitute a nuisance
when allowed to accumulate.
   GARBAGE. Every refuse or waste material accumulation of animal, fruit or
vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise decayed or not that attends the
preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fruit or
vegetables including offal, tin cans and other containers in which foodstuffs
are packaged, which refuse has been abandon as worthless and having no property
value or which would constitute a nuisance when allowed to accumulate.
   GARDEN RUBBISH. Garden, lawn or tree trimmings leaves and dead garden plants
from the normal household. It shall not include rubbish from work of landscape
gardeners or private companies such as landscaping firms and nurseries.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, association, club, recognized group,
business, sole proprietorship, partnership or any other legally recognized
entity.
   RUBBISH. Domestic, garden and commercial rubbish unless specifically
restricted to mean a particular type of rubbish in a particular section of this
chapter.
(Ord. 23, passed 11-13-1974)
§ 50.02 ACCUMULATION; GARBAGE, RUBBISH, CONSTRUCTION WASTE AND ASHES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate, permit or allow to be
accumulated, to place, dump or permit to be dumped or placed, to scatter, bury
or permit to be scattered or buried in or on property or premises owned by him
or her or under his or her control, any garbage, domestic, commercial or garden
rubbish, ashes, construction waste, manure or any other form of waste, having
no property value or constituting a nuisance when so accumulated, except where
the substances are placed in proper receptacles for removal.
(Ord. 23, passed 11-13-1974) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.03 DUMPING OF GARBAGE, RUBBISH, CONSTRUCTION WASTE AND ASHES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, bury, place, scatter, deposit
or cause to be deposited, any garbage, domestic, commercial or garden rubbish,
ashes, manure, construction waste or other forms of waste in any public place
or on private property with or without the owner's permission, except where the
substances are dumped in a place or on private property, with or without the
owner's permission, except where the substances are dumped in a place
designated by the Village Council for the purpose, except where the purpose or
except where the substance is so pursuant to a commercial arrangement for its
commercial value and a permit is issued from the village upon a hearing that
the disposal method will not occur if a permit is issued; when any permit is
issued, a violation of the conditions attached to it will cause the permit to
be terminated immediately.
(Ord. 23, passed 11-13-1974) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.04 DUTY OF OWNERS, OCCUPANTS OR OTHER PERSONS IN CHARGE OF ANY BUILDING,
RESIDENCE OR LOT.
   (A)   In all business, industrial and residential districts of the village,
it shall be the duty of owners, occupants or other persons in charge of any
building, residence or lot to see that no rubbish, either combustible or
noncombustible, is placed or permitted to remain in any street, alley or other
public place or in any private place except a building or other suitable
storage place which shall consist of, as a minimum, a closed container. It
shall also be violation for any person to store any inflammable rubbish or
other waste material where it would cause a fire hazard.
   (B)   When any owner, proprietor, occupant or other person in charge of any
premises permits rubbish or combustible material to accumulate in any public
alley, street or other public place or on any private place outside of a
storage or other approved building, the village department of public works
director shall have authority to cause to be collected such rubbish or other
material. The cost of such special collection shall be charged to the owners or
occupants of the property permitting such rubbish or other material to
accumulate.
   (C)   Whenever the village shall enter upon any lot or parcel of land in
order to accomplish abatement of accumulated rubbish or other material,
pursuant to provisions of this section, the village department of public works
director is hereby authorized and directed to keep an accurate account of all
expenses incurred, and, based upon these expenses, to issue a certificate
determining and certifying the reasonable cost involved for the work with
respect to each parcel of property.
   (D)   Within ten days after receipt of the certificate, the village
treasurer shall forward a statement of the total charges assessed on each
parcel of property to the person as shown by the last current tax roll and the
assessment shall be payable to the village treasurer within 30 days from the
date the statement was forwarded.
   (E)   If the owner of a lot, lots or premises fails to pay the bill within
30 days from the date the bill is mailed, the council may cause the amount of
the expense incurred, together with a penalty and administrative fee of 10%, to
be levied by them as a special assessment upon the lot, lots or premises as
provided in §
32.23 of this Code for single lot assessments, or the amount thereof shall be
collected by court action.
(Ord. 23, passed 11-13-1974; Am. Ord. 108, passed 3-2-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.05 ALLEYS, STREETS AND LOTS.
   In the case of any alley, street or easement where any substance has been
deposited in violation of this chapter, it shall be the duty of every owner or
occupant of any lot or premises to remove from one-half of the alley, street or
easement adjoining the lot or premises, all the substances. It shall be the
duty of every occupant of premises abutting upon an alley, street or easement
to keep his or her adjoining one-half of the alley, street or easement in a
clean, neat and orderly condition and to keep all weeds and grasses removed or
cut to a height not to exceed nine inches at all times.
(Ord. 23, passed 11-13-1974; Ord. 143, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 50.06 COLLECTION.
   (A)   Garbage, rubbish, manure, ashes and other forms of waste shall be
placed in proper receptacles and shall be collected by the village pursuant to
an established collection schedule and at the charge, tax or assessment as may
be established by the village reasonably commensurate to the cost of the
collection.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any other person to collect and dispose of
the substance within the village limits after the time as the village shall
commence collection service, or shall contract with others pursuant to public
contract for the collection.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into and deposit, dump,
bury, place and scatter the substances obtained from outside the village
limits, even at a place designated by the Village Council for the purpose
unless duly licenses to do so by the Village Council.
   (D)   Construction waste will not be collected by the village. Commercial
waste and refuse will not be collected by the village.
(Ord. 23, passed 11-13-1974) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.07 CONTAINERS.
   The occupant of any premises within the village, to which any garbage or
rubbish shall be accumulated which is not disposed of by an approved
incinerator or approved garbage grinder, shall maintain on the premises the
number of containers sufficient to conveniently store the normal accumulation
of garbage on the premises over a period of not less than seven days. Every
container shall be kept tightly covered with an impervious cover. Garbage
containers shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. It is
further provided that the village may approve the use of plastic or waterproof
paper bags of a capacity and quality sufficient for the storage and disposal of
refuse.
(Ord. 23, passed 11-13-1974)
§ 50.08 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED PROPERTY BY OWNERS AND OTHER PARTIES.
   (A)   Mandatory use of mechanical containers for disposal of abandoned
property.
      (1)   An owner who lawfully recovers possession of real property shall
place and use on the real property (or arrange for such placement and use) one
or more mechanical containers as defined in division (B) of this section to
contain the abandoned property until the mechanical container is removed from
the real property for disposal within the time limitations of this section. The
mechanical containers must be located on a private portion of the property that
contains the dwelling unit or principal building.
      (2)   An owner who uses a court officer's services to recover or obtain
possession of real property under an order of eviction shall make prior
arrangements (either by private contract or through a court officer) for the
placement of one or more mechanical containers meeting the requirements of this
section on the real property prior to having the court officer remove or
dispose of the occupant's abandoned property.
      (3)   An occupant, owner, or court officer who uses a mechanical
container in connection with the disposal of abandoned property shall tightly
close all lids and side doors after depositing the abandoned property into the
mechanical container to prevent spillage on the real property or neighboring
properties.
      (4)   An owner shall remove a mechanical container that is used under
this section to contain abandoned property from the real property within 48
hours of its placement, unless the mechanical container used for such disposal
is authorized under the provisions of subdivision (A)(8) of this section.
      (5)   An owner shall pay the expenses of placement, removal, and disposal
of the contents of mechanical containers used to dispose of abandoned property
whether such placement was arranged by private contract or through a court
officer. To the extent permitted by law, an owner who pays for the use of a
mechanical container may recover such expenses from the occupant who has
vacated or been evicted from the real property.
      (6)   A court officer who agrees to arrange for placement and use of a
mechanical container for an owner may require advance payment or an escrow
deposit for the use of such equipment. To the extent permitted by law, the
court officer shall have a lien against the real property to secure payment of
any unpaid charges for the placement and use of a mechanical container under
this section.
      (7)   A court officer may require indemnification from an owner using his
or her services to obtain or recover possession of real property as a condition
of arranging the furnishing of mechanical containers in connection with
executing an order of eviction.
      (8)   Nothing contained in this section shall prevent an owner of real
property that already uses containerized refuse receptacles as provided for in
§
50.07 for regular, periodic pick-up and disposal from using such containerized
refuse receptacles for containing abandoned property, provided the
containerized refuse receptacles:
         (a)   Have sufficient unused capacity to contain all of the abandoned
property;
         (b)   Meet the requirements of §
50.07, except removal from the real property within 48 hours; and
         (c)   Are emptied and returned to their usual, lawful location within
48 hours of their placement for use under this section.
   (B)   Requirements for mechanical containers used to dispose of abandoned
property. Except for mechanical containers used in accordance with the
provisions of subdivision (A)(8) of this section, mechanical containers used by
an owner or court officer to dispose of abandoned property shall have wheels,
side doors for access, and sufficient capacity to contain all of the abandoned
property within them, including, but not limited to, furniture, appliances,
clothing, refuse and the like items. All mechanical containers shall be made of
watertight metal or plastic, with plastic or metal tightfitting lids.
   (C)   Abatement remedies.
      (1)   The village shall have the right to summarily abate any nuisance
condition that violates the terms of this section, at the owner's expense, as
provided for in §
50.04 of this Code. Such remedies shall include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   Removing any abandoned property located upon the real property
that is not contained in a mechanical dumpster meeting the requirements of this
section, and disposal of it as refuse, using the village's own personnel and
resources, or contracting with a private company to furnish such equipment and
perform such services;
         (b)   Removing any mechanical container located on real property that
contains abandoned property, and disposing of its contents.
      (2)   Additional nuisance conditions or violations not specifically set
forth above may be addressed by the village through enforcement of other
applicable code provisions, by prosecution or other enforcement action in the
district court, or by legal action in the circuit court with prior
authorization from the village council.
   (D)   Nuisance per se. Any condition on real property that violates the
regulations of this section constitutes a nuisance per se that shall be abated
by a court of competent jurisdiction if the village elects to abate the
nuisance by commencement of an action in a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   Penalties for violation. A person who violates this section shall be
subject to the civil infraction penalties set forth in
Chapter 10. Each day on which a violation of this section continues shall
constitute a separate violation. The imposition of a fine and/or payment of the
village's abatement costs shall not be construed to excuse or to permit the
continuation of any violation. A person who violates the provisions of this
section shall also be subject to penalties for violation of the property
maintenance code and the provisions of this code and state law regulating
blight and nuisance.
(Ord. 108, passed 3-2-2012)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
Water System of Village
   
51.01   Definitions and abbreviations
   
51.02   Findings
   
51.03   Establishment of Water Supply System
   
51.04   Operation and administration; fiscal year
   
51.05   Connection permit required; applications; deposit
   
51.06   Connections to Water Supply System
   
51.07   Water meters
   
51.08   Cross-connections prohibited
   
51.09   Rules governing use of Water Supply System
   
51.10   Establishment of rates; rates and charges
   
51.11   Billing and enforcement; no free service
   
51.12   Contract for service; indemnity; liability of village for interruption
of service; limitation on liability of village
 
   
51.99   Penalty
WATER SYSTEM OF VILLAGE
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AWWA. The American Water Works Association.
   CAPITAL CONNECTION FEE. The fee charged to premises seeking access to the
Water Supply System, as described in §
51.10(C)(4).
   COMMODITY CHARGE. The charge imposed on users of the Water Supply System
calculated on the basis of metered gallons of water consumed, as described in §
51.10(C)(1).
   CONNECTION CHARGE. The charge imposed on each user connecting or
reconnecting to the Water Supply System to recover the actual costs of the
material, meter, labor, equipment and supervision related to the installation
of the connection and meter as determined by resolution of the Village Council.
   CORPORATION STOP. A valve which is inserted into the water main for the
connection of the water service pipe in sizes up to and including two inches in
diameter.
   CROSS CONNECTION. A connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances
through which water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants could
possibly flow back into the Water Supply System because of a reversal of flow.
   CURB BOX. A box or metal housing which encloses, protects and provides
access to the curb stop.
   CURB STOP. A valve which is inserted in the water service pipe at or near
the property line.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE or DEBT RETIREMENT. The charge that users of the water
distribution system shall be required to pay, including principal, interest,
and administrative costs, for retiring local debt incurred for the construction
of the village water supply, storage, treatment, transmission, or distribution
facilities. DEBT SERVICE CHARGES shall be in addition to the user charges.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Public Works.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
other group.
   PIPE SADDLE. A device that is wrapped around a pipe where a new or a repair
of a service connection is made.
   READINESS-TO-SERVE CHARGE. The charge calculated on the basis of meter size
in accordance with §
51.10(C)(2).
   SPRINKLER LINE SERVICE CHARGE. The charge calculated on the basis of fire
service line size in accordance with §
51.10(C)(8).
   STATE. The State of Michigan.
   TAP. The drilling and threading of an opening in a water main for insertion
of a corporation stop.
   USER. The person who owns or leases any home or dwelling, retail or
wholesale business, manufacturing establishment, educational, religious or
social establishment, or any federal, state or local government office or
service facility that is served by the Water Supply System.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Pinckney, County of Livingston, State of Michigan.
   VILLAGE TECHNICAL STANDARDS. The specifications for the design and
construction of utilities and related improvements and components under the
jurisdiction of the village, prepared by the village and on file with the
Village Clerk, as the same may be in effect and amended from time to time.
   WATER CONNECTION. Part of the Water Supply System connecting the water main
to a point terminating at a meter, meter pit or vault.
   WATER MAIN. Part of the Water Supply System located within easement lines or
streets designed to supply more than one water connection.
   WATER SERVICE PIPE. The pipe connecting the water main with the premises
served, and includes the connection to the water main or the corporation cock,
the shut off valve and the valve on the inlet side of the meter.
   WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. The complete Water Supply System of the village,
including all water mains and laterals, connections, pipes, meters, hydrants,
wells, well houses, pumps, water storage facilities, transmission lines and all
water treatment facilities, plants, works, instrumentalities and properties
used or useful in obtaining a water supply, treating and distributing the same
for domestic, commercial, industrial, institutional and/or fire protection
purposes, and all other appurtenances thereto, including all easements, rights
and land for the easements and including all extensions and improvements
thereto which may be acquired or constructed on behalf of current and future
users of the Water Supply System.
(Ord. 69, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 164, passed 10-24-2022)
§ 51.02 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Necessity for potable water. The Village Council has previously found
and currently reaffirms that the residents, businesses, industries and
governmental and charitable agencies located in the village need to have
potable and otherwise usable water.
   (B)   Availability of potable water. The Village Council has previously
found and currently reaffirms, that the supply of potable water available from
private wells or other sources within the village is insufficient to assure
that all residents, businesses, industries and governmental and charitable
agencies will have sufficient potable water available for their use and other
water necessary for industrial and fire prevention and control unless the
village offers water to properties located within the village.
   (C)   Method of measuring use of Water Supply System. The Village Council
has previously found and currently reaffirms that the most practical, cost-
effective and accurate method, given available technology of measuring the use
of the water supply provided by the Water Supply System by any user, is by a
meter or meters controlled by the village.
   (D)   Continuation of water supply service.  The Village Council has
previously found and further currently reaffirms that in order to provide and
continue to provide clean, potable and otherwise usable water to all users of
the Water Supply System, in quantities necessary for all varieties of use, it
is necessary from time to time to install improvements, enlargements,
extensions and repairs to the Water Supply System.
   (E)   Purpose of fees. The fees for the use of and connection to the Water
Supply System are hereby established for the purpose of recovering the cost of
operation, maintenance, repair, replacement and improvement of the Water Supply
System and to comply with federal and state laws and regulations, to provide
for the payment of principal of and interest on any bonds authorized to be
issued as and when the same become due and payable, and to provide an account
for reasonable and necessary improvements to the Water Supply System. The fees
shall be made against all users of the Water Supply System in a fair and
equitable manner and based on the level of service provided, in accordance with
the purposes herein described, as well as the following:
      (1)   All premises connected to the Water Supply System shall be charged
and shall make payments to the village in amounts computed on the basis of this
subchapter;
      (2)   The rates and fees for water supply service by the Water Supply
System are established herein to adequately provide for bond requirements and
to ensure that the Water Supply System does not operate at a deficit. The rates
and fees shall be established by resolution of the Village Council based upon
advice of the village's engineers and administrative staff; and
      (3)   The charges, rates and fees shall be set so as to recover costs
from users in reasonable proportion to the cost of serving those users.
   (F)   Proportionality, fairness and benefits of rates and fees. The Village
Council has previously found and further currently reaffirms that the most fair
and reasonable method of providing for the operation, maintenance, repair,
replacement and improvement of the Water Supply System is to charge each user a
proportionate share of the cost of:
      (1)   Retiring debt secured by the net revenues of the Water Supply
System issued to pay for improvements and replacements to the Water Supply
System;
      (2)   Ongoing repair, replacement and improvement and budgeted as part of
the annual costs of the Water Supply System; and
      (3)   Operation, administration and maintenance costs of the Water Supply
System.
   (G)   Water service charges. The village has investigated several methods of
apportioning the costs of the water service provided by the Water Supply
System. Based on its investigation, the Village Council has previously found
and currently reaffirms that to ensure the stability and viability of the Water
Supply System for the benefit of its users, the fairest and most accurate way
to apportion the costs of operation, maintenance, replacement and improvement
of the Water Supply System is to charge each user:
      (1)   A commodity charge for water usage which is based on the user's
actual metered use of water supplied by the Water Supply System;
      (2)   A readiness-to-serve charge for water usage based on meter size,
which fee reflects each user's proportionate share of the fixed costs of
operating and maintaining the Water Supply System;
      (3)   A capital connection fee to be paid by persons connecting to the
Water Supply System or changing their user classification in order to defray
certain capital costs incurred to provide sufficient capacity to all users; and
      (4)   The other fees and costs for services as authorized by this
subchapter.
         (a)   The Village Council further has previously found and currently
reaffirms that the charges, rates and fees set forth herein and by resolution
fairly and accurately apportion the fixed and variable costs of providing water
service among the users of the Water Supply System, and that the commodity
charge and readiness-to-serve charges provide actual benefits to the users in
the form of ready access to water that would be unavailable if the charges were
not imposed.
         (b)   In addition to the findings set forth above, the Village Council
has previously found and currently reaffirms that the capital connection fee is
a fair and proportionate charge for new users of the Water Supply System, and
that the opportunity to connect to the Water Supply System provides actual
benefits to each new user equal to or greater than the amount of the charge.
(Ord. 69, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 164, passed 10-24-2022)
§ 51.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
   Based on the above findings, for the purposes set forth above and pursuant
to the authority granted to the village under Public Act 94 of 1933, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 141.101 through 141.138 and § 141.121, as amended, Public Act 3 of
1895, being M.C.L.A. §§ 61.1 through 75.12, as amended and Art. 7, § 24 of the
Michigan Constitution of 1963, the village has previously established and
hereby reestablishes the Water Supply System as an enterprise system,
consisting of the complete Water Supply System of the village, including all
water mains and laterals, connections, pipes, meters, hydrants, wells, well
houses, pumps, water storage facilities, transmission lines and all water
treatment facilities, plants, works, instrumentalities and properties used or
useful in obtaining a water supply, treating and distributing the same for
domestic, commercial, industrial, institutional and/or fire protection purposes
and all other appurtenances thereto, including all easements, rights and land
for the easements and including all extensions and improvements thereto which
may be acquired or constructed on behalf of current and future users of the
Water Supply System. The Water Supply System shall be operated on a public
utility rate basis.
(Ord. 69, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 51.04 OPERATION AND ADMINISTRATION; FISCAL YEAR.
   (A)   The operation, maintenance and management of the Water Supply System
shall be under the supervision and control of the Village Council or its
agents. The village retains exclusive right to establish, maintain and collect
rates and charges for use of the Water Supply System, and in the capacity, the
Village Council may employ the person in the capacity as it deems advisable and
may make the rules and regulations as it deems necessary or advisable to ensure
the efficient establishment, operation and maintenance of the Water Supply
System and to discharge its financial obligations.
   (B)   The Director is charged with the responsibility of administering the
Water Supply System. The Director may recommend additional rules and
regulations concerning the Water Supply System, connection to the Water Supply
System, meter installation, maintenance and other matters related to the
operation, maintenance and administration of the Water Supply System. The rules
and regulations shall be effective upon approval by the Village Council.
   (C)   The fiscal year of the Water Supply System shall begin on July 1 of
each year and shall end on the last day of June immediately succeeding July 1.
(Ord. 69, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 51.05 CONNECTION PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS; DEPOSIT.
   (A)   Application for permit; permit required. No person shall make an
excavation or opening in or under a street right-of-way, nor shall any person
uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any
part of the Water Supply System without first obtaining a written permit from
the designated official of the village. The owner or his or her agent shall
make application for the permit on a form furnished by the village. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information required by this subchapter or requested by the village. No permit
shall be granted until the applicant posts a cash deposit or surety bond as
required by the fee schedule, files evidence of a liability insurance policy as
provided by the Village Technical Standards and pays all connection fees and
any other fees as set forth in the fee schedule or by resolution of the Village
Council at the time the connection is to be made. If a street opening is
required to make the connection, an additional attachment to the permit
application must be completed detailing the justification and need for the
opening before a permit will be issued by the village. A permit application
must be made, the applicable fees paid and approval obtained from the village
at least 72 hours before commencement of work for which the permit application
is made. In addition to the foregoing, the issuance of a permit as provided in
this division shall be subject to the terms and conditions regarding street
excavation and cuts found in §
92.31.
   (B)   Other permits. Other permits and inspections may be required by the
Livingston County Building Department. The applicant is solely responsible for
obtaining all other necessary permits and inspections and for paying all costs
associated therewith.
   (C)   Existing private wells. Upon connection of any property to the Water
Supply System, any private water well serving the property shall be
disconnected and abandoned as provided for by the Village Technical Standards.
(Ord. 69, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 158, passed 10-
25-2021) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 CONNECTIONS TO WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
   (A)   Water connections; general. Water connections shall not be made
unless:
      (1)   The water main is located and extended as provided for by the
Village Technical Standards; and
      (2)   There is capacity available in all water distribution piping,
wells, and water towers. To determine capacity:
         (a)   A study of the system capacity shall be submitted by the
applicant's engineer in accordance with the Village Technical Standards.
         (b)   Study of system capacity shall be reviewed and approved by the
Village Engineer or qualified Village Agent.
   (B)   Tapping water mains; location; requisites.
      (1)   All connections to the Water Supply System shall be made using the
proper tools and equipment for performing connections to the Water Supply
System’s mains according to Village Technical Standards. All taps and
connections to the water main shall be installed at the main.
      (2)   Before an owner, user or contractor installs a water service pipe,
he or she shall obtain from the village the location for the making or
connection of the water service pipe. The terminus of the water service pipe
shall be located such that the water service pipe is installed to the water
main in a straight line perpendicular to the water main, and there are no
obstructions such as driveways, manholes, trees, fire hydrants or other
obstacles.
      (3)   No permit holder shall turn water on or off at the corporation stop
or curb stop to any water service pipe, except for testing and/or repairs upon
written authorization of the village. No unauthorized person shall turn the
water on or off at the corporation stop or curb stop.
      (4)   All service lines from the water main to the curb stop shall meet
the requirements set forth in the Village Technical Standards.
      (5)   All holes or trenches dug in the public streets or roads shall be
in accordance with the Village Technical Standards.
      (6)   Tunneling under streets is prohibited except by special permission
of the state, county or local governmental agency having jurisdiction over the
street. Open cuts shall be permitted in graveled streets with prior approval of
the state, county or local governmental agency having jurisdiction over the
street.
      (7)   Connections under hard surfaced paving, to the extent permitted by
§
92.31, shall be made only by jack and boring or directional drilling with the
prior approval of the state, county or local governmental agency having
jurisdiction over the street.
      (8)   When fire suppression is required, a separate line shall be
encouraged. However, a single water line connection, sized for fire suppression
requirements, with a “T” connection for domestic water can be permitted with
approval of the Village Engineer or a qualified Village Agent.
   (C)   Service control valves; curb boxes.
      (1)   The user shall provide and install a shut off valve in the form of
a curb stop and curb box in accordance with the Village Technical Standards on
all one-inch, one and one-half-inch and two-inch water service pipes.
      (2)   Valves may be used for the larger size connections. The valves
shall be approved by the Village Engineer or qualified Village Agent.
      (3)   Curb boxes shall not be installed in any driveway, sidewalk or
planter box unless approved by the village. Trees, shrubs and planting areas
shall be located so as not to interfere with access to the curb box. If any
curb box shall fail to meet the requirements of this subchapter, the village
may, at its option, either:
         (a)   Correct the deficiency and recover all expenses thereof from the
property owner; or
         (b)   Order the property owner to correct the deficiency at his or her
expense.
   (D)   Water service pipe; installation requirements. Water service pipe
connections shall be installed in accordance with state and local building
regulations. Water service pipe connections shall also be installed in
compliance with the following specifications:
      (1)   The connection of the water service pipe to the corporation stop
shall be made using an approved adapter fitting as specified in the Village
Technical Standards;
      (2)   All water service pipes on either private or public property shall
be installed in accordance with the Village Technical Standards;
      (3)   The user shall continue the water service pipe connection from the
water main to the curb stop and from the curb stop to the valve inside the
building entirely at the user's expense;
      (4)   There shall be no joints from the corporation stop to the curb box
and from the curb box to the meter unless commercial lengths are not available
to allow for this provision (for example, because of excessive building
setbacks). Pursuant to the Village Technical Standards, only compression
fittings shall be used for connections in copper pipes. All other types of
fittings are strictly prohibited;
      (5)   Plugged tees or other accessible outlets between the meter and the
water main are prohibited. No connections or outlets shall be made in this line
other than for sprinkler heads or fire fittings. It shall be unlawful for the
user, or any employee or agent of the user, to make any connections on or use
the sprinkler system for any other purpose or purposes other than for fire
protection, and any other use thereof shall be and constitute a violation of
this chapter and also the general ordinances of the village; and
      (6)   The maintenance of any water service pipe from the water main to
and including the curb stop shall be the responsibility of, and shall be made
at the expense of, the village. The maintenance of any water service pipe from
the curb stop to the meter shall be the responsibility of, and shall be made at
the expense of, the owner whose premises are served by the water service pipe.
   (E)   Completion of work; inspection required.
      (1)   Upon completion of any new water service pipe installation or
repairs thereto, it shall be the duty of the holder of the permit to obtain all
necessary approvals by the Village Engineer or qualified Village Agent and the
Livingston County Building Department before covering same.
      (2)   The service trench shall not be covered or backfilled until the tap
has been completed and the village and Livingston County Building Department
have approved their respective portions of the installation. Embedment material
meeting the requirements of the Village Technical Standards shall be carefully
tamped every one foot above the top of the water service pipe. This material
shall be carefully backfilled and compacted with proper tools. The use of clay
for the purpose is prohibited.
      (3)   If any building drainage, plumbing system or part thereof which is
installed, altered or repaired is covered, it shall be uncovered for inspection
after notice to uncover the work has been issued either by the village or the
Livingston County Building Department.
      (4)   A separate ball valve must be placed on the water service pipe just
inside the building wall and also just after the meter so that the water may be
turned off and drained from the water service pipe in the event of accident or
in order to make repairs. The valves must be approved by the qualified Village
Agent.
   (F)   Repair.
      (1)   Repair of the water service pipe from the water main to and
including the curb stop shall be the responsibility of the village. Repair of
the water service pipe from the curb stop to the meter shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the premises.
      (2)   Any plumber called upon by the owner to shut off water and drain
pipes in any premise shall do so inside the building only.
      (3)   Persons taking water must keep their water service pipe and their
meter protected from frost and hot water at their own expense. When the water
service pipe or meter is damaged by frost or hot water, the water service pipe
shall be repaired by a licensed plumber, to be employed and paid for by the
owner. The water meter shall be repaired by the owner at the owner’s expense.
(Ord. 69, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 79, passed 2-25-2008; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-
2021; Ord. 158, passed 10-25-2021; Ord. 164, passed 10-24-2022) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.07 WATER METERS.
   (A)   Meters required; use; purchase from village.
      (1)   With the exception of fire suppression lines, all premises served
by the Water Supply System shall be metered. Connections made to the Water
Supply System for fire suppression purposes are required to have a village-
approved backflow prevention device per §
51.08 below.
      (2)   Water meters shall be purchased from the village and shall be
maintained by the property owner at the owner's expense.
      (3)   Each water meter shall be served by its own water connection and
water service pipe unless another system incorporating exterior valves to
control water flow to each meter is approved by the qualified Village Agent.
   (B)   Water meters; type; size determination.
      (1)   When requesting connection to the Water Supply System, the user
shall furnish information about the amount of the user's contemplated water
demand and the type and size of meter to be installed. The type and size of
meter shall be determined by the qualified Village Agent. For usual domestic
use and consumption of water, a three-quarter-inch meter shall be purchased
from the village and installed by the user.
      (2)   All meters shall be under the control of the village and shall be
equipped with an instrument capable of being remotely connected and read away
from the meter itself. The instrument shall be installed in a location to be
determined and as directed by the qualified Village Agent.
      (3)   All new meters will require an outside touch pad and a unit capable
of being remotely connected and read away from the meter such as a meter
interface unit (MIU) or a meter transceiver unit (MXU), as approved by the
qualified Village Agent.
   (C)   Water meters; installation; location regulations.
      (1)   Meters shall be installed in a readily accessible location
according to Village Technical Standards. A meter shall never be installed in a
place where it cannot be readily repaired or read by the qualified Village
Agent.
      (2)   All meters shall be installed horizontally in a dry, clean,
sanitary location and in the places that small leaks and the spilling of water
will do no damage.
      (3)   All users shall place the meter in a suitable location to prevent
the pipes and meters from freezing in cold weather.
      (4)   If a suitable and readily accessible location is provided in a dry
basement sufficiently well heated to prevent freezing of the meter during the
winter, the meter may be placed in the basement; provided, however, that the
meter shall be installed no lower than 16 inches above the basement floor and
no higher than 48 inches above the basement floor unless otherwise approved by
the qualified Village Agent.
      (5)   When the premises contains no basement or cellar, the meter shall
be installed in a location which shall be approved by the village or its
authorized Qualified Agent. When it is necessary to install the meter in a pit
inside a building, the pit shall be built as directed by the village. When a
sump pump or drain is provided, meters may be installed below grade line in a
brick or first floor meter pit upon approval by the village and/or the
Livingston County Building Department. All meter pits shall be of a type
approved by the village and built in accordance with the Village Technical
Standards, with cover openings directly over meters.
      (6)   Devices designed for use in lieu of wells may be used if approved
by the village.
   (D)   Failure to register; estimated water usage. If any meter or metering
system fails to register properly or if a meter is inaccessible for reading,
the village shall estimate consumption based on former consumption. In the
event, the quantity of water used shall be determined by the amount used during
the corresponding period of the preceding year, or by averaging the amount for
the period immediately preceding and subsequent to the period wherein the meter
registered quantities of water usage.
   (E)   Tests; inspections.
      (1)   Any duly authorized agent or employee of the village shall have
access to each user’s premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of
reading meters or for testing, inspecting, maintaining, repairing or replacing
meters and related equipment and appurtenances.
      (2)   The accuracy of the meter on any premises may be tested or replaced
by the village upon written request of the owner and/or user. If the meter is
to be tested, the owner and/or user shall pay in advance, a fee to cover the
cost of the test and providing the equipment is available. If on the test, the
meter shall be found to register over 3% more water than passes through it,
another meter will be substituted therefore, and the fee will be refunded and
the water bill will be adjusted for the preceding and current billing periods.
      (3)   All premises with fire suppression and backflow devices are
required to submit proof of inspection of the device every two years according
to the Clean Drinking Water Act.
   (F)   Meter repairs; termination of service for failure to timely repair or
replace. The expense of maintaining meters will be borne by the user. The
village shall have the right to terminate water service to any user which fails
to repair or replace in a timely manner a meter which has failed to register
properly upon giving notice of the termination in accordance with §
51.09(B). The cost of replacement of a meter will be borne by the user.
   (G)   Seals; tampering and the like prohibited. Meters shall be sealed by
the village and no person except an authorized employee of the village shall
break the seals. No unauthorized person, including the user, shall change the
location of, alter or interfere in any way with any meter or its components.
(Ord. 69, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 79, passed 2-25-2008; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-
2021; Ord. 164, passed 10-24-2022) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.08 CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall make, permit to be made or permit to exist, any cross-
connection on any lot or parcel of land owned or occupied by the person. The
village adopts by reference the cross-connection rules of the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality, being M.A.C. R325.11401 through
R325.11407, as the same may be amended or revised.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Department to cause inspections to be made
of all properties served by the Water Supply System where cross-connection with
the Water Supply System is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and
re-inspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be established
by the Department and as approved by the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality.
   (C)   Duly authorized representatives of the village shall have the right to
enter, at any reasonable time, any property serviced by a connection to the
Water Supply System for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems
thereof for cross-connections. On request of the owner, lessees or occupants of
any property so served shall furnish to the Department any pertinent
information regarding the piping system on the property. The refusal of the
information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of the presence of cross-connections.
   (D)   The Department is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water
service, after due notice thereof has been given at least seven days prior to
the shut off date, wherein any connection in violation of this section exists
and to take the other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any
danger of contamination of the Water Supply System. Water service to the
property shall not be restored until the cross-connection has been eliminated
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (E)   The potable water supply made available on the properties served by
the Water Supply System shall be protected from possible contamination as
specified by this section and by the State Plumbing Code. Any water outlet
which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied
by the Water Supply System must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as:
Water Unsafe For Drinking
   (F)   This section does not supersede the State Plumbing Code, but is
supplementary to it.
   (G)   Any person or user found guilty of a violation of any of the
provisions of this section, or any written order of the Department in pursuance
thereof, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by ordinance of
the village for each and every day that the violation exists. Each day upon
which a violation of the provisions of this section shall occur shall be deemed
a separate and additional violation for purposes of this section.
(Ord. 69, passed 10-24-2005) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.09 RULES GOVERNING USE OF WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
   (A)   Turning on water service. No person, other than an authorized employee
of the village, shall connect or disconnect to any water service, except that a
licensed plumber may connect to a water service upon which he or she is working
for the purpose of testing his or her work upon receiving a written order to
operate the curb stop from the village. Upon completion of testing, the curb
stop shall be immediately turned off.
   (B)   Turning off water service. The village reserves the right to terminate
service to a user, after due notice thereof has been given at least seven days
prior to the shut off date, where payment for service has not been timely
received, and/or for violation of any of the rules and regulations of the
village relating to the Water Supply System and/or the provisions of this
subchapter. The village may shut off the water in any main to make repairs or
extensions or for any other necessary purpose at any time without notice to
users of the Water Supply System.
   (C)   Maintenance of water service pipes. The user shall maintain all
service pipes free from leaks at all times. Whenever a leak appears in a user’s
installation which allows water to escape without registering upon the meter,
the village shall give the user written notice thereof and the user shall
immediately proceed to repair the water service pipe. If the repairs have not
been completed within 48 hours after notice has been given, the village may
stop the service by shutting off the water at the curb stop or by excavating to
and closing the corporation stop. The costs incurred by the village of
excavating and shutting off the service shall be paid by the user or by the
owner of the property before service is restored. If, in the determination of
the village, any leak on the user’s installation endangers public safety or
constitutes a nuisance or a source of waste, the village may shut off or stop
the service until the leak is repaired.
   (D)   Change of user. When premises are to be vacated or there is a change
of owner, occupant or agent, prompt written notice shall be given to the
Village Clerk's office. The user may discontinue service by giving not less
than 24-hours' notice to the Village Clerk's office during its regular office
hours and shall pay the shut-off fee as required by § 51.10(C)(6)(b). Failure
of a user to give notice to the village shall continue the contract between the
village and the user, at the option of the village, and the user may be held
liable for all of the services provided or furnished the premises until notice
is properly given.
   (E)   Water mains; extensions.
      (1)   The water mains of the village shall be under the general control
of the Department, and no person other than duly authorized agents or employees
of the village shall uncover, tap, change, obstruct, interfere with or in any
way disturb the system of water mains.
      (2)   All extensions and alterations of the system of water mains shall
be constructed under the supervision of the Director or other authorized agent
of the village who shall act only upon authorization by the Village Council. A
petition for the extension of water mains may be addressed to the Village
Council, and the Village Council shall consider the same and advise the
petitioners of its decision. The cost of all improvements to and extensions of
the Water Supply System shall be at the expense of the person or properties
benefitted by the improvements or extension, reasonably proportioned to the
benefits received, or at the expense of the Water Supply System, to the extent
funds are lawfully available therefore, or at the expense of the general fund
of the village. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the cost of improvements to the
Water Supply System, the benefits of which cannot be attributed to particular
customers or groups of customers of the Water Supply System may be allocated
proportionally among all customers of the Water Supply System.
   (F)   Access; inspection.
      (1)   The Director and other duly authorized representatives of the
village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter upon all properties served by the Water Supply System at reasonable times
for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing
to determine compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. Any person who
applies for and/or receives water from the Water Supply System under this
subchapter shall be deemed to have consented to inspections pursuant to this
section, including entrance upon that person's property at reasonable times to
make inspections.
      (2)   Any duly authorized agent or employee of the village shall have
access to the user's premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of
reading meters, inspections, doing repairs or installing or removing any or all
village owned apparatus used for providing service to the premises.
   (G)   Restricting water use. The Village Council may regulate, limit or
prohibit the use of village supplied water for any purpose. The regulations may
limit use of water by a user to the extent deemed necessary to assure an
adequate supply of water for essential needs and fire fighting.
   (H)   Limit on connections.
      (1)   Unless written approval is granted by the village, separate
premises shall have separate curb stops and water service pipe installations
and shall be separately metered.
      (2)   More than one user.
         (a)   Whenever water is to be supplied to more than one user located
in a single building and supplied through one water service pipe, the property
owner shall be responsible for the payment of all water bills for service of
the premises.
         (b)   The property owner shall be responsible for payment of all water
bills in multi-tenant/multi-user buildings
         (c)   This division shall apply in all cases, except as provided in §
51.11(C)(4) and (D).
      (3)   In no event shall a user extend a water service pipe or plumbing
across any public way, or to an adjacent property in order to furnish service
thereto, even though the adjacent property is owned by the user.
   (I)   Prohibitions. No person in the village shall:
      (1)   Willfully, negligently or maliciously break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with or alter any structure, property, appurtenance,
equipment or any other item which is part of the Water Supply System;
      (2)   Remove any water meter, water service pipe or other equipment or
tools;
      (3)   Prevent or circumvent a water meter from measuring water supplied
by the Water Supply System; and
      (4)   Fraudulently obtain or waste water from the Water Supply System.
   (J)   Water main extension on private property. All water mains on private
property shall be installed at the property owner's expense and shall be
conveyed to the village by the property owner, and the property owner, at his
or her expense shall provide the village with a recorded easement sufficient to
permit access by the village for inspection, operation, repair and maintenance
of same.
   (K)   Water supply emergencies.
      (1)   Authorization. The Director is hereby authorized to declare a water
supply emergency whenever he or she determines, on the basis of existing or
anticipated drought conditions, depletion of the water supply, reduction in
water pressure, failure of one or more parts of the supply system, or for other
good reasons, that there is a threat of loss of water supply to the village or
a portion of the village.
      (2)   Method of declaration.
         (a)   A water supply emergency shall exist when the Director has
caused a declaration of such emergency to be made by:
            1.   Public posting the declaration at the Village Hall;
            2.   Announcement on the Village Hall telephone answering system;
            3.   Announcement on one or more radio or television stations with
a normal operating range covering the village.
         (b)   When practical, and if the duration of the anticipated emergency
warrants it, such declaration shall also be announced in a local newspaper.
         (c)   The Director shall make a record of the time and date for
implementation of each method of such declaration.
         (d)   Irrespective of such methods of declaration, a water supply
emergency shall be deemed to exist for any person, and the property under his
or her direct supervision or control, as soon as such person has received a
direct written notice of such declaration.
      (3)   Content of declaration. A declaration of water supply emergency
shall include:
         (a)   The effective date and time of such emergency, which may be
immediate; the period of time during which such emergency shall be in effect,
which may be for as much as 24 hours per day, and until further notice is
given;
         (b)   The types of outside water usage which are prohibited, which may
include all outside uses except fire protection, and may permit certain outside
uses on alternating days or during restricted hours; and
         (c)   The types of inside water usage which are requested to be
reduced or avoided in the interest of conservation of water.
      (4)   Water use restricted; violations. No person shall use water in
violation of a declaration of water supply emergency as provided herein, nor
cause willful or needless waste of water by allowing constant flow of a faucet
or otherwise. Whenever a water supply emergency exists, it shall be a violation
of this code for any person to utilize water from the village water supply
system for any type of use which is in violation of the terms of such
declaration.
      (5)   Discontinuance of service for violations; cost of resumption. Any
premises may be disconnected from the distribution pipes of the village water
system and the supply of water withheld from such premises upon violation by
the owner or occupant of the premises of any provision of this code, a
declaration of water supply emergency as provided herein, or of the regulations
adopted pursuant the village’s water system ordinances. Whenever the water is
turned off from any premises because of any such violation, it shall not be
turned on again until the owner or occupant has paid the applicable water shut
off and water turn on fees as set by the Village Council in the fee schedule.
      (6)   Municipal civil infraction. A person who violates any provision of
this code is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment
of a civil fine as set forth in §
10.99(C). Repeat offenses under this division (K) shall be subject to increased
fines.
(Ord. 69, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 111, passed 7-23-2012; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-
2021; Ord. 164, passed 10-24-2022) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.10 ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES; RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Establishment of cost of service. The Village Council has determined
that the purpose of water rates is to produce sufficient revenues each year to
pay the costs of service. The costs of service to be paid from revenues shall
include all of the following:
      (1)   Operation and maintenance expenses;
      (2)   Debt service expenses; and
      (3)   Capital expenses not funded from bonded indebtedness.
         (a)   The rates to be charged for water service furnished by the Water
Supply System shall be made against each lot, parcel or premises having any
connection with the Water Supply System.
         (b)   The village shall periodically review rates, fees, rules and
regulations of the Water Supply System. The review shall be completed not less
than one time per fiscal year. The review will define actual expenses
associated with the operation, maintenance and administration of the Water
Supply System, as well as debt service requirements, repair and replacement
costs. Results of the review shall be reported to the Village Council with
recommendations for any adjustments.
   (B)   Allocation of cost of service; user classification. The Village
Council has determined that not all classes of users of the Water Supply System
cause the same costs of service. Based on independent investigation and on the
advice of the village's independent engineering consultants, the Village
Council has previously found and currently reaffirms that:
      (1)   The commodity costs of water service for users of the Water Supply
System located within the village are uniform among users in accordance with
the volume of use. Accordingly, all classes of users located within the village
shall pay the same rate per gallon of metered water for water supply services;
      (2)   Certain indirect costs of providing water service, including size
of the water service pipe, materials used, location of meters, size of storage
and treatment facilities, maintenance and administrative overhead, vary
according to the size of meters employed;
      (3)   Users taking possession of previously undeveloped properties and
users changing the nature and amount of use of the Water Supply System at
renovated or expanded properties would not bear their proportionate share of
the cost of capital improvements to the Water Supply System unless required to
pay a capital connection fee; and
      (4)   Certain types of property use require a reservation of a greater
capacity of the Water Supply System than others. The Village Council has
therefore developed the following classification of users which the Village
Council finds is the most fair and accurate means of apportioning the indirect
costs of providing service among different classes of users for purposes of
calculating the readiness-to-serve charge and determining the relative demand
on capacity of the Water Supply System among different classes of users for
purposes of calculating the capital connection fee. For meters of the following
sizes, the following meter equivalency ratios shall be used for purposes of
allocating the amount of the indirect costs of service and determining the
relative demand on capacity of the Water Supply System per meter size.
Meter Size (Inches) AWWA
Meter Capacity Ratio
Meter Size (Inches) AWWA
Meter Capacity Ratio
5/8 and 3/4         1
1                   2.5
1-1/2               5
2                   8
3                   17.5
4                   30
6                   62.5
 
   (C)   Specific rates and charges.
      (1)   Commodity charge. Every user shall pay a commodity charge for all
water furnished by the Water Supply System. Except as otherwise provided in
this subchapter, commodity charges for all water service shall be calculated on
the basis of metered gallons of water consumed at rates determined by the
Village Council and which fairly apportion the variable costs of providing
water service to users of the Water Supply System.
      (2)   Readiness-to-serve charge. Every user shall pay a readiness-to-
serve charge for water service on the basis of meter size in an amount and in
the manner determined by the Village Council and which fairly apportions the
fixed costs of providing water service for users of the Water Supply System and
may include periodic depreciation expenses to allocate the original cost of the
system's assets over the life of those assets.
      (3)   Connection fee. Each user connecting or reconnecting to the Water
Supply System shall pay a connection fee equal to the actual cost of the
material, labor, equipment and overhead related to the installation and
inspection of the connection or re-connection as determined by resolution of
the Village Council.
      (4)   Capital connection fee. The Village Council may, by resolution,
establish a capital connection fee to defray or recover the cost of capital
improvements which are acquired and constructed for the primary purpose of
providing additional capacity determined by the village to be reasonably
necessary to accommodate:
         (a)   New connections to the Water Supply System; or
         (b)   Modifications of existing connections for a use estimated to
demand the reservation of greater capacity of the Water Supply System than
previously required. Every person seeking to connect previously unconnected
property to the Water Supply System, or to reconnect previously connected
property to the Water Supply System for a use estimated to demand the
reservation of greater capacity of the Water Supply System, may be required to
pay a capital connection fee. A capital connection fee shall be established and
managed as provided in this section.
            1.   Calculation of estimated demand on capacity. The estimated
demand on capacity of a new connection to the Water Supply System (or
modification of an existing connection to the Water Supply System) shall be
based on the meter equivalency table set forth in division (B)(4) above.
            2.   Calculation of capital cost requirements. The capital costs to
be defrayed or recovered through the imposition of the capital connection fee
shall be determined annually by the village and shall be based on the estimated
cost of capital improvements incurred or to be incurred for the primary purpose
of providing additional capacity determined by the village to be reasonably
necessary to accommodate new connections to the Water Supply System, or
modifications of existing connections for a use estimated to demand the
reservation of greater capacity of the Water Supply System than previously
required.
            3.   Credits. If the capital connection fee relates to an increase
in demand on capacity, the village shall credit against the specific amount of
the capital connection fee, the amount of any capital connection fee or similar
charges previously paid for connection of that property to the Water Supply
System.
      (5)   Equity buy-in. This fee may include a component that represents the
capital equity share within the system as established prior to the new or
expanded user's connection or a user's increased use of the system's capacity.
      (6)   Turn-on/turn-off fee. Each user desiring to:
         (a)   Reinstate service which has been discontinued due to violations
of the provisions of this subchapter; or
         (b)   Voluntarily discontinue or reinstate water service shall pay a
fee for reinstating or discontinuing water service, as applicable, in an amount
equal to the actual costs of the labor and administrative expenses as
determined by resolution of the Village Council. This shall include shut-offs
and/or turn-on's requested upon the change of ownership and change of tenants
under §
51.11(C)(4) and (D).
      (7)   Meter charge. Each user connecting to the Water Supply System shall
pay the actual cost of the required meter and components plus a 10% fee for
administration and handling. The meter charge shall be in addition to the
connection fee and other fees and charges prescribed by this subchapter.
      (8)   Fire hydrant rental charges. Any person desiring to utilize any
fire hydrant in the village shall make application to the village for the use,
which application shall specify the hydrant or hydrants to be used, the length
of time the hydrant(s) will be used and the purpose for which the hydrant(s)
will be used. Village Council and/or the Department of Public Works Director
shall have the authority to deny any application or grant said application in
whole or limit the approval up to a certain amount of gallons. If the
application is granted, the applicant shall submit a non-refundable rental
charge plus a cash deposit for a temporary meter in amounts established by
resolution of the Village Council. The fire hydrant connection and meter
installation shall be made by the village. A monthly hydrant rental charge and
a usage commodity charge, calculated on the basis of metered gallons of water
consumed, shall be assessed at rates determined by resolution of the Village
Council. Upon expiration of the rental period, the village shall remove the
connection and temporary meter. The cash deposit shall be applied by the
village to the payment of the hydrant usage charge and the excess amount of the
deposit, if any, shall be refunded to the applicant. The purchaser is liable
for any damage to the hydrant, village equipment, or the surrounding area.
      (9)   Annual fire suppression sprinkler line service fee. Each user
connecting or reconnecting a dedicated service line for fire suppression
services shall pay an annual sprinkler line service fee on the basis of fire
service line size in an amount and in the manner determined by the Village
Council and which fairly apportions the fixed costs of providing fire
suppression services to users of the Water Supply System.
      (10)   Debt service charge. The charge assessed users of the system which
is used to pay principal, interest, and administrative costs of retiring the
debt incurred for the construction of the water system, and construction of
improvements of, and extensions to, the water system.
      (11)   Continuing fees. The readiness-to-serve and debt service charges
established by the Village Council shall continue to be assessed to a property
to which water service is available regardless of whether or not such premises
has had its service disconnected or shut-off unless it can be established that
the connection to the premises is permanent and will not be reestablished. If
service that has permanently been discontinued is subsequently reestablished
after these fees are terminated, that property will charged a new capital
connection fee.
      (12)   Other fees. The Village Council may, by resolution, establish
certain additional fees as may be required to carry out the purposes of this
subchapter.
   (D)   Publication of rates. Following approval from time to time by the
Village Council of rates and charges or revisions thereto for use of the Water
Supply System in accordance with this subchapter, the rates, as approved by the
Village Council, shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation
in the village within 30 days of approval thereof.
(Ord. 69, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 79, passed 2-25-2008; Ord. 138, passed 7-10-
2017; Ord. 164, passed 10-24-2022)
§ 51.11 BILLING AND ENFORCEMENT; NO FREE SERVICE.
   (A)   Responsibility for payment. Except as provided in divisions (C) and
(D) of this section, the owner of the premises served by the Water Supply
System shall be liable to the village for any charges and fees authorized by
this subchapter.
   (B)   Billing, collections and user payments.
      (1)   Meters shall be read at least quarterly.
      (2)   The Village Clerk shall render bills for water service and all
other charges in connection therewith. Bills for water service shall be sent
periodically as determined by the village, and delivered to the user or owner
of the premises. No bill for water use shall be changed, altered or amended
without consent of a majority of the Village Council. Except as otherwise
provided in this subchapter, all bills shall be payable by day 30 following the
mailing of the bill and shall be paid at the Village Hall.
      (3)   The Village Treasurer or his or her designee shall collect all
monies due for water service and all other charges in connection with the
operation of the Water Supply System.
      (4)   If any billed charge for water service shall not be paid by day 30
following the mailing of the bill for which the charges were made, a delayed
payment charge of 10% of the amount of the bill shall be added thereto, plus
interest in an amount determined by the Village Council resolution, and shall
be collected therewith.
      (5)   Failure of the user or owner of the premises served to receive any
bill shall not relieve the person of the liability for the charges incurred,
and the person shall notify the Village Clerk if a bill has not been received
by day 15 of the end of a quarterly billing period.
   (C)   Rates and charges to constitute lien on premises served. 
      (1)   Tax lien. Under the provisions of Public Act 178 of 1939, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 123.161 through 123.167, as amended, and Act 94 of 1933, M.C.L.A.
§§ 141.121, as amended, as security for the collection of water service
supplied to any house or any other building or any premises, lot or lots, or
parcel or parcels of land, the village shall have a lien upon the house or
other buildings and upon the premises, lot or lots, or parcel or parcels of
land, upon which the house or other building is situated. This lien shall
become effective immediately upon the distribution of the water service to the
premises or property supplied. This lien created herein shall be collected and
enforced in the same manner as provided for the collection of taxes assessed
upon the tax roll pursuant to Village Charter, except that the same shall not
be enforceable for more than three years after it becomes effective.
      (2)   The village shall annually, on April 1, certify to the appropriate
tax assessing officer or agency, all unpaid water service charges for the
services furnished to any premises, which, on the last day of March immediately
preceding April 1, have remain unpaid for a period of six months or more,
whereupon the charge shall be entered upon the next tax roll as a charge
against the piece of property or premises served. The charges shall be
collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general village
taxes.
      (3)   This lien remedy does not preclude any other remedy provided by
law.
      (4)   Lease exception. Charges for water services furnished to any
premises, as described in the preceding paragraph, shall not be a lien thereon
if all of the following exist:
         (a)   A legally executed written lease between the owner of the
premises and the tenant containing a provision that the owner of the premises
shall not be liable for the paying of water services accruing subsequent to the
filing of an affidavit by the owner with the Village Clerk;
         (b)   An affidavit filed by the owner with the Village Clerk
containing statements as to the date of the execution of the lease, that the
lease contains a provision holding the tenant liable for water services on the
premises, the expiration date of the lease; and 20 days’ written notice shall
be given to the village by the lessor of any cancellation, change in, or
termination of the lease; and
         (c)   In the case of multiple tenancies in one building, the owner
shall provide, at his or her cost, a separate meter, service line and curb box
to each apartment or leasehold within the building that is to be servicing the
tenants responsible for charges under this section.
   (D)   Deposits.
      (1)   Deposit required by tenant. If notice of a tenant’s liability has
been filed with the Village Clerk, the village shall render no further service
to such premises until a cash deposit in a sum sufficient to cover three times
the average quarterly bill for such premises, as estimated by the Village
Clerk, has been made as security for the payment of such charges.
      (2)   Deposit required for non-village service. Whenever services are
applied for under this chapter for premises located outside the village, the
Village Clerk shall forthwith advise Council of such application, and no such
service shall be furnished without the approval of Council, nor until a cash
deposit in a sum sufficient to cover three times the average quarterly bill for
such premises, as estimated by the Village Clerk, has been made as security for
the payment to secure all bills and charges. However, the Council may waive
this requirement in the event the property being served by the village water
services is covered by an agreement with Putnam Township to provide for the
collection of unpaid rates, fees, and charges and payment to the village by
placing such unpaid rates, fees, and charges on the township’s summer tax roll.
      (3)   The security deposit shall be retained by the village in a separate
account established for that purpose and shall be forfeited to the village if
the lessee of property contemplated in division (D)(1) above, or the owner on
property outside of the village contemplated in division (D)(2) above, shall be
or become delinquent in the payment of water rates or charges. Upon such
forfeiture of a security deposit, the Village Clerk shall transfer as much of
the sum of the deposit as is required to satisfy the delinquency to the credit
of the proper account, and the remainder, if there be any, shall be transferred
to the contingent reserve fund of the water department, as the case may be. The
property affected shall not be served again unless a new security deposit be
made in the same amount as the original, and disconnection preceding under
division (G) below shall be commenced.
      (4)   Monies deposited with the village for tenants under this division
(D), which shall not have been forfeited in the above described manner, shall
be returned to the depositor upon his or her application at the expiration of
the lease period. Such deposits may be left undisturbed to apply on renewals or
extensions of a lease for which the original deposit was made. Upon a sublease
or cancellation of a lease contemplated hereunder, security deposits shall,
upon request, be returned to the depositor. In the case of a sublease, no such
return shall be made unless there be a similar guarantee deposit made by the
holder of such sublease. Monies deposited with the village under this division
(D) for non-village property service, which shall not have been forfeited in
the above described manner, shall be returned to the depositor when all
services provided for in this chapter have been paid for in full and further
services are not required.
   (E)   Appeal of charges. Any user shall have the right to appeal any rates,
charges or fees levied in accordance with this subchapter. Appeals shall be
directed to the village within 30 days of the billing or invoice date along
with any supporting documentation. Any additional information required to
resolve the appeal shall be obtained by the user at his or her expense.
Resolution of appeals shall be made within 60 days by the Village Council or
its designee in accordance with the best available data and this subchapter.
All bills for rates and charges outstanding during the appeal process,
including all late payment fees or delinquency charges, shall continue to be
due and payable.
   (F)   No free service. No free service shall be furnished to any user of the
Water Supply System.
   (G)   Termination of water service by village. The village reserves the
right to terminate a user’s water service in each case where payment for water
service has not been timely received, and/or for violation of any of the rules
and regulations of the village relating to the Water System and/or the
provisions of this subchapter.
      (1)   It is the policy of the village to discontinue water service under
this code to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a
meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The village’s form for
application for water service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the
title, address, room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of
billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set
forth on the bill;
         (b)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second
bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid
within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service may be discontinued
for nonpayment; and
         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the
village official in charge of water billing. This official shall be authorized
to order that the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the village to discontinue water
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge in an amount set by Village Council.
   (H)   Litigation. In addition to discontinuing service to a delinquent user
and/or placing a lien on any premises for unpaid charges, the village shall
have the option of collecting all such delinquencies and penalties due by legal
proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 69, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 94, passed 5-10-2010; Ord. 103, passed 4-11-
2011; Ord. 164, passed 10-24-2022) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.12 CONTRACT FOR SERVICE; INDEMNITY; LIABILITY OF VILLAGE FOR INTERRUPTION
OF SERVICE; LIMITATION ON LIABILITY OF VILLAGE.
   (A)   All provisions and sections of this subchapter and any amendments
hereto shall be considered a part of the contract with every person that is
supplied with water through the Water Supply System, and every person, by
taking water from the Water Supply System, shall be considered to express his
or her consent to be bound hereby, and whenever any provision or section of
this subchapter is violated, the water may be cut off from the building or
place of violation at the discretion of the village and shall not be turned on
again except upon correction of the violation and payment of the expenses of
same as provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   The user shall indemnify, save harmless and defend the village against
all claims, demands, cost or expenses for loss, damage or injury to persons or
property in any manner, directly or indirectly, growing out of the transmission
and use of water by the user from the user's water service pipe installation.
   (C)   Should it become necessary to shut off the water to any user or users
of the Water Supply System because of any accident or for the purpose of making
repairs or extensions, the village shall endeavor to give timely notice to the
users affected thereby and shall, so far as is practicable, use its best
efforts to prevent inconvenience and damages arising from any such causes, but
the failure to give the notice shall not render the village liable in damages
for any inconvenience, injury or loss which may result therefrom.
   (D)   The village shall not be responsible for interruptions of service
because of natural calamities, equipment failures or actions of users of the
Water Supply System. It shall be the responsibility of the user that all
connected equipment remains in good working order. No claim shall be made
against the village by reason of the breaking away of any water service pipe,
corporation stop, curb stop or for any other interruption of the water supply.
   (E)   The village shall not be liable for any expense incurred by a permit
holder or applicant in locating water mains, water service pipes, corporation
stops, curb stops, compilation of water records or compliance with other
requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. 69, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter
shall be served with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently
cease all violations. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter, unless
the violation constitutes a crime under the laws of the state, is a municipal
civil infraction subject to a fine of not more than $500, court costs and costs
of prosecution.
      (2)   A violation of this chapter is also declared to be a public
nuisance and the village may enforce same by injunction or other remedy,
including the right to correct the violation and recover the cost of obtaining
the necessary correction from the owner or person in charge of the premises
therefore.
(Ord. 69, passed 10-24-2005)
CHAPTER 52: SEWERS
Section
Sewage Disposal System; General Provisions
   
52.01   Definitions and abbreviations
   
52.02   Objectives of subchapter
   
52.03   Findings
Sewage Disposal System; Rules and Regulations
   
52.20   Establishment of Sewage Disposal System
   
52.21   Unlawful waste disposal; discharge to natural outlets prohibited
   
52.22   Industrial users; information required prior to connection to Sewage
Disposal System; conditions; reporting and pretreatment requirements
   
52.23   Private Sewage Disposal Systems
   
52.24   Building sewer and connections
   
52.25   Use of public sewers
   
52.26   Disposal at waste water treatment plant
   
52.27   Industrial pretreatment fees and surcharges
   
52.28   Measuring sewer usage; water meters required for all nonresidential
users
   
52.29   Establishment of rates; rates and charges
   
52.30   Protection from damage
   
52.31   Enforcement
   
52.32   Appeals
   
52.33   Operation and administration; fiscal year
   
52.34   Records of annual audit; no free service
   
52.35   Billing and collections; termination of water and sewer service by
village
   
52.36   Disconnection for late payment
   
52.37   Contract for service; indemnity; liability of village for interruption
of service; limitation on liability of village
 
   
52.99   Penalty
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean
Water Act, adopted as Pub. Law No. 92-500 in 1972, as amended by Pub. Law No.
95-217 in 1977, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et. seq., and any succeeding amendments and
any administrative rules promulgated thereunder, as amended or revised from
time to time.
      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF AN INDUSTRIAL USER. A representative of an
industrial user who is:
         (a)   A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice
president, if the industrial user is a corporation;
         (b)   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship respectively; or
         (c)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated
above if the representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the discharge originates, or for environmental matters of
the industrial user. Authorization for this representative must be submitted in
writing to the village by the individual designated in divisions (a) or (b)
above.
      BACKWASH. The backwash or discharge water from any water conditioning
device such as, but not limited to, an iron filter, water softener or related
device using sodium chloride, potassium chloride or related material containing
either sodium or chloride as the generate.
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure,
five days at 20°C expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams
per liter).
      BUILDING DRAIN. Part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the drainage from waste or other drainage pipes inside the walls
of the building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning five feet
outside the inner face of the building wall.
      BUILDING SEWER. Extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other places of disposal, including pipe or conduit in the public street right-
of-way or public easements which serves a particular user's property. BUILDING
SEWER also includes pump stations and force mains installed to serve a property
by lifting sewage to the public sewer.
      BYPASS. Intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a
user's treatment facility.
      CAPITAL CONNECTION FEE. The fee charged to premises seeking access to the
Sewage Disposal System, as described in §
52.29(C)(4).
      CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD. A measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity
of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater. It is expressed
as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specified test.
It does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter and thus
does not necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. Also known as OC
and DOC, OXYGEN CONSUMED and DICHROMATE OXYGEN CONSUMED, respectively.
      CHLORINE DEMAND. The difference between the amount of chlorine added to
water or wastewater and the amount of residual chlorine remaining at the end of
a specified contact period. The demand for any given water varies with the
amount of chlorine applied, time of contact and temperature.
      COMMODITY CHARGE. The charge imposed on users of the Sewage Disposal
System as described in §
52.29(C)(1).
      COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. A substance amenable to treatment in the POTW such
as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria,
plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit if the POTW was
designated to treat the pollutants and in fact does remove the pollutant to a
substantial degree. Examples of the additional pollutants may include: chemical
oxygen demand, total organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus compounds,
nitrogen compounds, fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin.
      COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A collection of individual samples which are obtained
at regular intervals, collected on a time-proportional and/or flow-proportional
basis, over a period of not less than 24 hours and which provides a
representative sample of the average stream during the sampling period. If the
composite sample is collected on a flow-proportional basis, the sampling shall
be taken utilizing a flow-proportional sampling device and flow meter approved
by the village.
      CONNECTION CHARGE. The charge imposed on each user connecting or
reconnecting to the Sewage Disposal System to recover the actual costs of the
material, meter, labor, equipment and supervision related to the installation
of the connection and meter as determined by resolution of the Village Council
and set forth in the Village Fee Schedule.
      COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is
heat.
      DEBT SERVICE CHARGE or DEBT RETIREMENT. The charge that users of the
Sanitary Sewage Disposal System shall be required to pay, including principal,
interest, and administrative costs, for retiring local debt incurred for the
construction of the village Sanitary Sewage Disposal System. DEBT SERVICE
CHARGES shall be in addition to the user charges.
      DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works.
      DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT, GREAT LAKES & ENERGY or EGLE. The State of
Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes & Energy, its Administrator or
other duly authorized official.
      DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the state.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Public Works.
      DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect discharge of any waste, waste effluent,
wastewater, pollutant or any combination into any of the waters of the state or
upon the ground.
      DRY WELL. An approved vessel or containment sized properly to handle
backwash from any water conditioning device.
      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The United States Environmental
Protection Agency, its Administrator or other duly authorized official.
      GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. Also includes other
solid waste such as wipes or diapers.
      GRAB SAMPLE. A sample taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis
without regard to the flow of the wastestream over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
      HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
      INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant which is not a COMPATIBLE
POLLUTANT.
      INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge or introduction of non-domestic
pollutants into the Sewage Disposal System (including holding tank waste
discharged into the Sewage Disposal System) from a non-domestic source.
      INDUSTRIAL USER. A person who contributes, causes or permits the
discharge of industrial waste into the Sewage Disposal System. Single-family
and multi-family residential dwellings are specifically excluded.
      INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The wastewater discharge from industrial,
manufacturing, trade or business processes, or wastewater discharge from any
structure with this characteristic, as distinct from their employees' domestic
wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
      INTERFERENCE. A discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, to which both of the following provisions apply:
         (a)   The discharge inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
         (b)   Pursuant to division (a) above, the discharge is a cause of a
violation of any requirement of the village or the Act or the State Act,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following
statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder, or more
stringent state or local regulations: § 405 of the Act, the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., including Title II, more commonly
referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and including state
regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. §§
7401 et seq., the Toxic Substance Control Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq. and
the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1401 et seq.
      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge
limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with §§ 307(b) and (c) of the Act
(22 U.S.C. § 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users and
which appear in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N.
      NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD. Any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and
40 C.F.R. § 403.5.
      NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
      NEW SOURCE.
         (a)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants and for which construction
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307
(c) of the Act will be applicable to the source if the standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with § 307(c) of the Act, and if any of the following
provisions apply:
            1.   The building, structure, facility or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located;
            2.   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
            3.   The production or wastewater-generated processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. The extent to which the new facility is
engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source and the
extent of integration of the new facility with the existing facility should be
considered in determining whether the process is substantially independent.
         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
which results in a modification that does not create a new building, structure,
facility or installation meeting the criteria of divisions (a)2. or (a)3. above
but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production
equipment.
         (c)   CONSTRUCTION OF A NEW SOURCE, as defined under this section, has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
            1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
               a.   Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
               b.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities
or equipment.
            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts, which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility,
engineering and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation
under this section.
      NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. §
1342).
      OBSTRUCTION. Any object of whatever nature which substantially impedes
the flow of sewage from the point of origination to the public sewer. This
shall include, but not be limited to, objects, sewage, tree roots, rocks and
debris of any type.
      OPERATION and MAINTENANCE. All work, materials, equipment, utilities,
administration and other effort required to operate and maintain the Sewage
Disposal System consistent with insuring adequate treatment of wastewater to
produce an effluent in compliance with the village's NPDES permit and other
applicable state and federal regulations.
      ORDER. An order issued by the village in accordance with §
52.31.
      OWNER. The owner or owners of record of the freehold of the premises or
lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person in control of a building.
      PASS THROUGH. A discharge that exits the Sewage Disposal System into
waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a
violation of any requirement of the Act, the State Act or the NPDES permit,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental or any other legal entity, or
its legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all
federal, state and local governmental entities.
      pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal concentration of hydrogen
ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
      POLLUTANT. Any of the following:
         (a)   Substances regulated by a National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, substances discharged to the POTW that are required to be monitored
are limited in the POTW's permit or are identified in the POTW's permit
application;
         (b)   Substances for which control measures are necessary to avoid
worker health and safety problems in the POTW; and
         (c)   Various chemicals, substances and refuse materials such as
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat and industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes
which impair the purity of the water and soil.
      POLLUTION. The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological or radiological integrity of water.
      PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing the pollutants into the Sewage Disposal
System. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, process changes or other means, except as prohibited by
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(d), as amended.
      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment prior to introduction in the Sewage Disposal System,
other than a pretreatment standard.
      PRETREATMENT STANDARD. National prohibitive discharge standards, National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards and local limits.
      PRIVATE SEWER LINES. All service lines and equipment for the disposal of
sewage installed or located on any property from the public sewer to, and
including, any structure or facility which exists on the property.
      PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer pipe, conduit, pump station or force main designed
to convey sewage in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights
and is controlled by the village.
      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. The TREATMENT WORKS as defined by
§ 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned and operated by the village
and includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling
and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature. The
term also includes sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons
outside the village who or which are, by contract or agreement with the
village, users of the village's POTW.
      READINESS-TO-SERVE CHARGE. The charge calculated on the basis of meter
size in accordance with §
52.29(C)(2).
      REPLACEMENT. The replacement in whole or in part of any equipment,
appurtenances and accessories in the Sewage Disposal System to ensure
continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with the village's NPDES
permit and other applicable state and federal regulations.
      RESIDENTIAL USER. A user whose premises or buildings are used primarily
as a domicile for one or more persons, including dwelling units such as
detached, semi-detached and row houses, mobile homes, apartments or permanent
multi-family dwellings.
      SANITARY SEWER. A pipe or conduit which carries sewage and to which
storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
      SEPTIC TANK. An underground tank in which waste matter is decomposed
through bacterial action.
      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property, damage
to a user's pretreatment facilities which causes them to be inoperable or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources, which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
      SEWAGE or WASTEWATER. A combination of the liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, businesses and buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments, together with the ground waters and surface waters as may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed to or permitted to
enter the Sewage Disposal System.
      SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. The complete Sewage Disposal System and publicly
owned treatment works of the village, including all pumps, pump houses, sewage
treatment facilities, sewers, lift stations and all other facilities used or
useful in the collection, treatment and disposal of domestic, commercial,
industrial or institutional wastes, and all other appurtenances thereto,
including all easements, rights and land for the easements and including all
extensions and improvements thereto which may be acquired or constructed on
behalf of current and future users of the Sewage Disposal System.
      SEWER or SEWER LINE. Pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.
      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the Sewage Disposal
System who:
         (a)   Is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards;
         (b)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of
wastewater to the Sewage Disposal System;
         (c)   Contributes a wastewater flow which makes up 5% or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the Village's Sewage
Disposal System; or
         (d)   Is found by the village, the Department of Environmental Quality
or the EPA to have a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the Sewage
Disposal System's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE. One or more of the following:
         (a)   CHRONIC VIOLATION OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE LIMIT defined as
results of analyses in which 66% or more of all the measurements for a
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude the
corresponding daily maximum limit or the corresponding average limit;
         (b)   TECHNICAL REVIEW CRITERIA (TRC) VIOLATIONS defined as results of
analyses in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for a pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the
corresponding daily maximum limit multiplied by the applicable TRC factor, or
the product of the corresponding average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC
factor. (TRC factor equals 1.4 for BOD, fats, oil and grease and 1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH);
         (c)   Any other violation of a daily maximum limit or an average limit
that the village determines has alone or in combination with other discharges
caused interference or pass through, including endangering the health of
Department personnel or the general public;
         (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, public welfare or the environment, or has
resulted in the village exercising its emergency authority under the State Act
or this subchapter to halt or prevent such a discharge;
         (e)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a village-issued discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance;
         (f)   Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required
reports such as, but not limited to, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day
compliance reports and/or reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
         (g)   Failure to timely or accurately report noncompliance; or
         (h)   Any other violation or group of violations which the village
determines may adversely affect operation or implementation of the village's
pretreatment program or operation of the Sewage Disposal System.
      SPLIT SAMPLE. An equal division of a representative sample between two
parties for the purpose of separate and independent laboratory analysis by the
two parties.
      SLUG. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a
violation of the prohibited discharge standards described in §
52.25.
      STATE. The State of Michigan.
      STATE ACT. Michigan Public Act 451 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.11501
et seq. the National Resources and Environmental Protection Act as amended, and
any administrative rules promulgated thereunder, as amended or revised from
time to time.
      STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm and surface waters and drainage,
but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
      STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
      SURCHARGE. An extra charge that any user discharging wastewater having
strength in excess of limits set forth by the village shall be required to pay
as an additional charge to cover the actual cost of treating, sampling and
testing the extra strength sewage.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is
removable by laboratory filtering.
      TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants, which is or
can potentially be harmful to the public health or the environment including
those listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the
EPA under the provisions of § 307(a) of the Act or other acts.
      UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not
include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation.
      USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the Sewage Disposal System.
      VILLAGE. The Village of Pinckney, County of Livingston, State of
Michigan.
      VILLAGE TECHNICAL STANDARDS. The specifications for the design and
construction of utilities and related improvements and components under the
jurisdiction of the village, prepared by the village and on file with the
Village Clerk, as the same may be in effect and amended from time to time.
      WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes
from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted
to enter the Sewage Disposal System.
      WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
      WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
   (B)   Abbreviations. In addition to the foregoing terms, the following
abbreviations, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings set forth
below, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      (1)   BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand;
      (2)   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations;
      (3)   COD. Chemical oxygen demand;
      (4)   DEQ. Department of Environmental Quality (State of Michigan);
      (5)   EPA. Environmental Protection Agency;
      (6)   IBC. International Building Code, Michigan Edition;
      (7)   l. Liter;
      (8)   mg. Milligrams;
      (9)   mg/l. Milligrams per liter;
      (10)   NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System;
      (11)   P. Phosphorous;
      (12)   POTW. Publicly Owned Treatment Works;
      (13)   SS. Suspended solids; and
      (14)   U.S.C. United States Code.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 165, passed 10-
24-2022)
§ 52.02 OBJECTIVES OF SUBCHAPTER.
   The objectives of this subchapter are:
   (A)   Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Sewage Disposal System
which will interfere with the normal operation of the Sewage Disposal System or
contaminate the resulting municipal sludge;
   (B)   Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Sewage Disposal System
which do not receive adequate treatment in the POTW and which will pass through
the Sewage Disposal System into receiving waters or the atmosphere, or will
otherwise be incompatible with the Sewage Disposal System;
   (C)   Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge
from the Sewage Disposal System;
   (D)   Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the Sewage Disposal
System;
   (E)   Protect both the general public and Sewage Disposal System personnel
who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment;
and
   (F)   Enable the village to comply with its NPDES permit conditions, sludge
use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the
Sewage Disposal System is subject.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 52.03 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Necessity for sewer service. The Village Council has previously found
and currently reaffirms that the use of septic tanks, privies, privy vaults,
cesspools or similar private sewage disposal facilities is deleterious to the
health, safety and welfare of the residents, businesses, industries and
governmental and charitable agencies of the village and that the health, safety
and welfare of the residents, businesses, industries and governmental and
charitable agencies is enhanced by the creation of a public Sewage Disposal
System, with regulation by the village of pollutants and other harmful
materials, according to state and federal standards.
   (B)   Method of measuring use of Sewage Disposal System. The Village Council
finds that the most practical, cost-effective and accurate method, given
available technology, of measuring the use of the Sewage Disposal System by all
nonresidential users and by all residential users that receive water service
from the village's Water Supply System is by a meter or meters installed to
measure water usage by the user. The Village Council further finds that, with
respect to residential users not served by the village's Water Supply System,
it would be impractical and cost-prohibitive to require already-established
users to install a meter to measure water use from a well or other private
water source. Therefore, in the case of residential users that do not receive
water service from the village's Water Supply System, the Village Council
determines that use of the Sewage Disposal System shall be estimated based on a
meter equivalency unit established by the village, which the Village Council
finds to be a fair and reasonable estimate of the variable costs of the sewer
and wastewater treatment services provided by the Sewage Disposal System to the
users. However, new residential construction in areas not served by the
village's Water Supply System will be required to install a meter to measure
water usage for determination of sewer usage.
   (C)   Continuation of Sewage Disposal Service.  The Village Council has
previously found and further currently reaffirms that in order to provide and
continue to provide for the safe and uninterrupted removal and treatment of
sewage, pollutants and other harmful materials, it is necessary from time to
time to install improvements, enlargements, extensions and repairs to the
Sewage Disposal System.
   (D)   Purpose of fees. The fees for the use of and connection to the Sewage
Disposal Supply System are hereby established for the purpose of recovering the
cost of operation, maintenance, repair, replacement and improvement of the
Sewage Disposal System and to comply with federal and state laws and
regulations, to provide for the payment of principal of and interest on any
bonds authorized to be issued as and when the same become due and payable and
to provide an account for reasonable and necessary improvements to the Sewage
Disposal System. The fees shall be made against all users of the Sewage
Disposal System in a fair and equitable manner and based on the level of
service provided, in accordance with the purposes herein described, as well as
the following:
      (1)   All premises connected to the Sewage Disposal System shall be
charged and shall make payments to the village in amounts computed on the basis
of this subchapter;
      (2)   The rates and fees for sewage disposal service provided by the
Sewage Disposal System are established herein to adequately provide for bond
requirements and to ensure that the Sewage Disposal System does not operate at
a deficit. The rates and fees shall be established by resolution of the Village
Council based upon advice of the village's engineers and administrative staff;
and
      (3)   The charges, rates and fees shall be set so as to recover costs
from users in reasonable proportion to the cost of serving those users.
   (E)   Proportionality, fairness and benefits of rates and fees. The Village
Council has previously found and further currently reaffirms, that the most
fair and reasonable method of providing for the operation, maintenance, repair,
replacement and improvement of the Sewage Disposal System is to charge each
user a proportionate share of the cost of:
      (1)   Retiring debt secured by the net revenues of the Sewage Disposal
System issued to pay for improvements and replacements to the Sewage Disposal
System;
      (2)   Ongoing repair, replacement and improvement and budgeted as part of
the annual costs of the Sewage Disposal System; and
      (3)   Operation, administration and maintenance costs of the Sewage
Disposal System.
   (F)   Sewer service charges. The village has investigated several methods of
apportioning the costs of the sewer service provided by the Sewage Disposal
System. Based on its investigation, the Village Council has previously found
and currently reaffirms that to ensure the stability and viability of the
Sewage Disposal System for the benefit of its users, the most fair and accurate
way to apportion the costs of operation, maintenance, replacement and
improvement of the Sewage Disposal System is to charge each user:
      (1)   A commodity charge for sewer usage which is based on the user's
actual metered use of water supplied by the village's Water Supply System (or,
in the case of residential users not served by the village's Water Supply
System, based on actual metered water use from a private water supply or based
on a meter equivalency unit established by the village);
      (2)   A readiness-to-serve charge for sewer usage based on meter size,
which fee reflects each user's proportionate share of the fixed costs of
operating and maintaining the sewage disposal system;
      (3)   A capital connection fee to be paid by persons connecting to the
Sewage Disposal System or changing their user classification in order to defray
certain capital costs incurred to provide sufficient capacity to all users;
      (4)   A debt service charge assessed to users of the system which is used
to pay principal, interest, and administrative costs of retiring the debt
incurred for the construction of the sewage disposal system, and construction
of improvements of, and extensions to, the sewage disposal system; and
      (5)   The other fees and costs for services as authorized by this
subchapter.
   (G)   Benefits of charges. The Village Council further has previously found
and currently reaffirms that the charges, rates and fees set forth herein and
by resolution fairly and accurately apportion the fixed and variable costs of
providing sewer service among the users of the Sewage Disposal System and that
the commodity charge and readiness-to-serve charges provide actual benefits to
the users in the form of ready access to sewer service that would be
unavailable if the charges were not imposed.
   (H)   Fair charges. In addition to the findings set forth above, the Village
Council has previously found and currently reaffirms that the capital
connection fee is a fair and proportionate charge for new users of the Sewage
Disposal System and that the opportunity to connect to the Sewage Disposal
System provides actual benefits to each new user equal to or greater than the
amount of the charge.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 165, passed 10-24-2022)
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 52.20 ESTABLISHMENT OF SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
   Based on the above findings and for the purposes set forth above, and
pursuant to the authority granted to the village under Public Act 94 of 1933,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 141.101 through 141.138 and § 141.121, as amended, Public Act
3 of 1895, being M.C.L.A. §§ 61.1 through 75.12, as amended, and Art. 7, § 24
of the Michigan Constitution of 1963, the village has previously established
and hereby reestablishes the Sewage Disposal System, as an enterprise system,
consisting of the complete Sewage Disposal System and publicly owned treatment
works of the village, including all pumps, pump houses, sewage treatment
facilities, sewers, lift stations and all other facilities used or useful in
the collection, treatment and disposal of domestic, commercial, industrial or
institutional wastes, and all other appurtenances thereto, including all
easements, rights and land for the easements, and including all extensions and
improvements thereto which may be acquired or constructed on behalf of current
and future users of the Sewage Disposal System. The Sewage Disposal System
shall be operated on a public utility rate basis.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 52.21 UNLAWFUL WASTE DISPOSAL; DISCHARGE TO NATURAL OUTLETS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the
village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any human or
animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any sewage,
industrial waste or other polluted waters, except when suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   The Village Council has previously found and currently reaffirms that
the use of septic tanks, privies, privy vaults, cesspools or similar private
sewage disposal facilities, is deleterious to the health, safety and welfare of
the residents, businesses, industries and governmental and charitable agencies
of the village. It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of sewage, unless specifically permitted by the Livingston County
Health Department or as hereinafter provided.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the
village and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the village
within 200 feet at the nearest point from the structure in which sewage
originates, is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable
sewage facilities therein, and to connect the facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter within
180 days after date of official notice to do so.
   (E)   No user shall discharge, cause or allow to be discharged any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, water from footing drains, roof water
or backwash water to any sanitary sewer or sewer connection. Any premise
connected to a storm sewer shall comply with all county, state and federal
requirements as well as those of the village. Downspouts, roof leaders and
backwash lines shall be disconnected from the sanitary sewers within six months
of the effective date of this subchapter. Failure to disconnect shall give the
village the right to make the disconnection and the property owner shall be
responsible for paying the village for the costs incurred by the village in
making the disconnection.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.22 INDUSTRIAL USERS; INFORMATION REQUIRED PRIOR TO CONNECTION TO SEWAGE
DISPOSAL SYSTEM; CONDITIONS; REPORTING AND PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Industrial users. Each industrial user and at the request of the
Director, any other person who applies for or receives sewer service from the
Sewage Disposal System, shall file the information listed below with the
Director. Any industry which does not normally discharge to the Sewage Disposal
System, but has the potential to do so from accidental spills or similar
circumstances, shall also file a Baseline Monitoring Report including, but not
limited to the information below.
      (1)   Name, address and location of the user;
      (2)   Whether the user is a corporation, partnership, proprietorship or
some other entity (if so, what type of entity) and the name of the person(s)
responsible for discharges by the user;
      (3)   Standard Industrial Classification number according to the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual, United States Office of Management and
Budget, as supplemented and amended from time to time;
      (4)   Discharge constituents and characteristics including, but not
limited to, toxic pollutants as determined by appropriate chemical and
biological analyses. Sampling and analyses shall be performed in accordance
with procedures established by the EPA and contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, as
amended;
      (5)   Time and duration of discharges;
      (6)   Average daily and instantaneous peak discharge flow rates in
gallons per day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. All
flows shall be measured unless other verifiable techniques are approved by the
Director;
      (7)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers
and other relevant equipment by size, location and elevation;
      (8)   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all materials which are or may be discharged to the Sewage
Disposal System intentionally or by accident;
      (9)   Nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge limited
by this subchapter, together with a statement regarding whether or not
compliance is being achieved with this subchapter on a consistent basis and, if
not, whether additional operation and maintenance activities and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to comply with this subchapter;
      (10)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production;
      (11)   Type and amount of raw materials used (average and maximum per day
or other relevant time period), including copies of material safety data
sheets;
      (12)   A list and copy of all environmental permits held by the user
applicable to the site to which the use permit applies; and
      (13)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Director
to evaluate the permit application.
   (B)   Discharge modifications. Within three months after the effective date
of the promulgation or revision of a National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, all affected industrial users must submit to the village the
information required by division (A) above.
   (C)   Discharge conditions. Wastewater discharges shall be subject to all
provisions of this subchapter and all other applicable regulations, user
charges and fees established by the village. The village may:
      (1)   Set unit charges or a schedule of charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to the POTW;
      (2)   Limit the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
      (3)   Limit the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or make
requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
      (4)   Require the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling
facilities;
      (5)   Establish specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for
tests and reporting schedule;
      (6)   Establish compliance schedules;
      (7)   Require submission of technical reports or discharge reports;
      (8)   Require the maintaining, retaining and furnishing of plant records
relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the village and affording
village access thereto and copying thereof;
      (9)   Require prompt notification of the village in advance of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume
or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system;
      (10)   Require immediate notification of all discharges that could cause
problems to the POTW, including slug discharges;
      (11)   Require other conditions as deemed appropriate by the village to
ensure compliance with this subchapter;
      (12)   Require waste treatment facilities, process facilities, waste
streams or other potential waste problems to be placed under the specific
supervision and control of persons who have been certified by an appropriate
state agency as properly qualified to supervise the facilities;
      (13)   Require records and file reports to be maintained on the final
disposal of specific liquids, solids, sludges, oils, radioactive materials,
solvents or other wastes;
      (14)   Convert concentration-based National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards to equivalent mass-based or production-based Pretreatment
Requirements; and
      (15)   Control through permit, order or similar means, the contribution
to the POTW by each user to ensure compliance with applicable National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Pretreatment Requirements. The control
mechanism may limit duration to a maximum of five years, require non-
transferability without appropriate prior notification, set effluent limits,
establish monitoring and reporting requirements and contain a statement of
applicable penalties for violations.
   (D)   Monitoring facilities. The village may require to be provided and
operated at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection,
sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage
systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's
premises, but the village may, when such a location would be impractical or
cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the
public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by
landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near the
sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of
samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense
of the user. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling
and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with plans and
specifications submitted to and approved by the village and all applicable
local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be
completed within 90 days following written notification by the village. If
monitoring Facilities are required, the user will enter into an operation and
maintenance agreement with the village in accordance with the Village Technical
Standards.
   (E)   Pretreatment requirements.
      (1)   Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as
required to comply with this subchapter and shall achieve compliance with all
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as
specified by Federal Pretreatment Standards and as required by the village. Any
facilities required to pre-treat wastewater to a level acceptable to the
village shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense.
Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to the village for review and shall be approved by the
village before construction of the facility. The review of the plans and
operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the
village under the provisions of this subchapter. Any subsequent changes in the
pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be
acceptable to the village prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
      (2)   The village will annually publish in a major local newspaper a list
of the users which were in significant noncompliance with any pretreatment
requirements or pretreatment standards at least once during the 12 previous
months. The notification will identify the nature of the violation and
summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same 12
months.
      (3)   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards
shall be made available to officials of the EPA or Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality upon request.
   (F)   Additional reporting requirements.
      (1)   Baseline reports.
         (a)   Within 180 days after promulgation or revision of a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, all existing affected industrial users must
submit to the village the information specified by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b),
paragraphs (1) through (7);
         (b)   At least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources
and sources that become affected industrial users subsequent to the
promulgation of an applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, shall
submit to the village the information specified by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b),
paragraphs (1) through (5). New sources shall also include in this report
information on the method of pretreatment they intend to use to meet the
applicable pretreatment standard and shall give estimates of the required
information regarding flow and pollutant discharge.
      (2)   Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the commencement
of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW by a New Source, any user
subject to pretreatment standards or Pretreatment Requirements shall submit to
the Director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants
in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment
standards or Pretreatment Requirements and the average and maximum daily flow
for these process units in the user facility which are limited by the
pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements. For users subject to
equivalent mass or concentration limits, this report shall contain a reasonable
measure of the long-term production rate. For all other users subject to
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards expressed per unit of production,
the report shall include the actual production during the sampling period. The
report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or
pretreatment requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the
applicable pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements. This statement
must be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user as
required in division (I) below.
      (3)   Periodic compliance reports.
         (a)   All significant industrial users discharging into the POTW or
the Sewage Disposal System shall submit to the Director during the months of
June and December, unless required more frequently by applicable pretreatment
standards or by the Director, a report indicating the nature and concentration
of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by the pretreatment standards
or this subchapter;
         (b)   In addition, this report shall include a record of maximum daily
flows during the reporting period;
         (c)   All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with division (I) below;
         (d)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep his or her monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results
are unrepresentative of its discharge;
         (e)   If a user is subject to reporting requirements required to
demonstrate continued compliance and monitors any pollutant more frequently
than required by the village, using standard laboratory procedures, the results
of this additional monitoring shall also be included in the periodic compliance
report described in division (F)(3) above; and
         (f)   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user
shall notify the village within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and submit the results of re-analysis
to the village within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except
when the village will be performing scheduled surveillance sampling and/or
analysis within this 30-day period.
      (4)   Notification of hazardous waste discharges. All users shall notify
the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and the State
Hazardous Waste Authority in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which would be a hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. § 261 if disposed
via other means. Notification details, as well as allowable exemptions, shall
be in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(p). In the case of any new regulations
under § 3001 of the Resource Recovery and Conservation Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901
et seq.) identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing
any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must provide
notification of the discharge of the substance within 90 days of the effective
date of the regulations. In the case of any notification of hazardous waste
discharges, the user shall further certify that he or she has a program in
place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the
degree it has determined to be economically practical.
   (G)   Inspection and sampling.
      (1)   The village shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain
whether the purpose of this subchapter is being met, and the user is complying
with all requirements. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is
created or discharged shall allow the village or its representative ready
access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, records examination, records copying or in the
performance of any of his or her duties.
      (2)   The village, Department of Environmental Quality and EPA shall have
the right to set up on the user's property the devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.
Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry into his or her premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with his or her security guards so that upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the village, Department
of Environmental Quality and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for
the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
   (H)   Confidential information.
      (1)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency
without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the village, that the release of the
information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
      (2)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portion of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written
request to governmental agencies for uses related to this subchapter, the NPDES
permit or the pretreatment standards; provided, however, that the portions of a
report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial
review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information.
      (3)   Information accepted by the village as confidential shall not be
transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the village
until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user.
   (I)   Signatory requirements.
      (1)   All reports required by this section shall be signed by the
authorized representative of an industrial user and include the following
certification statement:
         “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
      (2)   If the authorized representative of an industrial user changes
because a different individual has responsibility for the overall operation of
the facility or for environmental matters of the user, a new authorization
satisfying the definition of an authorized representative of an industrial user
as set forth in division (A) above, must be submitted to the village prior to,
or together, with any reports to be signed by that representative.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 52.23 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   (A)   When a public sewer is not available under the provisions of §
52.21(D), the building sewer shall be connected to an approved private Sewage
Disposal System.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private Sewage Disposal
System, the owner shall first apply to the Livingston County Health Department
for a soil evaluation test. The fee for this application shall be determined by
the Livingston County Health Department and shall be paid to the Livingston
County Health Department. At completion of the above soil evaluation test
showing the site is suitable for the construction of a private Sewage Disposal
System, the property owner shall apply for a permit for installation for the
proposed private Sewage Disposal System. The application shall include plans,
specifications and other information as deemed necessary by the Livingston
County Health Department. At the time the application is filed, the fee
determined by the Livingston County Health Department for the permit and
inspection shall be paid by the owner.
   (C)   A permit for a private Sewage Disposal System shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Livingston County Health Department. The Livingston County Health Department
shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any
event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Livingston County Health
Department when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within seven
days of the receipt of notice by the Livingston County Health Department. All
persons receiving a permit for a private Sewage Disposal System shall provide
the village with copies of all final approved inspection reports issued by the
Livingston County Health Department.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private Sewage Disposal
System shall comply with all recommendations of the Livingston County Health
Department. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
public sewer or natural outlet.
   (E)   At the time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private Sewage Disposal System, as provided in §
52.21(D), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this subchapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled in accordance with the
Livingston County Health Department standards and regulations.
   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the village.
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any other agency having
legal jurisdiction.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 52.24 BUILDING SEWER AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall make an excavation or opening in or under a street
right-of-way, nor shall any person uncover, make any connection with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, without
first obtaining a written permit from the designated official of the village.
The owner or his or her agent shall make application for the permit on a form
furnished by the village. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications or other information required by this subchapter or
considered pertinent in the judgment of the village. No permit shall be granted
until the applicant posts a cash deposit or surety bond as provided in the fee
schedule, files evidence of a liability insurance policy as provided by the
village fee schedule and pays the connection fee and all other fees required by
the fee schedule or by resolution of the Village Council at the time the
connection is to be made. A sewer tap permit issued by the Livingston County
Health Department shall also be required to be obtained by the applicant prior
to commencing any work under the permit. If a street opening is required to
make the lead connection, an additional attachment to the permit application
must be completed detailing the justification and need for the opening before a
permit will be issued by the village. A permit application must be made, the
applicable fees paid and approval obtained from the village at least 72 hours
before commencement of work for which the permit application is made. In
addition to the foregoing, the issuance of a permit as provided in this
division shall be subject to the following terms and conditions regarding
street excavation and cuts found in §
92.31.
   (B)   Sewer tap permits will expire within six months of purchase and fees
will be returned with no interest if construction has not begun on the exact
parcel for which the tap permit was purchased. A new application will be
required for each property or for a replacement tap permit should a property
owner allow a permit to expire.
   (C)   The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the Director
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. Twenty-four hour minimum notice is required. No building sewer shall be
covered until after it has been inspected and approved by the Village Engineer
or qualified Village Agent and the Livingston County Health Department.
   (D)   All cost and expense incident to the installation, maintenance and
connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall be borne by the
owner. It shall be the duty of each property owner to maintain, clean and
repair the building sewers servicing the owner's property and any private sewer
lines to the public sewer at the owner's expense as necessary to keep the lines
free and clear of obstructions and in good working order.
   (E)   All liabilities incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the property owner. The property owner shall
indemnify and save harmless the village from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
   (F)   For all buildings connected to the Sewage Disposal System, a separate
and independent dry well or similar device that shall adequately handle
backwash shall be provided for every water conditioning device; and the water
conditioning device shall be connected to the dry well or similar device in
such a manner as to prevent the discharge of backwash into the Sewage Disposal
System. All new residential, commercial or industrial buildings connected to
the Sewage Disposal System shall also be required to install a separate and
independent dry well or similar device that shall be designed and constructed
to adequately handle backwash to prevent the discharge of backwash into the
Sewage Disposal System even if a water conditioning device is not initially
installed. This shall also apply to all residential, commercial, or industrial
properties that have been destroyed or demolished and subsequently are being,
or have been, rebuilt, remodeled, or otherwise restored. All dry well or
similar devices will be installed in accordance with Village Technical
Standards. A physical inspection and approval of the dry well or similar device
and its related plumbing shall be made by the Village Engineer or qualified
Village Agent for all newly constructed, remodeled, rebuilt or otherwise
restored buildings to be connected to the Sewage Disposal System before water
and sewer service is provided by the village. It shall be the duty of each
property owner who owns a building covered by this division to install,
maintain, replace or clean the dry well or similar device at his or her own
expense.
   (G)   It shall be the duty of the village to maintain, clean and repair as
necessary and at its expense the public sewer. The village shall not be
responsible for cleaning or maintenance of building sewers or private sewer
lines.
   (H)   Any property owner who shall violate the provisions of this subchapter
shall be liable to the village for civil damage incurred in correcting the
defect. In addition, any violation of the provisions of this subchapter, unless
the violation constitutes a crime under the laws of the state, is a municipal
civil infraction subject to a fine of not more than $500 plus court costs and
costs of prosecution. If any property owner fails to maintain a private sewer
line as required by this subchapter, in addition to the other penalties
prescribed, the sewer may be declared a public nuisance by the village and the
defect may be corrected by the village. Any costs so incurred shall be assessed
against the property and become a lien on the property if not timely paid.
   (I)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; provided, however, that when one building stands at the rear of
another or an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, yard or driveway,
the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
in accordance with Village Technical Standards. In the event that this lot is
split, the owner of the lot containing the building without a sewer must
construct a building sewer in accordance with this section and the Village
Technical Standards. Alternatively, the owner may install a separate tap and
water meter and present a copy of a recorded easement for the continued use of
the building sewer for the front building to the Village Engineer or qualified
Village Agent.
   (J)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are inspected by video equipment at the expense of the owner and
found on examination and test by the qualified Village Agent, to meet all
requirements of this subchapter.
   (K)   The building sewer shall be constructed of materials meeting the
requirements of the Village Technical Standards. The village reserves the right
to specify and require the encasement of any sewer pipe with concrete, or the
installation of the sewer pipe in concrete cradle if foundation and
construction are such as to warrant the protection in the opinion of the
Director.
   (L)   The size and slope of the building sewer shall be in accordance with
the Village Technical Standards.
   (M)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
in accordance with the Village Technical Standards.
   (N)   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the drain shall be
lifted in accordance with the Village Technical Standards and discharged to the
building sewer.
   (O)   All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight in
accordance with the Village Technical Standards. All joints shall be approved
by the Village Engineer or qualified Village Agent.
   (P)   No sewer connection will be permitted unless there is capacity
available in all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains and the POTW,
including capacity for treatment of BOD and suspended solids. The study of the
downstream capacity shall be performed by the applicant's engineer in
accordance with the Village Technical Standards. Study of downstream capacity
shall be reviewed and approved by the Village Engineer or qualified Village
Agent.
   (Q)   All newly constructed building sewers shall have a properly sized
clean-out in accordance with the Village Technical Standards.
   (R)   All sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the Village
Technical Standards and the IBC. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures
and materials must be approved by the Village Engineer or qualified Village
Agent before installation.
   (S)   Other permits and inspections may be required by other governmental
authorities or agencies. The applicant is solely responsible for obtaining all
other necessary permits and inspections and for paying all costs associated
therewith.
   (T)   All excavations for building sewer installations shall be done in
accordance with the Village Technical Standards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways
and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored
in accordance with the Village Technical Standards and approved by the Village
Engineer or qualified Village Agent.
   (U)   All holes or trenches dug in the public streets or roads shall be
backfilled in accordance with the Village Technical Standards and §
92.33(A)(2).
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 158, passed 10-
25-2021) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.25 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
    (A)   General discharge prohibitions.
      (1)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will pass through or interfere
with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply
to all the users of the POTW whether or not the user is subject to the National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements. The village may refuse to accept any
wastes which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit discharge limits.
A user may not contribute the following substances to any POTW:
         (a)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flash point of
less than 140°F (60°C), using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. §
261.21;.
         (b)   Wastewater having a pH less than six or greater than nine or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the POTW;
         (c)   Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the POTW such as,
but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch
in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or
fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime,
stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt
residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud
or glass grinding or polishing wastes;
         (d)   Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD and
the like) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause
interference with the POTW;
         (e)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds
40°C (104°F);
         (f)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
         (g)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans
or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW or exceed
the limitation set forth in a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. This
prohibition of toxic pollutants will conform to § 307(a) of the Act;
         (h)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for maintenance and repair, including pollutants which result in the presence
of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause
acute worker health and safety problems;
         (i)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions;
         (j)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
         (k)   Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to stormwater,
groundwater, surface water, roof water, artesian well water, subsurface
drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water or non-contact
cooling water, unless specifically authorized by the Director;
         (l)   Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process;
         (m)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES
permit or the receiving water quality standards;
         (n)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids or any
constituent of the character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is
required to handle the materials at the POTW;
         (o)   Any waste from individual Sewage Disposal Systems; provided,
however, that waste from individual Sewage Disposal Systems may be accepted at
the POTW treatment plant as provided in §
52.26 or may be disposed of directly into a sanitary sewer upon entering into
an agreement with the village, which agreement shall specify the site of
disposal, sewage disposal charge and the other conditions as may be required to
satisfy the sanitation and health requirements of the village. For the purpose
of this section, INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM is defined to include every
means of disposing of industrial, commercial, household, domestic or other
water-carried sanitary waste or sewage other than a public sanitary sewer;
         (p)   Any sludge, precipitate or congealed substances resulting from
an industrial or commercial process, or resulting from the pretreatment of
wastewater or air pollutants; and
         (q)   Any backwash water, water or wastewater containing chloride
levels greater than 230 mg/l or sodium levels greater than 120 mg/l or which
may cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit discharge limits.
      (2)   No wastes or wastewater shall be discharged by any user or person
into the POTW from a vehicle which transported the waste or wastewater to the
point of discharge, unless the discharge is approved in writing prior to the
discharge by the Director. No wastes or wastewater shall be discharged by any
user if the waste or wastewater was at any time transported by a vehicle (such
as a tank truck) from its point of generation prior to discharge to the POTW,
unless the discharge is approved in writing prior to the discharge by the
Director. The Director shall specify which location must be used and any other
terms and conditions for the discharges, including a requirement for a use
permit.
   (B)   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. All users shall comply
with the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and
requirements promulgated pursuant to the Act as set forth in 40 C.F.R.
Subchapter N, Effluent Guidelines and Standards, which are hereby incorporated
by reference and with all other applicable standards and requirements;
provided, however, that where a more stringent standard or requirement is
applicable pursuant to state law or regulation or this subchapter, then the
more stringent standard or requirement shall be controlling.
   (C)   Specific pollutant limitations.
      (1)   Conventional pollutants. Except as authorized by the village, no
person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess:
         (a)   Of 410 mg/l BOD;
         (b)   Of 430 mg/l total suspended solids;
         (c)   Of 50 mg/l total Kjeldahl nitrogen;
         (d)   Of 8.5 mg/l total phosphorus;
         (e)   Of 100 mg/l by weight of fat, oil or grease;
         (f)   Of 230 mg/l chloride; and
         (g)   Of 120 mg/l sodium.
      (2)   Concentrations. Should the above concentrations, either
individually or in combination with one another, interfere with the sewage
treatment process or cause difficulties or damage to the receiving waters, the
maximum concentrations of these substances will be reduced by order of the
Director. Should any other substances, either individually or in combination
with other substances, interfere with the sewage treatment process or cause
damage to the receiving waters or affect the POTW, the allowable concentration
of these substances will be reduced by order of the Director.
      (3)   Discharged waste waters. If any waters are discharged or are
proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated above, and which in the
judgment of the Director may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the village may:
         (a)   Reject the wastes;
         (b)   Require pretreatment to reduce the pollutant levels or
deleterious characteristics to levels below the specific pollutant limitations
set forth in this subchapter;
         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
         (d)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered using taxes or user charges;
         (e)   Require new industrial users or industries with significant
changes in strength or flow to submit prior information to the village
concerning the proposed flows; and
         (f)   If the village permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the village and shall be subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, Village Technical Standards
and laws.
   (D)   Village’s right of revision. The village reserves the right to
establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges
to the POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in §
52.02.
   (E)   Grease and oil interceptors, grit separators and other interceptor/
separator devices.
      (1)   Grease and oil interceptors, grit separators and other interceptor/
separator devices shall be provided when required by Michigan Plumbing Code or
if determined by Village Engineer or qualified Village Agent as being necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts
or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that the
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed
of impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped
with easily removable covers, which when bolted in place shall be gastight and
watertight.
      (2)   Where installed, all interceptors and separators shall be
maintained by the owner, at the owner's expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times. The user will enter into an operation and maintenance
agreement with the village for the monitoring facility in accordance with the
Village Technical Standards.
   (F)   Surcharge for discharges of unusual strength.
      (1)   Where the strength of sewage from any user exceeds the limits set
forth in division (C)(1) above for conventional pollutants, and where the
wastes are permitted to be discharged to the POTW by the Director, an added
charge as determined by resolution of the Village Council, will be made against
the establishment according to the strength of the wastes, or the Director
shall require that the sewage shall be denied, if necessary, to protect the
POTW or any part thereof.
      (2)   The strength of the wastes shall be determined by composite samples
taken over a sufficient period of time to ensure a representative sample. If
sampling is conducted on a flow-proportional basis, the sampling shall be taken
utilizing a flow-proportional sampling device and flow meter approved by the
village. The village or its authorized designee or independent contractor shall
have access to the premises of any user at all reasonable times for purposes of
sampling and testing the strength of sewage of any user in accordance with this
division.
      (3)   If the village determines that it is necessary to conduct sampling
and testing of the sewage of any user in order to determine the applicability
of any surcharge which may be imposed in accordance with this subchapter, the
village or its authorized agent shall be responsible for taking the initial
sample in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter. Testing of the
initial sample shall be made by an independent laboratory or by the village.
The cost of the initial sampling and testing shall be borne by the village. The
user may request that the village provide the user with a split sample for
testing at the user’s own laboratory or an independent laboratory selected by
the user; provided, however, that the cost of testing the split sample shall be
borne by the user.
      (4)   If the initial testing described in division (F)(3) above reveals
the presence of conventional pollutants in excess of the limits set forth in
division (C)(1) above, the costs of all subsequent sampling and testing,
including the testing of any split samples as described in this division, shall
be borne by the user. The subsequent sampling and testing may be conducted by
the user or, at the option of the user, by the village or its authorized agent.
         (a)   If testing and sampling is conducted by the user, the user shall
provide the village with a split sample. The split sample received by the
village may, at the option of the village, be tested by the village or by an
independent laboratory. In either case, the user shall reimburse the village
for all costs incurred in connection with the testing.
         (b)   If testing and sampling is conducted by the village, the user
may request that the village provide the user with a split sample for testing
at the user’s own laboratory or an independent laboratory selected by the user.
The cost of testing the split sample shall be borne by the user.
   (G)   Special agreements authorized. With respect to conventional pollutants
as set forth in division (C)(1) above, only no statement contained in this
subchapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the village and any person, firm or corporation whereby
waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the village, subject
to payment therefore by the person, firm or corporation, provided the agreement
will not violate EPA guidelines or NPDES permit requirements and provided the
waste will not damage the Sewage Disposal System or the receiving waters.
   (H)   Wastewater sampling and analyses.
      (1)   The prohibitions and restrictions in divisions (A),(B) and (C)
above, or as set forth in a special agreement (which may be a use permit),
shall apply at the point where wastewater and pollutants are discharged or
caused to be discharged into the POTW and required pretreatment shall be
effected before that point is reached.
      (2)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
water to which reference is made in this section shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition at the time of Standard Methods for
Examination of Water and Sewage, published by the American Public Health
Association, most current American Society for Testing Material (ASTM) and EPA
approved procedures contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, or any validated methods
from recognized authority in cases where the above referenced procedures are
not available or do not apply to the characteristic involved or another method
accepted by the village.
      (3)   Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a composite sample of all outfalls of a premise
is appropriate or whether grab samples should be taken. If composite sampling
is conducted on a flow- proportional basis, the sampling shall be taken
utilizing a flow-proportional sampling device and flow meter approved by the
village.
   (I)   Powers and authority of inspectors. Authorized agents of the village,
Livingston County Health Department, DEQ or the EPA shall have the right to
enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, the
Act and State Act.
   (J)   Excessive discharges and/or dilution of discharge. Except where
expressly authorized to do so by an applicable National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, no user shall ever increase the use of process water or,
in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute
for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in
the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, alternative discharge limits
or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the village or
state.
   (K)   Accidental discharges.
      (1)   Where required by the Director, qualified Village Agent or other
governmental agency, a user shall provide protection from accidental discharge
of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this subchapter, the
Act or the state. The village will evaluate, at least once every two years,
whether a user without the protection will be subjected to these requirements.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge or prohibited materials shall be
provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed
plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection
shall be submitted to the village for review and shall be approved by the
village before construction of the facility. All required users shall complete
such a plan within 180 days after the adoption of this subchapter. If required
by the village, a user who commences contribution to the POTW after the
effective date of this subchapter shall not be permitted to introduce
pollutants into the POTW until accidental discharge procedures have been
approved by the village. Review and approval of the plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the
user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this subchapter.
      (2)   In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of
the user to immediately telephone and notify the village of the incident. The
notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration
and volume and corrective actions.
      (3)   Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall
submit to the Director a detailed written report describing the cause of the
discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences. The notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor shall the
notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability
which may be imposed by this subchapter or other applicable law.
   (L)   Violations. It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any
industrial user to:
      (1)   Fail to completely and/or accurately report the wastewater
constituents and/or characteristics of the industrial user's discharge;
      (2)   Fail to report significant changes in the industrial user's
operations or wastewater constituents and/or characteristics within the time
frames provided in this subchapter;
      (3)   Refuse reasonable access to the industrial user's premises or waste
discharge for the purpose of inspection or monitoring;
      (4)   Restrict, lockout or prevent, directly or indirectly, access to any
monitoring facilities constructed on public or private property. The locking or
securing of the monitoring facility shall not constitute a violation pursuant
to this subsection, provided that, upon request, reasonable access to the
facility is promptly provided;
      (5)   Restrict, interfere, tamper with or render inaccurate any
monitoring devices including, but not limited to, samplers;
      (6)   Fail to comply with any condition or requirement of the industrial
user's wastewater discharge permit, if any; and
      (7)   Fail to comply with any limitation, prohibition or requirement of
this subchapter including any rule, regulation or order issued hereunder.
   (M)   Upsets.
      (1)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or pretreatment standards, provided the following requirements are
met:
         (a)   An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause
(s) of the upset;
         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
worker-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
         (c)   The user submitted the following information to the village
within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided
orally, a written submission must be provided within five days):
            1.   A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance;
            2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
      (2)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (N)   Bypass.
      (1)   Bypasses are prohibited unless the bypass does not cause a
violation of pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements, but only if
it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the POTW.
These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of divisions (N)(2) and (3)
below.
      (2)   Industrial users anticipating a bypass shall submit notice to the
village at least ten days in advance.
      (3)   An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the village within 24
hours from the time the user becomes or should have become aware of the bypass.
A written submission shall be provided within five days of the time the
industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the bypass. The written
submission shall contain a description of the bypass including exact dates and
times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
      (4)   Bypass is prohibited and the village may take enforcement action
against a user for the bypass, unless:
         (a)   The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
         (c)   The industrial user submitted required notices.
      (5)   Where it meets all conditions in division (D) above, the village
may approve an anticipated bypass.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.26 DISPOSAL AT WASTE WATER TREATMENT PLANT.
   Waste from individual Sewage Disposal Systems (as defined in §
52.25(A)(1)(p)) may be disposed of at the POTW treatment plant with permission
of the Director. Rates for the disposal shall be established by resolution of
the Village Council. No other waters or wastes described in §
52.25(A) shall be disposed of through the POTW.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 52.27 INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT FEES AND SURCHARGES.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery from
industrial users of the Sewage Disposal System of the actual costs of
implementing the pretreatment program established herein. The applicable
charges or fees shall be established by resolution of the Village Council. The
fees may be implemented to recover the actual cost of:
      (1)   Setting up and operating the pretreatment program;
      (2)   Monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures;
      (3)   Reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction;
      (4)   Processing permit applications or transfers and reviewing and
processing appeals;
      (5)   Removal by the village of pollutants otherwise subject to federal
pretreatment standards;
      (6)   Treatment of pollutant loadings not normally treated at or in
excess of those treated by the POTW; and
      (7)   Charges for laboratory testing of wastewater. The laboratory charge
shall be for the cost labor, equipment and the actual cost of laboratory
testing and will be determined for and paid by each industrial user.
   (B)   The foregoing charges and fees for the services described above may be
established by the Village Council and levied upon any industrial user which
may have any sewer connection with the Sewage Disposal System and which
discharges industrial waste to the Sewage Disposal System.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 52.28 MEASURING SEWER USAGE; WATER METERS REQUIRED FOR ALL NONRESIDENTIAL
USERS.
   (A)   As described in §
52.03(B), the Village Council finds that the most practical, cost-effective and
accurate method, given available technology, of measuring the use of the Sewage
Disposal System by all nonresidential users and all residential users that
receive water service from the Village's Water Supply System is by a meter or
meters installed to measure water usage by the user.
   (B)   All new users of the Sewage Disposal System, who or which are not
served by the village Water Supply System, shall be required to purchase and
install a water meter or meters for the purpose of measuring the amount of
water supplied to the premises by river water or from private wells or other
private sources. The meter or meters shall be purchased by the owner of the
property served by the Sewage Disposal System and shall be maintained at the
expense of the owner. The purchase and installation of a water meter as
described in this section shall be required as a condition to the connection to
and use of the Sewage Disposal System.
   (C)   Residential users not served by the village's Water Supply System are
encouraged, but shall not be required to purchase and install a water meter for
the purpose of measuring the amount of water supplied to the premises by
private well or other private source. A meter described in this section shall
be purchased by the residential user from the village and shall be maintained
at the expense of the user. A residential user electing to purchase and install
a water meter as described in this section shall be assessed a commodity charge
on the basis of metered water consumption as described in §
52.29(C)(4)(b)l. in lieu of the commodity charge calculated in accordance with
§
52.29(C)(4)(b)2.
   (D)   Any user may, but shall not be required to install a secondary water
meter for outdoor irrigation systems. Any outdoor hose spigots may be part of
the independent water system metered by the secondary irrigation system meter.
The secondary irrigation meter shall be installed in such a manner that the
water usage registered through the secondary irrigation meter is entirely
separate from the water usage metered through the primary water meter or
meters. A meter described in this section shall be purchased by the owner of
the property served by the Sewage Disposal System and shall be maintained at
the expense of the owner. Water consumed for irrigation purposes, as measured
by a secondary irrigation meter installed in accordance with this section,
shall be excluded from the calculation of, and shall not be subject to, the
commodity charge described in §
52.29(C)(1)(a). Any meter installed pursuant to this section shall comply with
the Village Technical Standards.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 165, passed 10-24-2022)
§ 52.29 ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES; RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Establishment of cost of service. The Village Council has determined
that the purpose of sewer rates is to produce sufficient revenues each year to
pay the costs of service. The costs of service to be paid from revenues shall
include all of the following:
      (1)   Operation and maintenance expenses;
      (2)   Debt service expenses; and
      (3)   Capital expenses not funded from bonded indebtedness.
         (a)   The rates to be charged for sewer service furnished by the
Sewage Disposal System shall be made against each lot, parcel of land or
premises having any connection with the Sewage Disposal System.
         (b)   The village shall periodically review rates, fees, rules and
regulations of the Sewage Disposal System. The review shall be completed not
less than one time per fiscal year. The review will define actual expenses
associated with the operation, maintenance and administration of the Sewage
Disposal System, as well as debt service requirements and repair and
replacement costs. Results of the review shall be reported to the Village
Council with recommendations for any adjustments.
   (B)   Allocation of cost of service; user classification. The Village
Council has determined that not all classes of users of the Sewage Disposal
System cause the same costs of service. Based on independent investigation and
on the advice of the village's independent engineering consultants, the Village
Council has previously found and currently reaffirms that:
      (1)   The commodity costs of sewer service for users of the Sewage
Disposal System located within the village are uniform among users in
accordance with the volume of use; provided, however, that in certain cases
where the character of the sewage from a particular source is such that
unreasonable additional burden is placed on the Sewage Disposal Systems, the
additional cost of treatment created thereby requires an additional surcharge
above the rates normally charged for the service;
      (2)   Certain indirect costs of providing sewer service vary according to
the size of meters employed;
      (3)   Users taking possession of previously undeveloped properties, and
users changing the nature and amount of use of the Sewage Disposal System at
renovated or expanded properties would not bear their proportionate share of
the cost of capital improvements to the Sewage Disposal System unless required
to pay a capital connection fee.;
      (4)   Certain types of property use require a reservation of a greater
capacity of the Sewage Disposal System than others. The Village Council has
therefore developed the following classification of users, which the Village
Council finds is the most fair and accurate means of apportioning the indirect
costs of providing service among different classes of users for purposes of
calculating the readiness-to-serve charge and determining the relative demand
on capacity of the Sewage Disposal System among different classes of users for
purposes of calculating the capital connection fee;
      (5)   For meters of the following sizes, the following meter equivalency
ratios shall be used for purposes of allocating the amount of the indirect
costs of service and determining the relative demand on capacity of the Sewage
Disposal System per meter size:
Meter Size (Inches) AWWA
Meter Capacity Ratio
Meter Size (Inches) AWWA
Meter Capacity Ratio
5/8 and 3/4         1
1                   2.5
1-1/2               5
2                   8
3                   17.5
4                   30
6                   62.5
 
      (6)   Un-metered single-family residential properties shall be assigned a
meter capacity ratio of one for purposes of calculating the rates and charges
prescribed by this subchapter.
   (C)   Specific rates and charges.
      (1)   Commodity charge. Every user of the Sewage Disposal System shall
pay a commodity charge for all sewer and wastewater treatment services
furnished by the Sewage Disposal System:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, commodity
charges for all sewer and wastewater treatment services shall be calculated on
the basis of metered gallons of water consumed (excluding water consumed for
irrigation purposes as measured by a secondary irrigation meter installed in
accordance with § 52.28(D)) at rates determined by resolution of the Village
Council and which fairly apportion the variable costs of providing sewer and
wastewater treatment services to users of the Sewage Disposal System.
         (b)   Single-family residential users not served by the village's
Water Supply System and which have not elected to install a water meter in
accordance with §
52.28(C) shall be assessed a commodity charge calculated based on an estimated
a meter equivalency unit established by the village as determined by resolution
of the Village Council and which the Village Council finds to be a fair and
reasonable estimate of the variable costs of the sewer and wastewater treatment
services provided by the Sewage Disposal System to the users.
      (2)   Readiness-to-serve charge. Every user shall pay a readiness-to-
serve charge for sewer service on the basis of meter size in an amount and in
the manner determined by resolution of the Village Council and which fairly
apportions the fixed costs of providing sewer service for users of the sewage
disposal system and may include periodic depreciation expenses to allocate the
original cost of the system's assets over the life of those assets.
      (3)   Connection fee. Each user connecting or reconnecting to the Sewage
Disposal System shall pay a connection fee equal to the actual cost of the
material, labor, equipment and overhead related to the installation and
inspection of the connection or re-connection, as determined by resolution of
the Village Council.
      (4)   Capital connection fee. The Village Council may, by resolution,
establish a capital connection fee to defray or recover the cost of capital
improvements which are acquired and constructed for the primary purpose of
providing additional capacity determined by the village to be reasonably
necessary to accommodate:
         (a)   New connections to the Sewage Disposal System; or
         (b)   Modifications of existing connections for a use estimated to
demand the reservation of greater capacity of the Sewage Disposal System than
previously required. Every person seeking to connect previously unconnected
property to the Sewage Disposal System, or to reconnect previously connected
property to the Sewage Disposal System for a use estimated to demand the
reservation of greater capacity of the Sewage Disposal System, may be required
to pay a capital connection fee. A capital connection fee shall be established
and managed as provided in this section.
            1.   Calculation of estimated demand on capacity. The estimated
demand on capacity of a new connection to the Sewage Disposal System (or
modification of an existing connection to the Sewage Disposal System) shall be
based on the meter equivalency table set forth in division (B)(5) above.
            2.   Calculation of capital cost requirements. The capital costs to
be defrayed or recovered through the imposition of the capital connection fee
shall be determined annually by the village and shall be based on the estimated
cost of capital improvements incurred or to be incurred for the primary purpose
of providing additional capacity determined by the village to be reasonably
necessary to accommodate new connections to the Sewage Disposal System or
modifications of existing connections for a use estimated to demand the
reservation of greater capacity of the Sewage Disposal System than previously
required.
            3.   Credits. If the capital connection fee relates to an increase
in demand on capacity, the village shall credit against the specific amount of
the capital connection fee, the amount of any capital connection fee or similar
charges previously paid for connection of that property to the Water Supply
System.
      (5)   Sewer surcharges. The Village Council may, by resolution, establish
surcharges for the actual cost of treatment of pollutant loadings not normally
treated or in excess of those normally treated by the POTW, as described in §
52.25(F).
      (6)   Meter charge. Each user installing a water meter in accordance with
§
52.28(B) and (C) or a secondary irrigation meter in accordance with §
52.28(D) shall pay the actual cost of the meter and components plus a 10% fee
for administration and handling. The meter charge shall be in addition to the
connection fee and other fees and charges prescribed by this subchapter.
      (7)   Debt service charge. The charge assessed to users of the system
which is used to pay principal, interest, and administrative costs of retiring
the debt incurred for the construction of the Sewage Disposal System, and
construction of improvements of, and extensions to, the Sewage Disposal System.
      (8)   Equity buy-in. This fee may include a component that represents the
capital equity share within the system as established prior to the new or
expanded user's connection or a user's increased use of the system's capacity.
      (9)   Other fees. The Village Council may, by resolution, establish
certain additional fees as may be required to carry out the purposes of this
subchapter.
   (D)   Publication of rates. Following approval from time to time by the
Village Council of rates and charges or revisions thereto for use of the Sewage
Disposal System in accordance with this subchapter, the rates as approved by
the Village Council shall be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the village within 30 days of approval thereof.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 165, passed 10-24-2022)
§ 52.30 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall enter or maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the Sewage Disposal System.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.31 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Notice of violation. The village may issue a notice of violation with
or without an order against any user believed to be in violation of this
subchapter and determine the civil administrative penalty, if any, to be
imposed. The notice of violation shall be served upon the user either by
personal delivery or by first class mail addressed to the user at his or her
billing address, except that an immediate cease and desist order may be written
or oral, and may also be served by telephone. The notice of violation shall
specify the:
      (1)   Date and time of issuance;
      (2)   Date(s), time(s) and place(s) of violation;
      (3)   Nature of the violation;
      (4)   Possible penalties under the ordinance; and
      (5)   The right of the alleged violator to present to the village written
explanations, information or other materials in answer to the notice, including
any defenses.
   (B)   Emergency suspensions and orders.
      (1)   Issuance of order. If the village determines that a user has
violated any provisions of this subchapter or other applicable laws or
regulations which the village is authorized to enforce, the village may issue
an order, with or without notice of violation and whether or not a notice of
violation was previously issued, to take action deemed appropriate under the
circumstances.
      (2)   Immediate cease and desist order.  The village may issue an order
to cease and desist from discharging any wastewater, incompatible pollutant or
illegal discharge. The order shall have immediate effect when the actual or
threatened discharge of pollutants to the Sewage Disposal System presents, or
may present, imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons, to the environment, or cause interference with the operation of the
Sewage Disposal System. If action is not taken immediately to correct illegal
discharge, the village will implement whatever action is necessary to halt the
discharge, including appropriate legal and/or equitable relief, in the
appropriate legal forum.
      (3)   Order to show cause. In cases other than those described in
division (B)(2) above, the village may issue an order to show cause why an
order to cease and desist by a certain time and date should not be issued. The
proposed time for remedial action shall be specified in the order to show
cause. The order may also contain the conditions deemed appropriate by the
village, including, but not limited to, a requirement to:
         (a)   Submit samples;
         (b)   Install sampling or monitoring equipment;
         (c)   Submit reports;
         (d)   Permit access for inspection, sampling, tests, monitoring and
investigations;
         (e)   Install and operate pre-treatment equipment;
         (f)   Reduce or eliminate a discharge or pollutants in a discharge;
and
         (g)   Payment of use permit fees.
      (4)   Disconnection orders. The Director may disconnect a user from the
Sewage Disposal System if the user violates any provision of a final order
issued pursuant to this section or an immediate cease and desist order issued
pursuant to division (B)(2) above (whether final or not).
      (5)   Content of orders. Any order issued by the village shall contain
the facts and grounds for its issuance and the remedial action ordered,
together with the time within the action shall be taken. No such order shall be
deemed insufficient, however, for inconsequential errors and omissions in the
facts and grounds for the order. If any user deems the content of the order to
contain insufficient information, it may request additional information from
the village; however, no request shall extend any time limit or defer any
payment, except as hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 52.32 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any user shall have the right to appeal any order, enforcement
decision or other action taken by the village pursuant to this subchapter to
the Village Council, unless the order, enforcement decision or other action has
previously been approved or authorized by Village Council. The appeal shall be
directed to the village within 30 days of the issuance of the order or the
effective date of any enforcement decision or other action taken by the
village. The Village Council shall consider the appeal and determine, in each
particular case, whether any deviation from strict enforcement of the order or
other enforcement decision or action will violate the intent of this subchapter
or jeopardize the public health or safety. Resolution of appeals shall be made
by the Village Council within 30 days of filing by a user of the appeal and any
supporting documentation, in accordance with the best available data and this
subchapter.
   (B)   Any user shall have the right to appeal any rates, charges or fees
levied in accordance with this subchapter. Appeals shall be directed to the
village within 45 days of the billing or invoice date, along with any
supporting documentation. Any additional information required to resolve the
appeal shall be obtained by the user at his or her expense. Resolution of
appeals shall be made by the Village Council within 60 days of filing by a user
of the appeal and any supporting documentation, in accordance with the best
available data and this subchapter. All bills for rates and charges outstanding
during the appeal process, including all late payment fees or delinquency
charges, shall continue to be due and payable.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 52.33 OPERATION AND ADMINISTRATION; FISCAL YEAR.
   (A)   The operation, maintenance and management of the Sewage Disposal
System shall be under the supervision and control of the Village Council or its
agents. The village retains exclusive right to establish, maintain and collect
rates and charges for use of the Sewage Disposal System, and in the capacity,
the Village Council may employ the person in the capacity as it deems
advisable, and may make the rules and regulations as it deems necessary or
advisable to ensure the efficient establishment, operation and maintenance of
the Sewage Disposal System and to discharge its financial obligations.
   (B)   The fiscal year of the Sewage Disposal System shall begin on July 1 of
each year and shall end on the last day of June immediately succeeding July 1.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 52.34 RECORDS OF ANNUAL AUDIT; NO FREE SERVICE.
   (A)   The village will maintain and keep proper books of records and
accounts, separate from all other records and accounts, in which shall be made
full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the Sewage Disposal
System. The village will cause an annual audit of the books of record and
account for the preceding operating year to be made by a recognized independent
certified public accountant and will supply the audit report to authorized
public officials on request.
   (B)   Classification of old and new industrial users shall also be reviewed
annually.
   (C)   The village will maintain and carry insurance on all physical
properties of the Sewage Disposal System of the kinds and in the amounts
normally carried by public utility companies and municipalities engaged in the
operation of Sewage Disposal Systems. All monies received for losses under any
insurance policies shall be applied solely to the replacement and restoration
of the property damaged or destroyed.
   (D)   No free service shall be furnished to any user of the Sewage Disposal
System.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 52.35 BILLING AND COLLECTIONS; TERMINATION OF WATER AND SEWER SERVICE BY
VILLAGE.
   (A)   Billing.
      (1)   Meters shall be read at least quarterly.
      (2)   The Village Clerk shall render bills for sewer service provided by
the Sewage Disposal System and all other charges in connection therewith. Bills
for sewer service shall be sent quarterly and delivered to the user or owner of
the premises, as applicable, by mail. No bill for sewer service shall be
changed, altered or amended, nor shall the basis upon which it was computed be
changed or altered, without consent of a majority of the Village Council.
Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, all bills shall be payable by
day 30 following the mailing of the bill and shall be paid at the Village Hall.
      (3)   The Village Treasurer or an authorized agent of the village shall
collect all monies due for sewer service and all other charges in connection
with the operation of the Sewage Disposal System.
      (4)   If any billed charge for sewer service shall not be paid by day 30
following the mailing of the bill for which the charges were made, a delayed
payment charge of 10% of the amount of the bill shall be added thereto, plus
interest in an amount determined by Village Council resolution, and shall be
collected therewith.
      (5)   Failure of the user or owner of the premises served to receive any
bill shall not relieve the person of the liability for the charges incurred,
and the person shall notify the Village Clerk if a bill has not been received
by day 15 of the end of a quarterly billing period.
   (B)   Rates and charges to constitute lien on premises served.
      (1)   Tax lien. Under the provisions of Public Act 178 of 1939, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 123.161 through 123.167, as amended, and Act 94 of 1933, M.C.L.A. §
141.121, as amended, as security for the collection of sewer service supplied
to any house or any other building or any premises, lot or lots, or parcel or
parcels of land, the village shall have a lien upon the house or other
buildings and upon the premises, lot or lots, or parcel or parcels of land,
upon which the house or other building is situated. This lien shall become
effective immediately upon the distribution of the sewer service to the
premises or property supplied. This lien created herein shall be collected and
enforced in the same manner as provided for the collection of taxes assessed
upon the tax roll pursuant to Village Charter, except that the same shall not
be enforceable for more than three years after it becomes effective.
      (2)   The village shall annually, on April 1, certify to the appropriate
tax assessing officer or agency, all unpaid sewer service charges for the
services furnished to any premises, which, on the last day of March immediately
preceding April 1, have remain unpaid for a period of six months or more,
whereupon the charge shall be entered upon the next tax roll as a charge
against the piece of property or premises served. The charges shall be
collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general village
taxes.
      (3)   This lien remedy does not preclude any other remedy provided by
law.
      (4)   Lease exception. Charges for sewer services furnished to any
premises as described in the preceding paragraph, shall not be a lien thereon
if all of the following exist:
         (a)   A legally executed written lease between the owner of the
premises and the tenant containing a provision that the owner of the premises
shall not be liable for the paying of sewer services accruing subsequent to the
filing of an affidavit by the owner with the Village Clerk;
         (b)   An affidavit filed by the owner with the Village Clerk
containing statements as to the date of the execution of the lease, that the
lease contains a provision holding the tenant liable for sewer services on the
premises, the expiration date of the lease; and 20 days’ written notice shall
be given to the village by the lessor of any cancellation, change in, or
termination of the lease; and
   (C)   Deposits.
      (1)   Deposit required by tenant. If notice of a tenant’s liability has
been filed with the Village Clerk, the village shall render no further service
to such premises until a cash deposit in a sum sufficient to cover three times
the average quarterly bill for such premises, as estimated by the Village
Clerk, has been made as security for the payment of such charges.
      (2)   Deposit required for non-village service. Whenever services are
applied for under this chapter for premises located outside the village, the
Village Clerk shall forthwith advise Council of such application, and no such
service shall be furnished without the approval of Council, nor until a cash
deposit in a sum sufficient to cover three times the average quarterly bill for
such premises, as estimated by the Village Clerk, has been made as security for
the payment to secure all bills and charges. However, the Council may waive
this requirement in the event the property being served by the village sewer
services is covered by an agreement with Putnam Township to provide for the
collection of unpaid rates, fees, and charges and payment to the village by
placing such unpaid rates, fees, and charges on the township’s summer tax roll.
      (3)   The security deposit shall be retained by the village in a separate
account established for that purpose and shall be forfeited to the village if
the lessee of property contemplated in division (C)(1) above, or the owner on
property outside of the village contemplated in division (C)(2) above, shall be
or become delinquent in the payment of sewer rates or charges. Upon such
forfeiture of a security deposit, the Village Clerk shall transfer as much of
the sum of the deposit as is required to satisfy the delinquency to the credit
of the proper account, and the remainder, if there be any, shall be transferred
to the contingent reserve fund of the sewer department, as the case may be. The
property affected shall not be served again unless a new security deposit be
made in the same amount as the original, and disconnection preceding under
division (F) of this section shall be commenced.
      (4)   Monies deposited with the village for tenants under this division
(C), which shall not have been forfeited in the above described manner, shall
be returned to the depositor upon his or her application at the expiration of
the lease period. Such deposits may be left undisturbed to apply on renewals or
extensions of a lease for which the original deposit was made. Upon a sublease
or cancellation of a lease contemplated hereunder, security deposits shall,
upon request, be returned to the depositor. In the case of a sublease, no such
return shall be made unless there be a similar guarantee deposit made by the
holder of such sublease. Monies deposited with the village under this division
(C) for non-village property service, which shall not have been forfeited in
the above described manner, shall be returned to the depositor when all
services provided for in this chapter have been paid for in full and further
services are not required.
   (D)   Appeal of charges. Any user shall have the right to appeal any rates,
charges or fees levied in accordance with this subchapter. Appeals shall be
directed to the village within 30 days of the billing or invoice date along
with any supporting documentation. Any additional information required to
resolve the appeal shall be obtained by the user at his or her expense.
Resolution of appeals shall be made within 60 days by the Village Council or
its designee in accordance with the best available data and this subchapter.
All bills for rates and charges outstanding during the appeal process,
including all late payment fees or delinquency charges, shall continue to be
due and payable.
   (E)   No free service. No free service shall be furnished to any user of the
Sewage Disposal System.
   (F)   Termination of water and sewer service by village. The village
reserves the right to terminate a user’s sewer service and water service (if
the user is a customer of the village’s Water Supply System), in each case
where payment for sewer service has not been timely received, and/or for
violation of any of the rules and regulations of the village relating to the
Sewage Disposal System and/or the provisions of this subchapter.
      (1)   It is the policy of the village to discontinue sewer service under
this code to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a
meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The village’s form for
application for sewer service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the
title, address, room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of
billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set
forth on the bill;
         (b)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second
bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid
within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued
for nonpayment; and
         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the
village official in charge of water billing. This official shall be authorized
to order that the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the village to discontinue sewer
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge in an amount set by Village Council.
   (G)   Litigation. In addition to discontinuing service to a delinquent user
and/or placing a lien on any premises for unpaid charges, the village shall
have the option of collecting all such delinquencies and penalties due by legal
proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (H)   Poverty exemption. This division (H) is known and cited as the Village
of Pinckney Utilities Poverty Exemption. In certain rare cases the village
reserves the right to grant forgiveness of a portion of utility billing,
provided that:
      (1)   The resident requesting hardship forgiveness of utility billing
meets all of these requirements:
         (a)   Is the head of the family or primary individual of a household;
         (b)   Has filed and been approved for a principle residence exemption
of property taxes through Putnam Township;
         (c)   The current total income from all sources for all persons living
in the same household does not exceed the published federal poverty level; and
         (d)   Is willing to provide adequate financial information for village
staff to determine a legitimate hardship status;
      (2)   The term of any exemption is for one year only and must be renewed
annually;
      (3)   A preliminary review board consisting of the Village Clerk, the
Village Treasurer, the Village Council President, and the DPW director reviews
application materials and recommends granting an exemption;
      (4)   Village Council then accepts that recommendation and approves the
exemption;
      (5)   The resident requesting hardship exemption identifies an achievable
payment amount, in consultation with the Village Clerk, and
      (6)   The resident requesting hardship exemption makes regular, on-time
payments of the exemption rate at intervals established in consultation with
the Village Clerk (i.e., the resident may ask to pay monthly instead of
quarterly).
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 94, passed 5-10-2010; Ord. 103, passed 4-11-
2011; Ord. 137, passed 5-22-2017; Ord. 165, passed 10-24-2022; Ord. 166, passed
12-12-2022)
§ 52.36 DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.
   (A)   It is the policy of the village to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The village's form for application
for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title,
address, room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of
billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth
on the bill; and
      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill
will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within
ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the
village official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be
authorized to order that the customer's service not be discontinued and shall
have the authority to make a final determination of the customer's complaint.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the village to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge in an amount set by Village Council.
§ 52.37 CONTRACT FOR SERVICE; INDEMNITY; LIABILITY OF VILLAGE FOR INTERRUPTION
OF SERVICE; LIMITATION ON LIABILITY OF VILLAGE.
   (A)   All provisions and sections of this subchapter and any amendments
hereto shall be considered a part of the contract with every person that is
supplied with sewer service through the Sewage Disposal System, and every
person by accepting the service shall be considered to express his or her
consent to be bound hereby, and whenever any provision or section of this
subchapter is violated, the sewer service may be cut off from the building or
place of violation at the discretion of the village and shall not be turned on
again except upon correction of the violation and payment of the expenses of
same as provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   The user shall indemnify, save harmless and defend the village against
all claims, demands, cost or expenses for loss, damage or injury to persons or
property in any manner, directly or indirectly, growing out of the installation
or use by the user of any building sewer or private sewer lines.
   (C)   The village shall not be responsible for interruptions of service
because of natural calamities, equipment failures or actions of users of the
Sewage Disposal System. It shall be the responsibility of the user that all
connected equipment remains in good working order so as not to cause disruption
of service.
   (D)   Should it become necessary to shut off service to any user or users of
the Sewage Disposal System because of any accident or for the purpose of making
repairs or extensions, the village shall endeavor to give timely notice to the
users affected thereby and shall, so far as is practicable, use its best
efforts to prevent inconvenience and damages arising from any causes, but the
failure to give the notice shall not render the village liable in damages for
any inconvenience, injury or loss which may result therefrom.
   (E)   The village shall not be liable for any expense incurred by a permit
holder or applicant in locating sewer lines, force mains, pump stations,
compilation of sewer records or compliance with other requirements of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provision of §§
51.01 et seq., §§
52.01 et seq. and §§
52.20 et seq. shall be served with written notice in accordance with §
52.31(A).
      (2)   Any person who is found to be in significant noncompliance with the
requirements of §§
52.01 et seq. and §§
52.20 et seq. shall, unless the significant noncompliance constitutes a crime
under the laws of the state, be guilty of a municipal civil infraction and
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 plus court costs and costs of
prosecution upon conviction thereof. Each day in which any violation shall
continue, shall be deemed a separate offense.
      (3)   A violation of §§
52.01 et seq. and §§
52.20 et seq. is also declared to be a public nuisance and the village may
enforce by injunction or other remedy, including the right to correct the
violation and bill the owner or person in charge of the premises therefore and
if not collected, the bill will become a lien upon the property.
      (4)   Any business, industry or individual violating any of the
provisions of §§
52.01 et seq. and §§
52.20 et seq., which results in fines or penalties being levied against the
village, shall become liable for the fine or penalty, plus any expenses, loss
or damage occasioned by the violation.
      (5)   Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation
or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to §§
52.01 et seq. and §§
52.20 et seq., or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate
any monitoring device or method required under §§
52.01 et seq. and §§
52.20 et seq., shall, unless the action constitutes a crime under the laws of
the state, upon conviction, be guilty of a municipal civil infraction and shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $500 plus court costs and costs of
prosecution upon conviction thereof.
(Ord. 68, passed 10-24-2005; Ord. 94, passed 5-10-2010)
CHAPTER 53: STORMWATER
Section
   
53.01   Findings
   
53.02   Purpose and intent
   
53.03   Compatibility with other regulations
   
53.04   Responsibility for administration
   
53.05   Definitions
   
53.06   Prohibitions
   
53.07   Watercourse protection
   
53.08   Industrial or construction activity discharges
   
53.09   Access and inspection of properties and facilities
   
53.10   Notice of non-stormwater releases
   
53.11   Enforcement
   
53.12   Appeals
   
53.13   Stormwater design and construction
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 FINDINGS.
   The village finds:
   (A)   Discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system that are not
composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased non-point source
pollution and degradation of receiving waters;
   (B)   These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and
improper connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system from
residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments;
   (C)   These non-stormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually
but, geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have
cumulative impacts on receiving waters;
   (D)   The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and
safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life,
property values and other uses of lands and waters;
   (E)   These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills,
dumping and discharges into the municipal separate storm sewer system;
   (F)   The village is required to comply with a number of county, state and
federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the
impacts of stormwater runoff quality and non-point source pollution due to
improper non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer
system;
   (G)   Therefore, the Council adopts the ordinance from which the provisions
of this chapter derive to prohibit such non-stormwater discharges to the
municipal separate storm sewer system. It is determined that the regulation of
spills, improper pumping and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer
system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and
safety and the environment.
(Ord. 121, passed 8-26-2013)
§ 53.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater
discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal law. This chapter establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm
sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process.
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are to:
      (1)   Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system by any person;
      (2)   Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the
municipal separate storm sewer system;
      (3)   Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills,
inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer
system; and
      (4)   Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 121, passed 8-26-2013)
§ 53.03 COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule,
regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in
addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other
provision of law and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other
provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher
protective standards for human health or the environment shall control.
(Ord. 121, passed 8-26-2013)
§ 53.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The Council designates the Director of the Village Department of Public
Works, or his or her designee, as its authorized enforcement agency to
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter, together with
such other persons as may be designated by resolution of the Council.
(Ord. 121, passed 8-26-2013)
§ 53.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. A discharge prohibited by this chapter which occurs by
chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence.
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Persons designated by the Council to enforce
this chapter.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) . Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to
prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPS also
include treatment practices, operating procedures and practices to control site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   COAL TAR AND OTHER HIGH PAH CONTENT SEALANT PRODUCT. Coal tar and other high
PAH sealant product are prohibited pursuant to §
132.197 and constitute hazardous materials as defined and regulated in this
section.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to the NPDES general construction
permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance.
Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating and demolition.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste or
combination thereof, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
   ILLEGAL CONNECTION. An illegal connection is either of the following:
      (1)   Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface
or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain
system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-
stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to
enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel,
drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted or approved by an
authorized enforcement agency; or
      (2)   Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the
municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans,
maps or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the
municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in §
53.06.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). Any facility designed or used
for collecting and/or conveying stormwater including, but not limited to, any
roads with drainage systems, highways, municipal streets, curbs, gutters,
inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural
stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and human-made or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage structures and which is:
      (1)   Owned or maintained by the village;
      (2)   Not a combined sewer; and
      (3)   Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT. A permit issued by the State Department of Environment, Great Lakes &
Energy under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b) which
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether
the permit is applicable on an individual, group or general area-wide basis.
    NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE.  Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not composed entirely of stormwater.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture,
public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or
private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political
subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents; petroleum
hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or
otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or
abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; liquid and solid
wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals;
animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
   POLLUTION. The contamination or other alteration of any water’s physical,
chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and
includes, but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color,
turbidity or odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous,
solid, radioactive or other substance into any such waters as will, or is
likely to, create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or
injurious to the public health, safety, welfare or environment or to domestic,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other legitimate
beneficial uses or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic
life.
   PREMISES.  Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STATE WATERS. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes,
reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface
and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of
the boundaries of the State of Michigan which are not entirely confined and
retained completely upon the property of a single person.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF OR STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage
consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation and
resulting from such precipitation.
   STRUCTURAL STORMWATER CONTROL. A structural stormwater management facility
or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of
that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period
of release or the velocity of flow.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Pinckney, Michigan and/or its authorized
representative.
(Ord. 121, passed 8-26-2013; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 53.06 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition of illicit discharges.
      (1)   No person shall throw, drain or otherwise discharge, cause, or
allow others under its control to throw, drain or otherwise discharge, into the
municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants, other than stormwater.
      (2)   The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision
above:
         (a)   Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other
potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream
flows, rising ground water, uncontaminated ground water infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not
including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air
conditioning condensation, residential car washing, dechlorinated swimming pool
water from family residences, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland
flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants;
         (b)   Discharges or flows from firefighting and other discharges
specified in writing by the Council or its authorized representative as being
necessary to protect public health and safety; and
         (c)   The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-
stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other
applicable laws and regulations and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
   (B)   Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use,
maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal
separate storm sewer system is prohibited.
      (1)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      (2)   A person violates this chapter if the person connects a line
conveying non-stormwater sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system or
allows such a connection to continue.
      (3)   Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be
disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater
management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the Council.
      (4)   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps
or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be
located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written
notice of violation from the village requiring that such locating be completed.
Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of
the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be
identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other and that the outfall
location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer
system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations
are to be documented and provided to the village.
(Ord. 121, passed 8-26-2013; Ord. 147, passed 8-26-2019; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-
2021)   Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.07 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(Ord. 121, passed 8-26-2013)
§ 53.08 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the Council or its authorized representative prior to allowing discharges to
the municipal separate storm sewer system.
   (B)   The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to
have an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial
activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the Council at
the same time the operator submits the original notice of intent to the EPA, as
applicable.
   (C)   The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the Council
either in person or by mailing it to:
   Notice of Intent to Discharge Stormwater
   Pinckney Village Council
   220 S. Howell Street
   Pinckney, MI 48169
   (D)   A person violates this chapter if the person operates a facility that
is discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without having
submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the Council.
(Ord. 121, passed 8-26-2013) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.09 ACCESS AND INSPECTION OF PROPERTIES AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   The village shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and
facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   If a property or facility has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner
or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to
representatives of the village.
   (C)   The owner or operator shall allow the village ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography,
videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the
conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater.
   (D)   The village shall have the right to set up on any property or facility
such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the village, to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges.
   (E)   The village may require the owner or operator to install monitoring
equipment and perform monitoring as necessary and make the monitoring data
available to the Council. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner
or operator at his or her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
   (F)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed
by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the village and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
owner or operator.
   (G)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the village access to a facility is a
violation of this chapter.
   (H)   If the village has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged and the village is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety,
environment and welfare of the community, then the village may seek issuance of
a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
   (I)   The Livingston County Drain Commissioner has adopted requirements
identifying best management practices (BMPs) for any activity, operation or
facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of
stormwater, the storm drain system or waters of the United States. The owner or
operator of such activity, operation or facility shall provide, at his or her
own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses
through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any
person responsible for a property or premise that is, or may be, the source of
an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person’s expense,
additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge
of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid
NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the
provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater management
plan (SWMP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
(Ord. 121, passed 8-26-2013) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.10 NOTICE OF NON-STORMWATER RELEASES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility, activity or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility
or operation which are resulting, or may result in, illicit discharges or
pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer
system, state waters or waters of the United States, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such
release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge.
   (B)   In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency
response agencies, including the Putnam Township Fire Department and/or other
appropriate agencies, shall be immediately notified.
   (C)   Said person shall notify the village’s authorized enforcement agency
by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity
and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone
shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the village within
three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of
prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment,
the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site
written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said
person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge
or spill.
   (D)   Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 121, passed 8-26-2013) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.11 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Notice of violation.
      (1)   The village may issue a notice of violation with or without an
order against any user believed to be in violation of this chapter and
determine the civil administrative penalty, if any, to be imposed. The notice
of violation shall be served upon the user either by personal delivery or by
first class mail addressed to the user at his or her billing address, except
that an immediate cease and desist order may be written or oral and may also be
served by telephone.
      (2)   The notice of violation shall specify the:
         (a)   Date and time of issuance;
         (b)   Date(s), time(s) and place(s) of violation;
         (c)   Nature of the violation;
         (d)   Possible penalties under the chapter; and
         (e)   The right of the alleged violator to present to the village
written explanations, information or other materials in answer to the notice,
including any defenses.
   (B)   Emergency suspensions and orders.
      (1)   Issuance of order. If the village determines that a user has
violated any provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws or regulations
which the village is authorized to enforce, the village may issue an order,
with or without notice of violation and whether or not a notice of violation
was previously issued, to take action deemed appropriate under the
circumstances.
      (2)   Immediate cease and desist order. The village may issue an order to
cease and desist from discharging any wastewater, incompatible pollutant,
illegal discharge or illegal connection. The order shall have immediate effect
when the actual or threatened discharge of pollutants to the MS4 presents, or
may present, imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons, to the environment or cause interference with the operation of the
MS4. If action is not taken immediately to correct illegal discharge, the
village will implement whatever action is necessary to halt the discharge,
including appropriate legal and/or equitable relief, in the appropriate legal
forum.
      (3)   Order to show cause. In cases other than those described in
division (B)(2) above, the village may issue an order to show cause why an
order to cease and desist by a certain time and date should not be issued. The
proposed time for remedial action shall be specified in the order to show
cause. The order may also contain the conditions deemed appropriate by the
village, including, but not limited to, a requirement to:
         (a)   Submit samples;
         (b)   Install sampling or monitoring equipment;
         (c)   Submit reports;
         (d)   Permit access for inspection, sampling, tests, monitoring and
investigations;
         (e)   Install and operate pre-treatment equipment;
         (f)   Reduce or eliminate a discharge or pollutants in a discharge;
and
         (g)   Payment of use permit fees.
      (4)   Disconnection orders. The Director may disconnect a user from the
MS4 if the user violates any provision of a final order issued pursuant to this
section or an immediate cease and desist order issued pursuant to division (B)
(2) above (whether final or not).
      (5)   Content of orders. Any order issued by the village shall contain
the facts and grounds for its issuance and the remedial action ordered,
together with the time within the action shall be taken. No such order shall be
deemed insufficient, however, for inconsequential errors and omissions in the
facts and grounds for the order. If any user deems the content of the order to
contain insufficient information, it may request additional information from
the village; however, no request shall extend any time limit or defer any
payment, except as hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 121, passed 8-26-2013)
§ 53.12 APPEALS.
   Any user shall have the right to appeal any order, enforcement decision or
other action taken by the village pursuant to this chapter to the Council
unless the order, enforcement decision or other action has previously been
approved or authorized by Council. The appeal shall be directed to the village
within 30 days of the issuance of the order or the effective date of any
enforcement decision or other action taken by the village. The Council shall
consider the appeal and determine, in each particular case, whether any
deviation from strict enforcement of the order or other enforcement decision or
action will violate the intent of this subchapter or jeopardize the public
health or safety. Resolution of appeals shall be made by the Council within 30
days of filing by a user of the appeal and any supporting documentation, in
accordance with the best available data and this chapter.
(Ord. 121, passed 8-26-2013)
§ 53.13 STORMWATER DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.
   For Stormwater Design and Construction, refer to the Village Technical
Standards.
(Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provision of §§
53.01 et seq., shall be served with written notice in accordance with §
53.11(A).
      (2)   Any person who is found to be in noncompliance with the
requirements of §§
53.01 et seq., shall, unless the noncompliance constitutes a crime under the
laws of the state, be guilty of a municipal civil infraction and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $500 plus court costs and costs of
prosecution upon conviction thereof. Each day in which any violation shall
continue, shall be deemed a separate offense.
      (3)   A violation of §§
53.01 et seq., is also declared to be a public nuisance and the village may
enforce by injunction or other remedy, including the right to correct the
violation and bill the owner or person in charge of the premises therefore and,
if not collected, the bill will become a lien upon the property.
      (4)   Any business, industry or individual violating any of the
provisions of §§
53.01 et seq., which results in fines or penalties being levied against the
village, shall become liable for the fine or penalty, plus any expenses, loss
or damage occasioned by the violation.
      (5)   Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation
or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to §§
53.01 et seq., or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate
any monitoring device or method required under §§
53.01 et seq., shall, unless the action constitutes a crime under the laws of
the state, upon conviction, be guilty of a municipal civil infraction and shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $500 plus court costs and costs of
prosecution upon conviction thereof.
(Ord. 121, passed 8-26-2013)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   MOTOR VEHICLE AND UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODES
      
71.   ADDITIONAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   BICYCLES AND OTHER RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: MOTOR VEHICLE AND UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODES
Section
Michigan Vehicle Code
   
70.01   Michigan Vehicle Code; adopted by reference
   
70.02   References in the Vehicle Code
   
70.03   [Reserved]
   
70.04   Citations
   
70.05   Copies
   
70.06   Limitations
   
70.07   Penalties
Uniform Traffic Code
   
70.15   Uniform Traffic Code; adopted by reference
   
70.16   References in the Uniform Traffic Code
   
70.17   Copies
   
70.18   Penalties
General Provisions
   
70.25   Notice to be published
MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE
§ 70.01 MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Michigan Vehicle Code, being Public Act 300 of 1949 (M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1
et seq.), as amended now and in the future is hereby adopted and incorporated
by reference as an ordinance of the Village of Pinckney.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 70.02 REFERENCES IN THE VEHICLE CODE.
   Where necessary to the enforcement of the Michigan Vehicle Code or the
collection of fines, costs and penalties for violations as a village ordinance,
references in the Michigan Vehicle Code to LOCAL AUTHORITIES, LOCAL AUTHORITY
or AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION shall mean the Village Council of the Village
of Pinckney; references to MUNICIPALITY shall mean the Village of Pinckney;
references to MUNICIPAL CHARTER shall mean the Charter of the Village of
Pinckney; references to LOCAL ORDINANCES shall mean the Code of Ordinances of
the Village of Pinckney; and references to the VILLAGE shall mean the Village
of Pinckney.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 70.03 [RESERVED].
§ 70.04 CITATIONS.
   A person violating the provisions of this chapter, or the Michigan Vehicle
Code adopted by reference in this subchapter, may be issued a citation by a
police officer in the form and through the procedure specified within the
Michigan Vehicle Code. The citations shall be in the name of the “People of the
Village” and references to Michigan Vehicle Code sections adopted by reference
under this subchapter shall be cited by stating the letter “P” followed by the
applicable Michigan Vehicle Code section (e.g., “P-257.XXX”).
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 70.05 COPIES.
   Printed copies of the Michigan Vehicle Code, as amended from time to time,
shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk and made available to
the public at all times the office is open.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 70.06 LIMITATIONS.
   Violations of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of
imprisonment is greater than 93 days shall not be enforced by the village as an
ordinance violation.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
 § 70.07 PENALTIES.
   (A)   The penalties provided in the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by
reference subject to the limitations stated in §
70.06.
   (B)   A person who violates any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code
concerning the parking of vehicles that is designated as a municipal civil
infraction, shall subject to payment of a civil fine of $25 for each
infraction, except a person who violates any provision of the Michigan Vehicle
Code concerning spaces reserved for use by disabled persons shall subject to
payment of a civil fine of $100 for each infraction.
   (C)   A person who violates any other provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code
that is designated as a municipal civil infraction, shall subject to payment of
a civil fine as specified in §
131.57, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses
shall be subject to increased fines as provided by
Ch. 131 of the Village Code.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013; Ord. 131, passed 8-8-2016)
UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE
§ 70.15 UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The village hereby adopts and incorporates by reference as an ordinance of
the village the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages as
promulgated by the Director of the Michigan Department of State Police pursuant
to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Public Act 306 of 1969 (M.C.L.A.
§§ 24.201 to 24.328) and made effective October 30, 2002, and all future
amendments and revisions of the Uniform Traffic Code when they are promulgated
and effective in this state.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 70.16 REFERENCES IN THE UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE.
   References to GOVERNMENTAL UNIT and MUNICIPALITY in the Uniform Traffic Code
for Cities, Townships, and Villages shall mean the Village of Pinckney.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 70.17 COPIES.
   Printed complete copies of the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships,
and Villages, and all future amendments and revisions thereto, shall be kept on
file in the office of the Village Clerk and made available to the public at all
times the office is open.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 70.18 PENALTIES.
   (A)   The penalties provided in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities,
Townships, and Villages are adopted by reference.
   (B)   A person who violates any provision of the Michigan Uniform Traffic
Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages concerning the parking of vehicles
that is designated as a municipal civil infraction, shall subject to payment of
a civil fine of $25 for each infraction, except a person who violates any
provision of the concerning spaces reserved for use by disabled persons shall
subject to payment of a civil fine of $100 for each infraction.
   (C)   A person who violates any other provision of the Michigan Uniform
Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages that is designated as a
municipal civil infraction, shall subject to payment of a civil fine as
specified in §
131.57, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses
shall be subject to increased fines as provided by
Ch. 131 of the Village Code.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013; Ord. 131, passed 8-8-2016)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.25 NOTICE TO BE PUBLISHED.
   The Village Clerk shall publish the ordinance from which this chapter
derives in the manner required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a
notice stating the purpose of the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships,
and Villages and the Motor Vehicle Code, and the fact that a complete copy of
the codes are available to the public at the office of the Clerk for
inspection.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
CHAPTER 71: ADDITIONAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Prohibited parking
   
71.02   Parking vehicles for sale; violation as municipal civil infraction
   
71.03   Parking signs required; exception
   
71.04   Parking on private property; violation as civil infraction
   
71.05   No parking during certain hours on certain streets
   
71.06   Operating, stopping, standing, or parking truck or commercial vehicle
with gross weight of more than signed limits prohibited
   
71.07   Temporary impoundment of bicycles of minors violating code
 
   
71.99   Penalties
§ 71.01 PROHIBITED PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk;
      (2)   In front of any driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant or instructional building;
      (5)   On a designated crosswalk;
      (6)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking;
      (7)   At any place where parking is permitted for specific purposes
unless the occupants of the vehicle are complying with the requirements of
permitted uses;
      (8)   On more than one designated parking space;
      (9)   On any grass or otherwise landscaped area;
      (10)   On a playground or playing field.
   (B)   A person who violates this section shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 71.02 PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE; VIOLATION AS MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION.
   No person shall park any vehicle, motorcycle, trailer or recreational
vehicle for the principal purpose of offering same “for sale” in any public or
privately owned parking lots. This would include but would not be limited to
automobile service stations and commercial parking lots, or any area normally
open to the public but not licensed as an automobile sales area. In any
prosecution or proceedings under this section, the registration plate displayed
on a motor vehicle shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that
the registered owner of such vehicle was the person responsible for parking
such vehicle at the place where such violation occurred.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 71.03 PARKING SIGNS REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.
   If by this chapter any parking time limit is imposed or parking is
prohibited on designated streets, such regulations shall not be effective
unless appropriate signs giving notice of the time limit or prohibited parking
are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense, except that such
signs need not be erected to make ordinances regulating the stopping, standing
or parking of vehicles effective when these ordinances do not differ from the
provisions of the Act.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 71.04 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; VIOLATION AS CIVIL INFRACTION.
   (A)   No person shall park any motor vehicle on any private property in the
village without the expressed or implied consent, authorization or ratification
of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such property.
   (B)   A person who violates this section shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 71.05 NO PARKING DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   The traffic engineer may determine and designate zones where parking is
prohibited between the hours specified in a traffic order.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 71.06 OPERATING, STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING TRUCK OR COMMERCIAL VEHICLE
WITH GROSS WEIGHT OF MORE THAN SIGNED LIMITS PROHIBITED.
   When signs are erected that give notice of weight limits, a person shall not
operate, stop, stand or park any truck or commercial vehicle with a gross
weight of more than the amounts specified on the signs at any time on any of
the streets or parts of streets on which such signs have been posted.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 71.07 TEMPORARY IMPOUNDMENT OF BICYCLES OF MINORS VIOLATING CODE.
   In lieu of instituting a civil infraction proceeding against a minor
violating any section of Part 6 of the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities,
Townships, and Villages, as adopted under §
70.15 of this code, involving operation of a bicycle, any law enforcement
agency may temporarily impound the minor’s bicycle as provided in §
72.95 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 71.99 PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, and shall subject to payment of a civil fine of $25
for each infraction, except a person who violates any provision concerning
spaces reserved for use by disabled persons shall subject to payment of a civil
fine of $100 for each infraction.
(Ord. 131, passed 8-8-2016)
CHAPTER 72: BICYCLES AND OTHER RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
   
72.01   Regulate the use of skateboards and other toy vehicles
   
72.02   Regulate the operation and use of bicycles, motorcycles, skateboards
and other wheeled conveyances
   
72.03   Regulate the use of snowmobiles
 
   
72.95   Impoundment authorized
   
72.96   Notice of impoundment
   
72.97   Impoundment fee
   
72.98   Sale after impoundment
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 REGULATE THE USE OF SKATEBOARDS AND OTHER TOY VEHICLES.
    (A)   Riding on sidewalks; right-of-way; alternate penalty.
      (1)   A person shall not operate a toy vehicle on the sidewalk anywhere
in the central business district of the village.
      (2)   A person shall not operate a toy vehicle on any public street,
public parking lot, public sidewalk, commercial establishment or public place
in an unsafe or hazardous manner likely to cause harm to himself or herself or
bystanders, or damage to the real or personal property of another or if on
private property without the permission of the owners of the property upon
which the activity is occurring.
   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT. Both sides of Main Street between Marion and
Webster Streets, and both sides of Howell Street, between Putnam and Livingston
Streets.
      TOY VEHICLES. Scooters, tri-cycles, big wheels, roller skates,
skateboards and any other non-motorized form of transportation which is
propelled by human power, but not including wheelchairs or other conveyances
used for improving the mobility of handicapped persons.
(Ord. 4.1, passed 8-13-1990) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 REGULATE THE OPERATION AND USE OF BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, SKATEBOARDS
AND OTHER WHEELED CONVEYANCES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a motorcycle or motor
driven cycle is rented, leased or furnished, owned or otherwise authorized the
use of the motorcycle or motor driven cycle on the public streets or highways
who, at the time of the use is not licensed to operate a vehicle in this state.
   (B)   (1)   A person propelling a bicycle or operating a motorcycle or motor
driven cycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular
seat attached thereto.
      (2)   No bicycle or motorcycle shall be used to carry more persons at one
time than the number for which it was designed and equipped.
      (3)   No motor driven cycle shall be used to carry more than one person
at any one time.
      (4)   A person operating or riding on a motorcycle or motor driven cycle
shall wear a crash helmet approved by the Department of the State Police. The
Department shall promulgate rules for the implementation of this section in
accordance with the provisions of Public Act 88 of 1943, being M.C.L.A. Chapter
24.
   (C)   (1)   Every person operating a bicycle, a motor driven cycle,
motorcycle or any other wheeled non-motorized vehicle or conveyance upon a
roadway, shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable,
exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the
same direction.
      (2)   Persons riding bicycles, motor driven cycles or motorcycles upon a
roadway shall not ride more than 2 abreast except on paths or parts of roadways
set aside for the exclusive use of the vehicles.
      (3)   Whenever usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use a path and shall not use the roadway.
      (4)   No person operating a motor driven cycle, a motorcycle or a bicycle
shall pass between lines of traffic, but may pass on the left of traffic moving
in his or her direction in the case of a two-way street or on the left or right
of traffic in the case of a one-way street, in an unoccupied lane.
   (D)    No person operating a bicycle, motorcycle or motor driven cycle shall
carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the driver from keeping
both hands upon the handle bars of the vehicle.
   (E)   No person shall operate a motorcycle or motor driven cycle in such a
manner as to create excessive noise disturbing the peace and quiet of the
village.
   (F)   No person shall operate a motorcycle or motor driven cycle within the
Village of Pinckney unless the motorcycle or motor driven cycle shall have
adequate exhaust muffling systems to insure minimum noise while operating the
motorcycle or motor driven cycle.
   (G)   No person shall operate any wheeled, non-motorized vehicle or
conveyance in or about any public street, public parking lot, public sidewalk,
commercial establishment or public place so as to cause a hazard to bystanders,
or in such a fashion as to cause damage to the property of others or, if on
private property, without the permission of the owners of the property upon
which the activity is occurring.
(Ord. 9, passed 6-15-1967; Ord. passed 2-13-1989) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 REGULATE THE USE OF SNOWMOBILES.
   (A)   This section is adopted pursuant to authority granted in § 14 of
Public Act 74 of 1968, being M.C.L.A.§§ 324.82101 through 324.82160.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
      HIGHWAY or STREET. The entire width between boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel and shall include among other portions thereof,
the sidewalk and the area between the sidewalk and the curb.
      OPERATE. To ride in or on and to control the operation of a snowmobile.
      OPERATOR. Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile.
      OWNER. Any person, other than a lien holder, having the property in or
title to a snowmobile entitled to the use or possession thereof.
      PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, the state and any of its
agencies or subdivisions and any body of persons whether incorporated or not.
      ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designated or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel. If a highway includes two or more separate roadways,
the term ROADWAY refers to any such roadway separately, but not to all the
roadways collectively.
      SNOWMOBILE. Any motorized vehicle designed for travel primarily on snow
or ice steered by wheels, skis or runners.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided, no snowmobile which is required to be
registered under the provisions of this section shall be operated within the
Village of Pinckney by a person or an authorized agent of that person, unless
and until he or she has attained the age or 16 years.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided, no snowmobile shall be operated within
the Village of Pinckney unless registered by the owner with the State of
Michigan as required by the Public Acts of 1968. No registration is required
for a snowmobile operated exclusively on lands owned or under the control of
the snowmobile owner.
   (E)   The owner of any snowmobile having been issued a certificate of
registrant for the snowmobile by the State of Michigan shall paint on or attach
in a permanent manner to each side of the forward half of the snowmobile, the
identification number issued by the State of Michigan in block characters of
good proportion, not less than three inches in height, reading from left to
right. The numbers shall contrast, so as to be distinctly visible and legible.
No number other than the number awarded to a snowmobile by the State of
Michigan, or granted reciprocity under Public Act 74 of 1968, being M.C.L.A. §§
324.82101 through 324.82160, shall be painted, attached or otherwise displayed
on either side of the forward half of the snowmobile.
   (F)   No person shall operate a snowmobile upon the main traveled portion
the roadway or on a highway or street within ten feet of the roadway within the
Village of Pinckney, with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Properly registered snowmobiles may cross streets and highways,
except access highways and freeways as defined in Public Act 300 of 1949, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 through 257.923, if the crossing can be made in safety and it
does not interfere with the free movement of vehicular traffic approaching from
any direction on the highway. The snowmobile operator shall yield the right-of-
way to all vehicular traffic upon any street or highway.
      (2)   Snowmobiles may be operated on a street and highway during a period
of emergency, when so declared by the Chief of Police, when travel by
conventional automobile equipment is not possible.
      (3)   Snowmobiles may be operated on the highways within the restrictions
herein set forth for the purposes of crossing bridges and culverts.
      (4)   Snowmobiles may be operated on a street or highway for a special
snowmobile event of limited duration which is conducted according to a
prearranged schedule under permit from the governmental unit having
jurisdiction.
      (5)   Whenever it is impractical to gain immediate access to an area
adjacent a public highway where a snowmobile is to be operated, the vehicle may
be operated adjacent and parallel to the highway for the purpose of gaining
access to the area of operation. This section shall apply to the operation of a
snowmobile from the point where the vehicle is unloaded from a motorized
conveyance to and from the area where the snowmobile is to be operated when
loading and unloading cannot be effected in the immediate vicinity of the area
of operation without causing a hazard to vehicular traffic approaching from
either direction on the highway. Loading and unloading must be accomplished
with due regard to safety at the nearest possible point to the area of
operation.
   (G)   No snowmobile shall be operated in the Village of Pinckney unless it
has at least one headlight, one taillight and adequate brakes capable of
producing deceleration at 14 feet a second on level ground at a speed of 20
mph.
   (H)   No person shall operate a snowmobile:
      (1)   At a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper, having
due regard for conditions then existing and in no case at a speed greater than
15 mph;
      (2)   When under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs,
barbital or any derivative of barbital;
      (3)   During the hours from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour
before sunrise, when permitted by this section, without displaying a lighted
headlight and a lighted taillight;
      (4)   Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m;
      (5)   In any nursery, planting area or natural area of forest
reproduction and when growing stock may be damaged;
      (6)   Unless it is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in
constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke;
      (7)   While transporting thereon a bow or firearm, unless the same be
securely encased;
      (8)   In any cemetery in the Village of Pinckney;
      (9)   In any public park; and
      (10)   Within 300 feet of any building in the Village of Pinckney without
the permission of the owner thereof.
   (I)   The operator of a snowmobile involved in an accident resulting in
injuries to or death of any person or property damage in an estimated amount of
$100 or more, or some person acting for him or her, or the owner of the
snowmobile having knowledge of the accident shall immediately, by the quickest
means of communication, notify the Police Department of the Village of
Pinckney.
   (J)   No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a snowmobile owned by
him or her or under his or her control to be operated in violation of this
section.
(Ord. 16, passed 2-4-1971) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.95 IMPOUNDMENT AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The Village Police Department is authorized to remove bicycles from
public places to a place of safety, when:
      (1)   Any bicycle is reasonably believed to be stolen.
      (2)   Any bicycle has been left unattended upon any public street, alley,
or sidewalk continuously for a period of 48 hours.
      (3)   Any bicycle is left in such a manner as to obstruct unreasonably
the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any public street, alley, or
sidewalk.
      (4)   The operator of a bicycle is detained because of a traffic
violation and refuses to give his or her name and address.
   (B)   When the operator of a bicycle who is a minor commits a traffic
violation contrary to Part 6 of the Uniform Traffic Code, as adopted by the
village, officers from the Police Department may temporarily impound the
minor’s bicycle in lieu of instituting a civil infraction action against such
minor.
   (C)   If an individual violates divisions (A)(1) or (2) of §
72.01, the Police Department may impound the toy vehicle for not more than 30
days in lieu of instituting a municipal civil infraction process. In the case
of a temporary impounding of a toy vehicle of a minor pursuant to this section,
written notice shall be given to the minor’s parent or legal guardian by
mailing the notice by first class mail within five days of the impoundment.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 72.96 NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   When a bicycle is impounded under this chapter and the Village Police
Department knows or is able to ascertain the owner thereof, officers from the
Police Department shall, within a reasonable period of time, give and cause to
be given a notice in writing to such owner of the fact of impoundment and
reasons therefor. For a temporary impoundment of the bicycle or toy vehicle of
a minor pursuant to §
72.95, such notice shall be given to the minor’s parent or legal guardian.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 72.97 IMPOUNDMENT FEE.
   (A)   No impounded bicycle shall be discharged or removed from the place of
impounded storage except by the owner or his or her authorized representative
and only upon the payment of an impoundment fee of $15. However, no such fee
shall be required for a stolen bicycle if it is reclaimed by the owner after
being notified of the impoundment and if the owner signs an affidavit that the
bicycle was stolen. The fee shall be paid at the Village Clerk’s office.
   (B)   For a bicycle or toy vehicle of a minor temporarily impounded pursuant
to §
72.95, the bicycle or toy vehicle shall be returned to the minor’s parent or
legal guardian without the imposition of the impoundment fee of $15. Upon
returning such bicycle or toy vehicle to the parent or legal guardian, the
impounding officer shall inform the parent or guardian of the nature of the
violation for which the bicycle or toy vehicle was impounded and of the fact
that further violations by the minor will result in institution of civil
infraction proceedings pursuant to the village traffic code.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 72.98 SALE AFTER IMPOUNDMENT.
   Any bicycle impounded under this chapter may, after one month from the date
of impoundment, be sold by the village at public sale. Notification of the sale
shall be published and/or posted at least five days prior to the sale.
(Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   A person who violates any provision of §
72.01 is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a
civil fine as specified in §
131.57 plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses
shall be subject to increased fines as provided by
Chapter 131 herein.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §
72.02 shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
liable to a fine of not more than $100, imprisonment for 90 days or both in the
discretion of the court.
   (D)   Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of §
72.03 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$500 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days in the county jail, or by
both the fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 9, passed 6-15-1967; Ord. 16, passed 2-4-1971; Ord. 4.1, passed 8-13-
1990; Ord. passed 5-22-2000; Ord. 116, passed 3-11-2013)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FIRE PREVENTION; INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE; FIREWORKS
      
92.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
93.   CEMETERIES
      
94.   WEEDS
      
95.   SPECIAL EVENTS
      
96.   NOISE
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Regulate the keeping of animals other than dogs and cats
   
90.02   Poultry; chickens; permit requirements; restrictions
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 REGULATE THE KEEPING OF ANIMALS OTHER THAN DOGS AND CATS.
   (A)   Hereafter it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
keep or confine any horse, cattle, swine, sheep, pony, goat, rabbit, poultry
(excepting chickens) or any other animals and fowl within the limits of the
Village of Pinckney.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to keep horses, cattle,
swine, sheep, ponies, goats, rabbits, non-chicken poultry or other animals or
fowl within the limits of the Village of Pinckney shall make applications in
writing to the Pinckney Village Council to so do, describing particularly the
place where the applicant proposes to keep the horses, cattle, swine, sheep,
ponies, goats, rabbits, non-chicken poultry or other animals and fowl, the
number thereof, the distance from the place to the public streets on each side
and the distance from the place to the dwelling houses upon the lands adjoining
the proposed place.
   (C)   If it shall appear to the Village Council that the granting of
permission will not be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of any of
the inhabitants of the village, the Council shall grant a permit to the person
applying therefore. The permit shall specify the place where the horses,
cattle, swine, sheep, ponies, goats, rabbits, non-chicken poultry or other
animals and fowl may be kept, and the number thereof shall be reasonable as
determined by the Council. No person, firms or corporation shall keep any
horse, cattle, swine, sheep, ponies, goats, rabbits, non-chicken poultry or any
other animals or fowl in the village contrary to the terms and conditions of
the permit. The Village Council may revoke the permit whenever it may deem it
proper to do so.
   (D)   Hereafter it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
keeping or confining any horse, cattle, swine, sheep, pony, goat, rabbit, non-
chicken poultry or any other animals or fowl within the limits of the Village
or Pinckney to do so in a manner that creates unwholesome, offensive and
noxious smells or odors or in any unsanitary condition.
   (E)   No horses, cattle, swine, sheep, pony, goat, rabbits, poultry or any
other animal or fowl may run at-large or trespass on public or private property
or park in the village.
   (F)   Regulations concerning the keeping of dogs or cats are not included in
this section.
(Ord. 13, passed 5-1-1969; Ord. 178, passed 9-8-2025) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 POULTRY; CHICKENS; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the
corporate limits any turkeys, ducks, geese, or any other poultry not classified
as chickens (gallus gallus domesticus).
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor, or have
under their care, custody, or control any cock or rooster chicken two months of
age or older without a valid village rooster permit. The unlawful keeping or
harboring of non-permitted cocks or roosters is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance.
   (C)   Rooster permit. One rooster may be permitted for flock protection
purposes on parcels of land measuring one-half acre or more, subject to the
issuance of a village rooster permit.
      (1)   The rooster permit shall be valid for the current calendar year and
renewable annually.
      (2)   The applicant shall obtain written permission from each adjoining
property owner whose property shares a boundary with the applicant's property.
      (3)   A $25 annual fee shall be paid to the village at the time of
application.
      (4)   The rooster must be kept in compliance with all housing, noise, and
sanitary requirements of this chapter.
      (5)   The village may revoke a rooster permit at any time upon receiving
substantiated complaints of:
         (a)   Excessive noise;
         (b)   Offensive odors;
         (c)   Property damage; or
         (d)   Unsanitary or unsafe housing conditions.
      (6)   Upon revocation, the rooster must be removed from the premises
within seven days.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor, or have
under their care, custody, or control any chicken without a valid permit issued
by the village.
      (1)   One time application shall be made to the village and the fee for
the permit shall be $25.
      (2)   The application shall be in writing on a form furnished by the
village. All applications to keep chickens within the corporate limits must be
approved by the village.
      (3)   No permit shall be assignable or transferable either as to
permittee, location, or chickens.
      (4)   Permits will be issued only to owner-occupied, single-family homes
and only in zoning districts R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4.
      (5)   A person who has been issued a permit freely and voluntarily
consents to a search and examination of the chicken enclosure in his or her
rear yard upon demand by any law enforcement officer or code enforcement
officer.
   (E)   The requirements for the issuance of a permit by the village to own,
keep, harbor, or have custody or control over a chicken are as follows:
      (1)   No more than 15 chickens shall be permitted on any property. The
number of hens does not exceed five hens for every one-quarter acre of property
sizes or a total of 15 hens, whichever is less.
      (2)   The chickens must be housed in a chicken facility and run approved
by the village, such chicken facility and run to be maintained in compliance
with all the village's requirements as a condition of the permit. The
requirements for the chicken facility and run include:
         (a)   The chicken facility and run must be in good repair, capable of
being maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free of vermin, obnoxious
smells and substances;
         (b)   The chicken facility and run shall not constitute a nuisance or
disturb neighboring residents due to noise, odor, or threats to public health;
         (c)   The chicken facility and run shall prevent chickens from roaming
at large;
         (d)   The run shall be attached to the coop and constructed to include
metal wire fencing anchored to the ground and a fully enclosed roof or similar
enclosure to prevent escape by chickens and entry by predators and general
members of the public;
         (e)   The chicken facility shall provide not less than three square
feet per occupant chicken and the run shall provide not less than five square
feet per occupant chicken;
         (f)   The chicken facility shall be constructed of durable material
and the flooring of any chicken facility within the coop shall be of a hard-
surface material. The chicken enclosure shall not exceed 60 square feet of
floor area or exceed seven feet in height. Chicken run area shall not require
hard-surface flooring;
         (g)   The chicken facility and run shall not be located in any front
yard of a property and must be located so as to be at least ten feet from the
rear and side property lines, ten feet from any existing structure on property
and at least 20 feet from any neighboring residence; and
         (h)   The chicken facility and run shall comply with all applicable
village building and zoning codes and must be consistent with the requirements
of any land use regulation.
      (3)   Offal, manure, and waste material shall not be permitted to
accumulate nor be confined in any manner that is conducive to the breeding or
attraction of flies, mosquitoes, or other noxious insects or in any manner that
endangers the public health or safety. All permit applicants must provide a
statement of the method in which offal, manure, and waste material accumulating
from the chickens will be sanitarily disposed of at least once every seven
days.
      (4)   All grain, feed, and stuff intended for use as food for chickens
shall be kept in tightly fitted containers constructed to keep out vermin and
wild animals.
      (5)   Odors from chickens, chicken manure, or other chicken-related
substances shall not be perceptible beyond the boundaries of the property with
the valid permit for chickens.
      (6)   Chickens shall not be permitted to run at large within the village
limits. No dog, cat or other domesticated animal which kills a chicken
permitted to run at large will, for that reason alone, not be considered a
dangerous or aggressive animal and it will not be the village's responsibility
to enforce its animal control provisions.
      (7)   Any noise from chickens shall not be loud enough beyond the
boundaries of the property with the valid permit for the chickens to disturb
persons of reasonable sensitivity.
      (8)   If the above requirements are not complied with the village may
revoke any valid chicken permit granted under this section and initiate
prosecution for a civil infraction violation. If a permit is revoked, all
chickens must be removed from the property and the village limits within seven
days.
      (9)   A person who has been issued a valid permit shall submit it for
examination upon demand by any law enforcement officer, animal control officer
or code enforcement officer.
   (F)   The slaughtering or destruction of chickens within the corporate
limits of the village shall be prohibited.
   (G)   Notwithstanding the issuance of a permit by the village, private
restrictions on the use of property shall remain enforceable and take
precedence over a permit. Private restrictions include but are not limited to
deed restrictions, condominium master deed restrictions, neighborhood
association by-laws, and covenant deeds. A permit issued to a person whose
property is subject to private restrictions that prohibit the keeping of
chickens is void. The interpretation and enforcement of the private restriction
is the sole responsibility of the private parties involved.
(Ord. 178, passed 9-8-2025)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of §
90.01 is responsible for a municipal civil infraction set forth in
Chapter 131 of this code, subject to payment of a civil fine as specified in §
131.57 plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses
shall be subject to increased fines as provided by
Chapter 131 herein.
(Ord. 13, passed 5-1-1969)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION; INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE; FIREWORKS
Section
   
91.01   Purpose
   
91.02   Title
   
91.03   Adoption
   
91.04   Revisions and additions
   
91.05   General fire service charges
   
91.06   Surety bond
   
91.07   Nuisance
   
91.08   Control of open burning
   
91.09   Outdoor free-standing furnaces
   
91.10   Fireworks
   
91.11   Enforcement
   
91.12   Notice
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 PURPOSE.
   This is a chapter enacted under Act 33 of Public Acts of 1951, as amended,
and Chapter X of the Village Charter, being the General Law Village Act 3 of
1895, as amended, (M.C.L.A. §§ 70.1 - 70.11), for the purpose of providing fire
inspection services; to provide for the powers and duties of fire authorities;
to provide regulations for the safe guarding of life and property from fire and
explosion hazards and conditions hazardous to life, property, and occupancy of
buildings and premises in the geographical area serviced by the Putnam Township
Fire Department within the Village of Pinckney; and to provide for the issuance
of permits for hazardous uses and operations, the enforcement thereof and to
prescribe penalties and remedies thereto.
(Ord. 169, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 91.02 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the Village of Pinckney
International Fire Code Ordinance.
(Ord. 169, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 91.03 ADOPTION.
   A certain document, three copies of each which are on file in the offices of
the Village of Pinckney, being marked and designated as the International Fire
Code 2018 Edition, including Appendix Chapter A, B, C, D, E, F, and G, as
published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Fire Code
for the Village of Pinckney for regulating and governing the safeguarding of
life and property from fire and explosion hazards and from conditions hazardous
to life, property, and occupancy of buildings and premises in the Village of
Pinckney and providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or
operations; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of such International Fire Code, 2018 edition, published by International
Code Council, on file in the offices of the Village of Pinckney are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
chapter.
(Ord. 169, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 91.04 REVISIONS AND ADDITIONS.
   The following sections of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, are
hereby revised and/or added:
Section 101.1: These regulations shall be known as the Village of Pinckney
International Fire Code Ordinance.
Section 102.7 Referenced Codes and Standards: The codes and standards
referenced in the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, as amended, shall be
those that are listed in Chapter 80 of the International Fire Code and such
codes and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this
chapter to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further
regulated.
Section 102.7.1: The Putnam Township Fire Department additionally adopts the
2018 Edition of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1 and the 2018
Edition of NFPA 101. Where differences occur between the provisions of this
chapter and the adopted standards, the provisions which contain the higher
standard for the promotion of the safety, welfare and protections of the public
shall apply.
Section 103.1 General: The Putnam Township Fire Department shall be responsible
for fire prevention, inspection activities and code enforcement of buildings
and occupancies as related to the risk of fire or explosion within Putnam
Township Fire Department jurisdiction. The Department of Fire Prevention is
established within the jurisdiction under the direction of the Fire Code
Official. The function of the Department shall be the implementation,
administration, and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
Section 104.11.4 Unlawful boarding or tampering with Fire Department Emergency
Equipment: A person shall not, without proper authorization from the Fire
Official in charge of Fire Department emergency equipment, cling to, attach to,
climb upon or into, board or wing upon any Fire Department emergency vehicle,
whether the same is in motion or at rest, operate any emergency warning
equipment, or to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches,
starting devices, brakes, pumps or any equipment or protective clothing on, or
a part of, any Fire Department emergency vehicle.
Section 104.11.5 Damage/Injury to Fire Department Equipment/Personnel: It shall
be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or conspire to
damage or deface, Fire Department emergency vehicles or equipment at any time;
or to injure, or attempt or conspire to injure, Fire Department personnel while
performing departmental duties.
Section 105.1 General: The Code Official is authorized to issue permits in
accordance with Section 105 of the International Fire Code. Where reference is
made to this Section for permits and there are no provisions for issuing said
permits by the Department of Fire Prevention, the Code Official is authorized
to waive the particular permit requirement.
Section 105.6.13 Permit Fees: Permit fees shall be set by the Village of
Pinckney in its discretion for the issuance of permits authorized under the
International Fire Code. The township shall issue from time to time revised
updates of a fee schedule which shall be incorporated by hereto as the
particular fees are adopted by the village.
Section 105.6.13.1 Exhibits, Crafts and Trade Shows: An operational permit is
required to operate exhibits, crafts, and trade shows. A $50 dollar permit fee
shall be required for each exhibit, craft, trade show, or any other item that
requires a permit for operation.
Section 105.6.20 Hazardous Materials: An operational permit is required to
store, transport on site, dispense, use or handle hazardous materials in excess
of the amounts listed in Table 105.6.20 of the International Fire Code. An
operational permit, once issued, shall remain valid until revoked or until the
occupancy for which the permit was issued shall change ownership. Upon any
change of ownership, a new operational permit for the occupancy shall be
required to store, transport on site, dispense, use of handle hazardous
material in excess of the amounts listed in Table 105.6.20 of the International
Fire Code. Notwithstanding the fact that no additional permit needs to be
issued, nor any further fee charged, for a change in the operation or manner of
storage, transportation, dispensing, use of handling of the permitted hazardous
substances, nor for any change in the type of hazardous substance being so
used, any such change from the conditions of the original permit shall create a
duty on the permit holder to advise the Fire Marshal or his or her designee for
such changes forthwith. Failure to comply with this notification mandate may be
cause for revocation of an operational permit where the circumstances
surrounding such permit have been changed without notice to the Fire Marshal.
Exception: Nothing in this subsection shall apply to a farm or farm operations
as defined in Section 202 of this International Fire Code and M.C.L.A. §
286.472, that being the Michigan Right to Farm Act, Act 93 of Public Acts of
1981, as amended.
Section 105.6.20.1 Required Amounts for Reporting: Reportable quantities shall
be considered the maximum amount of hazardous materials on site at any given
time. This amount is required to be reported to the Fire Department as
indicated in Table 105.6.20. of the International Fire Code.
Section 105.6.20.2 Permit Fees: The following fees shall be applied to the
maximum quantities of each form of hazardous materials:
 
Quantity and Form                                      Fee
0 - 1,000 lbs; 0 - 100 cu. ft; 0 - 330 gal.            $100
1,001 - 20,000 lbs, 101 - 6,000 cu. ft; 331 - 990 gal. $250
20,000+ lbs.; 6,001+ cu. ft.; 991+ gal.                $500
Section 105.7.1.1 Installations - Fire Suppression Systems: Before any fire
suppression system or component is installed, enlarged, extended, or modified,
a permit shall be obtained from the Code Official. This shall include any
device or relay connected to or controlled by the fire suppression system. A
qualified installer who is properly licensed and/or certified to perform such
work as determined by the Code Official must perform all work. Construction
documents shall be reviewed by the Code Official prior to the issuance of the
permit. Upon issuance of the permit, the permit must be posted at the job site
in plain view.
Section 105.7.1.2 Permit Fees: Permit fees cover initial plan review and two
inspections.
Sprinkler Systems:
Riser(s) and Sprinkler Heads Fee
Riser(s) and Sprinkler Heads Fee
1 - 20 heads                 $80
21 - 50 heads                $90
51 - 100 heads               $100
101 - 200 heads              $120
201 - 300 heads              $140
301 - 400 heads              $160
401 - 500 heads              $180
501 - 1000 heads             $200
Greater than 1001 heads      $0.50 per head
Standpipes: $45 per standpipe.
Fire pump: $50.
Dry or wet chemical fire suppression systems: $90 per system. Each additional
system in the same building reviewed at the same time is $45. Alterations,
additions, or modifications to each existing system are $35.
Total flooding agent extinguishing systems: $90 plus appropriate detection
system fee.
Plan reviews: the code might require an outside third party. This review will
be charged at the current fire safety consultants or plan reviewer's rates.
These fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit.
   Section 105.7.7.1 Installations - Fire Alarm Systems: Before any fire alarm
or detection system or component is installed, enlarged, extended, or modified,
a permit shall be obtained from the Code Official. This shall include auxiliary
devices such as magnetic locks, electronic locks or any device or relay
connected to or controlled by the fire alarm or detection system. A qualified
installer who is properly licensed and/or certified to perform such work as
determined by the Code Official must perform all work. Construction documents
shall be reviewed by the Code Official prior to the issuance of the permit.
Upon issuance of the permit, the permit must be posted at the job site in plain
view.
Section 105.7.7.2 Permit Fees: Permit fees cover the initial plan review and
two inspections.
 
Devices                                                        Fee
Control panel                                                  $20
First initiating or auxiliary control devices (smoke detector, $10
heat detector, control switch, and the like)
Each additional initiating or aux. control device              $0.50 per device
First audio/visual indicating or communications device (horn,  $10
strobe, bell, and the like)
Each additional audio/visual indicating or communications      $0.50 per device
device
Plan reviews: If review by a third-party is required, the review will be
charged at the current fire safety consultants or plan reviewer's rate. These
fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit.
Section 105.7.26 Permit Issuance: A permit granted hereunder shall not be
transferrable nor shall any such permit be extended beyond the time set forth
therein unless approved by the Fire Official. When work is started without a
permit, the permit fee shall be doubled.
Section 106.6 Additional Fees: The following fees may be charged for a re-
inspection and shall apply to each inspector performing the re-inspection.
These fees shall be paid in full prior to the re-inspection being performed.
   1.   $30 per re-inspection during normal working hours.
   2.   $75 per re-inspection during non-working hours.
Section 106.7 Cancellation Fee: Handling cost of permits cancelled after being
issued is 35% of the permit fee or $10, whichever is greater.
Section 109.4 Board of Appeals Members: The Board of Appeals shall consist of
the following:
   1.   The Board of Appeals shall consist of the following:
      a.   Two certified Fire Inspectors from outside the jurisdiction of the
Putnam Township Fire Department.
      b.   One certified engineer or architect.
      c.   One member of the Putnam Township Board.
      d.   One member of the Pinckney Village Council.
   2.   No member of the Board of Appeals can have a conflict of interest with
the issue being addressed.
Section 110.5 Prohibited Parking; Exception, Bus-Loading Zone; Violation as
Civil Infraction:
   1.   A vehicle shall not be parked, except if necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the law or the directions of a police
officer, Fire Official/personnel or traffic-control device, in any of the
following places:
      a.   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
      b.   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station and within
75 feet of a fire station entrance on the opposite side of a street if properly
marked by an official sign.
      c.   Alongside or opposite a street excavation or obstruction, if the
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
      d.   Within 500 feet of an accident at which a police officer or Fire
Official/personnel is in attendance.
      e.   In a place or in a manner that blocks immediate egress from an
emergency exit conspicuously marked as an emergency exit of a building.
      f.   In a place or in a manner that blocks or hampers the immediate
egress from a fire escape conspicuously marked as a fire escape providing an
emergency means of egress from a building.
      g.   Within 500 feet of a fire at which fire apparatus is in attendance.
However, volunteer fire fighters responding to the fire may park within 500
feet of the fire in a manner not to interfere with the fire apparatus at the
scene. A vehicle parked legally, previous to the fire, is exempt from this
subdivision.
      h.   In a place or in a manner that blocks access to a space clearly
designated as a fire lane.
      i.   A person shall not move a vehicle not owned by the person into a
prohibited area or away from a curb a distance that makes the parking unlawful.
Section 110.5.1 Fee Schedule: For any violation of the parking requirements
listed in Section 110.5 of this Code, the fine for such an offense shall be $25
dollars per violation if paid within ten days of the violation and, if not paid
within ten days of said violation, shall be increased to $50 dollars per
violation.
Section 110.5.2 Towing and Storage Costs: In addition to the above violation
penalties, a person who violates this Section shall be responsible for all
vehicle towing and storage costs incurred if the Fire Chief and/or his/her
designees determines that the vehicle parked in violation of Section 110.5 must
be towed to ensure public safety and/or Fire Department access to a building or
emergency scene.
Section 114.1 False Alarms; Inspections; Orders to Correct:
   1.   A fire, sprinkler, or water alarm system experiencing more than two
false alarms within a 30-day period or four false alarms within a calendar year
is deemed defective. Upon written notice to the owner or lessee of the alarm
system by the Fire Chief and/or his/her designee, the owner or lessee shall
have the system inspected by an alarm system contractor who shall, within 15
days, file a written report to the Fire Chief and/or his/her designee of the
results of his/her inspection, the probable cause of the false alarm and his/
her recommendation for eliminating false alarms.
   2.   Upon receipt of the report, the Fire Chief and/or his/her designee
shall forward the same to the owner or lessee, ordering corrections, based upon
recommendations contained in the report.
   3.   The owner of lessee shall have three working days from the receipt of
the order to make such corrections. Thereafter, to defray the cost of
responding to false alarms, the owner or lessee of an alarms system shall pay
to the village the amount of the response as per the cost recovery fees for
each false alarm received and responded to by the Fire Department during the
calendar year in which the order to correct the system was issued. The amount
due to the village shall be paid upon demand by the Fire Department or the
village and if not so paid, the village shall have the right to any and all
other remedies provided by law for the collection of all charges.
Section 114.2 Misrepresented False Alarms: It shall be unlawful for any person
to summon, in any way, the Fire Department unless a valid reason for their
response is present. The Fire Chief and/or his/her designee shall have the
authority to issue fines, as per the Emergency Response Cost Recovery
Ordinance, to any person causing a false alarm. If the person causing a false
alarm is a minor the fines shall be the responsibility of the minor's legal
supervisor.
Section 202 General Definitions: The following definitions shall be in addition
to the definitions noted in the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition.
"Code Official": The Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, Fire Inspector, Code Enforcement
Officer, the Village Police Chief or other designated authority charged by the
applicable governing body with the duties of administration and enforcement of
this International Fire Code, or duly authorized representative. The term "Fire
Official" may be used interchangeably with "Code Official" in this Code.
"False Alarm": Means the activation of an alarm of an alarm system through
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the
owner or lessee of an alarm system or his/her employee or agents. "False Alarm"
does not include the alarm caused by severe weather or other violent conditions
beyond the control of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or his/her
employee or agent.
"Farm": Means the land, plants, animals, building, structures, including ponds
used for agricultural activities, machinery, equipment, and other appurtenances
used in the commercial production of farm products (M.C.L.A. § 286.472(a)).
"Farm Operations": Means the operations and management of a farm or a condition
or activity that occurs at any time as necessary on a farm in connection with
the commercial production, harvesting, and storage of farm products (M.C.L.A. §
286.472(b)).
"Fire Watch": A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic
surveillance of a building or portion thereof by one of more qualified
individuals for the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards,
detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and notifying
the Fire Department by method(s) approved or recommended by the Code Official.
"Misrepresented False Alarm": The willful and knowing initiation or
transmission of a signal, message, or other notification of fire or the
emergency when no danger exists.
"Water Capacity": The amount of water, in either pounds or gallons at 60 deg. F
(15.6 deg. C) required to fill a container full of water.
Section 307.1.2 Local Burning Ordinances Preserved: Nothing in this Code shall
be construed as prohibiting the Village of Pinckney from regulating matters of
open burning by duly adopted local ordinance, whether or not such ordinance
predates the adoption of this Code. In the event of a conflict between this
Code and an open burning ordinance in force and adopted by the village, the
open burning section (§ 91.08 of the Pinckney Code of Ordinances) shall be
deemed to supersede this Code and control, for so long as it remains in force.
However, notwithstanding any open burning ordinance, the Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal, or Fire Code Official shall retain the authorization to ban all open
burning if conditions warrant.
Section 307.6 Fire Department Training: Open burning is allowed for the purpose
of training fire fighters in firefighting practice, or for the purpose of
training the public, including workers or employees, or for the purpose of
demonstration by the Fire Official or other trained Fire Personnel, when such
burning is done in accordance with accepted practice.
Section 308.3.1.1 Open Flame: A person shall not utilize or allow to be
utilized, an open flame in connection with any public meeting or gathering for
purpose of deliberation, entertainment, amusement, instruction, education,
recreation, awaiting transportation or similar purpose in assembly or
educational occupancies without first obtaining approval from the Code
Official.
Section 312.2.1 Maintenance of Guard Posts: It shall be the property owner's
responsibility to provide and maintain guard post protection.
Section 505.1 Address Numbers: New and existing buildings shall have approved
numbers, building numbers, or building identification placed in a position to
be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be
Arabic numbers or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of six inches
high with a minimum stroke of 0.5 inches.
Section 506.1.1 Locks and Key Switches: An approved lock or key switch shall be
installed on gates or similar barriers when required by the Code Official. Any
business that is issued a land use permit that does not currently have a
compliant lock box is required to supply one in compliance with the
International Fire Code.
Section 507.3 Fire Flow: Fire flow requirements for buildings or portions of
buildings and facilities shall be determined in accordance with Appendix B of
the International Fire Code. An appropriate pressure and flow margin of safety
shall be provided with each fire sprinkler system as required by the Code
Official.
Section 507.5 Fire Hydrants Systems: Fire hydrant systems shall comply with
Section 507.1 through 507.56 and Appendix C of the International Fire Code and
shall be in accordance with Village of Pinckney standards and policies.
Section 507.4.1 Removal of Obstructions: If upon the expiration of the time
mentioned in a notice of violation, obstructions, or encroachments to fire
hydrant, or to other fire protection equipment, are not removed, the Code
Official shall proceed to remove or have removed the same. The expense incurred
shall be a debt to the local governing body from the responsible person and
shall be collected as authorized by law.
Section 507.6 Residential and Commercial Development Water Supply:
The Code Official has the authority to require that an approved means of water
supply for fire suppression efforts be provided in the following instances:
   1.   All residential developments that require site plan review/approval by
the village.
   2.   All commercial developments.
   3.   Creation of a new roadway which could provide access to ten or more
residential lots.
   4.   On a parcel, on an existing roadway, that is divided into ten or more
residential lots.
Section 608.8 Exhaust Fans: Exhaust fans for commercial cooking hoods shall be
installed so that the fans are operational at all times when cooking is
occurring. This may be accomplished by a temperature-monitoring device
installed in, on, or near the hood to activate the exhaust fan(s) at a pre-
determined temperature, or as otherwise approved by the Code Official.
Section 901.6.3 Records: Records of all system inspections, tests, and
maintenance required by this Code shall be maintained on the subject premises
for a minimum of one year and made available to the Code Official upon request.
The service company or individual performing such work shall also send a copy
to the Code Official.
Section 901.6.4 Anti-Freeze Fire Sprinkler Systems: Fire sprinkler systems
designed and installed to protect areas prone to freezing shall be drained and
tested annually, then refilled and maintained to ensure the solution is
operable to -40 degrees F or as otherwise approved by the Code Official.
Section 903.5.1 Required Pressure Margin: Due to unforeseeable and changing
conditions within the water supply, the Code Official is authorized to require
a pressure margin of up to 20 lbs. over the minimum design criteria for
installed automatic fire sprinkler systems. Where this margin cannot be
achieved, approved means shall be taken to provide the margin.
Section 904.3.6 Monitoring: A supervising station in accordance with NFPA 72 as
approved by the Code Official shall monitor automatic fire extinguishing
systems. Where a building fire alarm is installed, automatic fire-extinguishing
systems shall be a monitored by the building fire alarm systems in accordance
with NFPA 72 and shall automatically annunciate their location at the
building's fire alarm control panel and activate the building's appropriate
fire protective signaling sequence.
Section 904.4.2. Signs: Where fire alarm systems are not monitored by a
supervising station, an approved permanent sign shall be posted that reads: THE
ALARM DOES NOT NOTIFY THE FIRE DEPARTMENT - TO REPORT A FIRE DIAL 911. Such
sign shall be installed adjacent to each manual fire alarm box.
Exception: Where the manufacturer has permanently provided this information on
the manual fire alarm box and has received approval by the Code Official.
Section 907.6.3.1.1 Annunciation: Where fire suppression systems exist in
multi-tenant occupancies, i.e., strip malls, separate annunciation shall be
required for each separately addressed tenant space unless otherwise approved
by the Code Official.
Section 909.16.1 Smoke Control Systems: Fans within the building shall be shown
on the firefighter's control panel. A clear indication of the direction of
airflow and the relationship of components shall be displayed. A means of
confirming equipment function such as an atmospheric pressure switch, air
velocity switch, or electrical current differential device, shall be installed
to indicate the status of fans, dampers, or other associated equipment during
alarm activation or smoke control operations. Status indicators shall be
provided for all smoke control equipment, annunciated by fans and zone and by
pilot-lamp-type indicators as follows:
   1.   Fans, dampers, and other operating equipment in their normal status -
WHITE.
   2.   Fans, dampers, and other operating equipment in their off or closed
status - RED.
   3.   Fans, dampers, and other operating equipment in their on or open status
- GREEN.
   4.   Fans, dampers, and other operating equipment in a fault status -
YELLOW/AMBER.
Section 912.2 Location: With respect to hydrants, driveways, buildings and
landscaping, Fire Department connections shall be so located that fire
apparatus and hoses connected to supply the system will not obstruct access to
the buildings for other fire apparatus. The location of Fire Department
connections shall be within 100 feet of a hydrant and shall be approved by the
Code Official.
Section 918 Fire Protection Systems Precautions.
Section 918.1 General: Precautions shall be taken in all rooms and areas
containing fire sprinkler equipment such as piping, valve(s), and fire pump(s),
to prevent freezing of said equipment during times of extremely cold
temperatures.
Section 1201.1 Scope: Dry cleaning plants and their operations shall comply
with the requirements of this chapter, NFPA 32, and the Michigan Fire
Prevention Code 1941 PA 207, as amended, or its equivalent.
Section 2101.1 Scope: Automotive service stations, marine service stations,
fleet vehicle service stations and repair garages shall be in accordance with
this Code and Chapter 91 of the Pinckney Code of Ordinances, the International
Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical Code, and the Michigan Storage and
Handling of Flammable and Combustible Liquids Rules, as amended, or their
equivalent. Such operations shall include both public accessible and private
operations.
(Ord. 169, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 91.05 GENERAL FIRE SERVICE CHARGES.
   This section is adopted for the purpose of governing costs and services
provided by the Village of Pinckney for the provision of fire and emergency
services through charging for benefits received for the fire protection
service.
   (A)   Changes by resolution. The Village of Pinckney hereby authorizes the
collection of charges for specific fire services. The fire services to be
covered and the actual amount of the charges shall be established by resolution
of the Pinckney Village Council from time to time. These charges shall be due
and payable to the Village of Pinckney for the services so stated. Such
services include, but are not limited to: fire inspection services, false
alarms, grass fires, rubbish fires, automobile fires, house fires, fires in
commercial establishments, fires in an industrial or manufacturing
establishment, hotel and motel fires, aircraft fires, truck fires, forest
fires, emergency rescue services, standby rescue or fire services for special
events, resuscitator services, and other services as may be specifically
enumerated in a resolution. Categories of costs may also be established for
services based upon geographic location and resident status of the benefitting
party.
   (B)   Due date of payment. The charges shall be due and payable within 30
calendar days from the date the services are rendered.
   (C)   Exemptions. The following properties and services shall be exempt from
charges: fire services performed outside the jurisdiction of the Village of
Pinckney involving buildings and properties of a township, city, or fire
department which is part of a mutual aid contract.
   (D)   Collection of charges. The Village of Pinckney may proceed in a court
appropriate jurisdiction to collect any monies remaining unpaid for services
provided as a mature debt of the Village of Pinckney and shall have any and all
other remedies provided by law for the collection of all charges.
   (E)   Non-exclusive charge. The charges established by resolution of the
Village of Pinckney shall not be the exclusive source of revenue available for
the Village of Pinckney to meet the expenses of maintaining and operating
services contemplated herein. These charges may be supplemented by other
sources permitted by state law, including, but not limited to: general taxation
following approval by a vote of the electorate, a special assessment
established under the applicable Michigan statues or an appropriation of the
general funds of the Village of Pinckney.
   (F)   Multiple property protection. When particular services rendered by the
Putnam Township Fire Department directly benefits more than one person or more
than one property, each person so benefitted and the owner of each property
receiving benefit shall be liable for the payment of the full charge for such
service. The interpretation and application of this section is hereby delegated
to the Putnam Township Fire Department's Fire Chief, subject to appeal to the
Pinckney Village Council. This section shall be administered so that charges
shall be assigned and collected only from the recipients of the service of
their agent.
   (G)   Collection agent and reservation of funds. The Village of Pinckney
shall function as the collection agent for all fees established under this
section or any adopted ordinances or fee schedule thereof. The Village of
Pinckney shall be responsible for all procedures and activities concerning
billing collection, record keeping, and inquires.
(Ord. 169, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 91.06 SURETY BOND.
   A surety bond may be required by the Pinckney Village Council to insure the
complete construction of structures and/or the development of area as proposed
and approved in conjunction with this chapter.
(Ord. 169, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 91.07 NUISANCE.
   Buildings erected, altered, moved, raised, or converted or any use of land
or premises carried on in violation of any provision of this chapter, the laws
of the State of Michigan, and the International Fire Code are declared to be
nuisances per se.
(Ord. 169, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 91.08 CONTROL OF OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Title. This section shall be referred to as the Open Burning Ordinance
and shall apply to all property within the Village of Pinckney.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      OPEN BURNING. A fire from which the products of combustion are emitted
directly into the open air without passing through a stack or chimney,
including the burning of a bonfire, rubbish fire, yard waste (including leaves,
brush, tree trimmings and grass) or other fire in an outdoor location where
fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace,
barbecue grill or barbecue pit.
      RECREATIONAL FIRE. The burning of materials other than rubbish, garbage,
waste paper, leaves, brush, grass or debris from construction or demolition,
where fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace
or barbecue grill and the total fuel area is of three feet (914 mm) or less in
diameter and two feet (610 mm) or less in height and is within a fireproof ring
or pit and provided the fire is used for pleasure, religious, ceremonial,
cooking or similar purposes.
   (C)   Prohibited burning.
      (1)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to burn or
permit the burning within the village of any garbage, food containers, rubbish
or other waste material, including by way of description, but not by way of
limitation, any leaves, brush, tree trimmings and grass, magazines, boxes,
paper, straw, saw dust, paper packing materials, wood shavings, wood chips or
any other wood products; except as may be permitted under division (D) below.
      (2)   No person shall conduct a salvage operation by open burning.
   (D)   Permit. Open burning may be done under permits as follows:
      (1)   Open burning may be conducted upon obtaining a written permit from
the Police Chief or his or her designee for occasional special events, such as
high school rallies, block parties, yule logs and religious gatherings and for
the burning of yard waste when burned at a location and under the conditions
authorized under this section.
      (2)   A request is made to the Police Chief or his or her designee for
the open burning permit by the party that will be responsible for meeting all
conditions and requirements of the permit.
      (3)   No permit shall be issued unless the issuing officer is satisfied
that:
         (a)   There is no practical available alternative method for disposal
of the material to be burned; and
         (b)   No hazardous condition will be operated by the burning.
      (4)   Any permit issued may be limited by the imposition of conditions
to:
         (a)   Prevent or limit the creation of smoke; and/or
         (b)   Protect property and the health, safety and comfort of persons
from the effects of open burning.
      (5)   No permit shall be issued for:
         (a)   The open burning of building demolition or excess construction
materials;
         (b)   The open burning of refuse from a multi-family dwelling;
         (c)   The open burning of refuse at commercial or industrial sites;
         (d)   The open burning of yard waste, such as leaves, brush, tree
trimmings and grass, within 300 feet of a residential dwelling; or
         (e)   Open burning at the same property address more often than once
per week.
      (6)   Any permit issued under this section may be revoked or canceled by
the Police Chief or his or her designee.
   (E)   Exceptions to section. Provided there is compliance with the
provisions of the Uniform Fire Code, as duly adopted by the county, this
section shall not apply to:
      (1)   The preparation of food in conventional charcoal, wood or gas
grills specifically designed for that purpose;
      (2)   The use of approved gaseous or liquid fired salamanders commonly
employed in conjunction with building and construction operations when used in
accordance with accepted safety standards;
      (3)   Roofers, tinners, plumbers or other mechanics pursuing a business
requiring the use of fire, or for the purpose of boiling tar, pitch or oil used
in the course of an appropriate business or trade and while being used in a
safe and sanitary manner;
      (4)   Fires set for Fire Department training purposes or similar Fire
Department activities; and
      (5)   Recreational fires, as defined in division (B) above.
   (F)   Evidence of violation. It shall be prima facie evidence that a person
who owns or controls property on which open burning occurs has caused or
permitted the open burning.
(Ord. 169, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 91.09 OUTDOOR FREE-STANDING FURNACES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish and impose
restrictions upon the construction and operation of outdoor furnaces within the
limits of the village to secure and promote the public health, safety and
welfare of the village and its inhabitants. Outdoor furnaces can create noxious
and hazardous smoke, soot, fumes, odors, air pollution, particles and other
products of combustion, particularly when restricted airflow and low operating
temperatures are present. These products can be detrimental to citizen's health
and can deprive neighboring residents of the enjoyment of their property. These
regulations are intended to eliminate noxious and hazardous conditions caused
by outdoor furnaces.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      FREE-STANDING FUEL-BURNING FURNACE. Any device or structure that:
         (a)   Is designed, intended or used to provide heat and/or hot water
to any residence, or other structure;
         (b)   Operates by the burning of wood or other fuel;
         (c)   Is not located within a residential or other structure for which
it provides heat, unless the structure is designed solely to house the furnace;
and
         (d)   Excluded from the definition of a FREE-STANDING FUEL-BURNING
FURNACE is any device which is not designed or used to heat a structure other
than the structure in which it is located.
   (C)   Regulations. It shall be unlawful to install or operate a free-
standing fuel-burning furnace, within the village.
   (D)   Existing free-standing fuel-burning furnace. This section shall not
apply to any freestanding fuel-burning furnace that was installed, connected
and operating as of the effective date of this section. However, this section
shall not be deemed as specific authorization for the use of any pre-existing
free-standing fuel-burning furnace and shall not be deemed to bar, limit or
otherwise affect the rights of any person to take private legal action
regarding damage to a nuisance caused by the use of a free-standing fuel-
burning furnace. If a pre-existing free-standing fuel-burning furnace is
converted, moved to a new location within the same property or is adapted to
service additional structures, it will be construed to be a newly installed
furnace and this section shall apply in its entirety. Any free-standing fuel-
burning furnace installed or operated in violation of this section is hereby
declared to be a nuisance per se.
(Ord. 169, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 91.10 FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Preamble. The Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Act No. 256 of the Public
Acts of Michigan of 2011, effective January 1, 2012, legalized the sale of
consumer fireworks in Michigan, and delegated to local communities limited
control over the use and discharge of the fireworks. The village recognizes
that fireworks endanger property, can cause physical injury, and disrupt the
peace and quality of neighborhoods and commercial districts. The village
endeavors to reconcile the rights that this Act confers upon sellers and
consumers with the rights of citizens and families to reside in a safe,
harmonious community. The following divisions are adopted to repeal existing
fireworks ordinances that conflicted with the Act, and to impose conditions on
the time, place and manner of use, discharge and ignition of fireworks deemed
to be within the purview of local regulation, and within the interest of the
public, health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CONSUMER FIREWORKS. That term as defined in the Michigan Fireworks Safety
Act.
      DISPLAY FIREWORKS. That term as defined in the Michigan Fireworks Safety
Act.
      FIREWORK or FIREWORKS. That term as defined in the Michigan Fireworks
Safety Act.
      LOW IMPACT FIREWORKS. That term as defined in the Michigan Fireworks
Safety Act.
      MICHIGAN FIREWORKS SAFETY ACT or the ACT. Public Act 256 of 2012, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 28.451 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time.
      RETAILER. That term as defined in the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act.
      WHOLESALER. That term as defined in the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act.
   (C)   Use of consumer fireworks; prohibition; holidays.
      (1)   No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks in the
village; except this prohibition shall not preclude any person from igniting,
discharging or using consumer fireworks within the village on the day
proceeding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday, consistent with
the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act.
      (2)   Use of consumer fireworks, as defined in the Michigan Fireworks
Safety Act, in the village is limited to the day before, the day of, and the
day after a holiday, as defined in 5 U.S.C. § 6103, and is expressly contingent
on the following:
         (a)   No person under the age of 18 years shall use, possess, explode
or cause to explode any fireworks, as defined herein, within the village.
         (b)   No individual shall use, ignite, or discharge consumer fireworks
or low-impact fireworks while under the influence of alcohol, a controlled
substance and/or a synthetic marijuana or other illegal substance. ALCOHOLIC
LIQUOR means that term as defined in Section 1d of the Michigan Vehicle Code,
Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949, M.C.L.A. § 257.1d, or any
subsequent provision amending or replacing that provision. CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE
means that term as defined in Section 5b of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Act No.
300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949, M.C.L.A. § 257.5b, or any
subsequent provision amending or replacing that definition. SYNTHETIC MARIJUANA
OR OTHER ILLEGAL SUBSTANCES are as determined under the Public Act 180-183 of
2012, and the Public Health Code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of
1978, M.C.L.A. § 333.2451. A violation of this provision shall be a misdemeanor
and shall result in the seizure, removal and storage of the fireworks, at the
expense of the responsible person.
         (c)   A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks
on public property, school property, church property, or the property of
another person without that organization's or person's express permission.
         (d)   A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
         (e)   Fireworks, including consumer fireworks, shall not be ignited
within 20 feet of an open flame, a burner, gasoline, ignited gas or electric
grill, or any combustible or flammable item or compound, or in any enclosed
structure, garage, tent, or shed, or under any canopy or overhanging cover of
any nature.
         (f)   Any use of fireworks that disrupts the peace of the public,
which may include deposits of litter or debris caused by fireworks is
prohibited, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Michigan Fireworks
Safety Act.
         (g)   No person shall, either individually or in concert with another
person, cause damage to any private or public property by the use, discharge or
ignition of any fireworks. Any violation of this provision is subject to any
penalty imposed under the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, except that damage to
public property under control of the village or damage to any private property
not protected in the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act is a misdemeanor, if a
higher offense is not available under state law.
         (h)   No consumer fireworks may be ignited, launched, or discharged
within 30 feet of any house, structure, building, vehicle, or landscaping.
Landscaping may include, without limitation, any tree, bush, flowers, vegetable
garden, or gazebo.
         (i)   No person shall at any time discharge or ignite any low impact
fireworks within 15 feet of another person's property, without the owner's
permission. Any violation is a municipal civil infraction.
   (D)   Compliance with applicable ordinances and codes. Unless otherwise
expressly provided in this chapter, a retailer or wholesaler of fireworks
located within the village must comply with the requirements of the village's
zoning ordinance, as well as all building codes and regulations, in addition to
the requirements of the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, and any applicable
federal laws and regulations.
   (E)   Display fireworks permits. Upon application in writing to the village
by any individual, association or group of individuals for the public display
of fireworks, the Village Council may grant permission for such display,
subject to such conditions as the Police Chief and the Fire Chief may impose to
properly safeguard the public, both as to persons and property; and subject to
the provisions of the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act. Applicants shall furnish
proof of financial responsibility by a bond or insurance in an amount,
character, and form deemed necessary by the village to satisfy claims for
damages to property or personal injuries arising out of an act or omission on
the part of the person, firm, or corporation or an agent or employee of the
person, firm, or corporation, and to protect the public. The application form
for permits under this section shall be provided the State of Michigan, and
applicants shall pay the application fee to the village in an amount determined
by Council resolution.
   (F)   Seizure and removal of fireworks. Any fireworks that are possessed,
sold, distributed or displayed in violation of the Michigan Fireworks Safety
Act or the zoning ordinances of the village are subject to seizure and removal
by the Police Department or Fire Department, at the expense of the responsible
person, in addition to other penalties as provided in this section or by other
ordinance.
   (G)   Imminent danger or threat. Notwithstanding the Act, any use, discharge
or ignition of fireworks that is presenting an imminent danger or threat to the
public health, safety or welfare, as deemed by a police officer or the Fire
Marshal, or his or her designee, shall be prohibited, and the fireworks may be
immediately seized.
   (H)   Seizure and cost recovery.
      (1)   All fireworks used, discharged and ignited and possessed in
violation of the Act and this section are subject to seizure. Any costs
incurred by the village to seize and store the fireworks shall be paid by the
responsible person.
      (2)   Any costs the village incurs to respond and remediate any damage to
private or public property or injury to another person shall be paid by any
person responsible for the damage or injury. The village may pursue any legal
remedies to collect such costs.
   (I)   Violations, fines, and penalties.
      (1)   Civil infraction. Persons who violate a provision of this section
or fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a
municipal civil infraction and subject to the civil fines set forth in the
schedule of civil fines in §
10.99(C), and shall be subject to any other relief that may be imposed by a
court for such conduct, which shall also be considered a nuisance per se. Each
act of violation and each day upon which such violation occurs shall constitute
a separate violation.
      (2)   Determination of violation; seizure. If a police safety officer
determines that a violation of this section has occurred, the officer may seize
the fireworks as evidence of the violation.
      (3)   Disposal. Following final disposition of a finding of
responsibility for violating this section, the village may dispose of or
destroy any fireworks retained as evidence in that prosecution.
      (4)   Costs. In addition to any other penalty, a person that is found
responsible for a violation of this section shall be required to reimburse the
village for the costs of storing, disposing of, or destroying fireworks that
were confiscated for a violation of this section.
(Ord. 169, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 91.11 ENFORCEMENT.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Putnam Township Fire
Department or the Village Police Department and any employees and officials as
the Village Council may delegate to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (A)   Violation. Any and all buildings or land use activities considered
possible violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be reported to the
Fire Marshal or Fire Chief of the Putnam Township Fire Department.
   (B)   Authority. The Fire Chief and/or his/her designees, who shall be the
Deputy Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, Fire Inspectors, Fire
Captains, the Village Police Department and anyone designated by the village
shall be authorized to issue tickets for violations of this chapter.
   (C)   Inspection of violation. The Fire Marshal and/or Fire Chief or his/her
designee shall inspect each alleged violation and shall issue a ticket or order
of correction in writing to the violator. The order of correction shall require
compliance of all conditions found to be in violation of this chapter, and/or
the laws of the State of Michigan, and/or the International Fire Code, within
30 days or sooner if any emergency violation shall occur. A copy of the order
shall be filed with the Fire Chief. The person who initiates the complaint may
be sent a notice of any determination made by the Fire Marshal and/or Fire
Chief and his/her designee within a period of 30 days.
   (D)   Correction period. All violations under an order of correction shall
be corrected within a period of 30 days or sooner if an emergency situation
exists after the order is issued by the Fire Marshal, Fire Chief, or his/her
designee, or such period of time to be determined by the Fire Marshal and/or
Fire Chief. A violation not corrected within the period required shall be
reported to the Village of Pinckney Village Council and prosecution proceedings
and/or civil remedies and relief or other enforcement action shall be pursued
within the same time period that is necessary to correct the particular
situation.
   (E)   Remedies. The Village of Pinckney Village Council may institute an
injunction, mandamus, abatement, or other appropriate proceedings to prevent,
enjoin, abate or remove any unlawful erection, alteration, maintenance or use
in violation of this chapter. The rights and remedies herein provided are civil
in nature and in addition to criminal remedies.
   (F)   Scope of remedies. The rights and remedies provided in this chapter
are cumulative and are in addition to all of the remedies provided by law. All
fines collected shall belong to Village of Pinckney and be deposited to its
general fund.
(Ord. 169, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 91.12 NOTICE.
   The Putnam Township Fire Chief and Village Clerk are hereby ordered and
directed to cause a notice to be published that this chapter has been adopted
and that three copies of the same are available to the public for inspection
during regular business hours at Village of Pinckney office located at 220 S.
Howell St., Pinckney, Michigan 48169. Said notice shall also contain the
introductory section of this chapter which shall serve as its stated purposes.
(Ord. 169, passed 2-13-2023)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a municipal civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not less than
$100 per day plus any costs, damages, expenses, and other sanctions, as
authorized by the Revised Judication Act M.C.L.A. 600.101 et seq., as amended,
and other applicable laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice
has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. Payment for any violation
fines shall be paid to Village of Pinckney. Repeat offenses shall be subject to
increased fines.
(Ord. 169, passed 2-13-2023)
CHAPTER 92: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Street and Street Right-of-Way Protection
   
92.01   Name
   
92.02   Purpose
   
92.03   Permits required
   
92.04   Obtaining a permit
   
92.05   Responsibility
   
92.06   Inspection
   
92.07   General work site responsibilities
   
92.08   Additional conditions
   
92.09   Permit fees
   
92.10   Roadway and parking lot design criteria
Street Utility Right-of-Way
   
92.25   Purpose
   
92.26   Permits required
   
92.27   Emergency street cuts
   
92.28   Obtaining permits
   
92.29   Responsibility
   
92.30   Inspection
   
92.31   Street cuts and new pavement
   
92.32   General work site responsibilities
   
92.33   Standards
   
92.34   Replacing sidewalk, driveway and curb
   
92.35   Markings
   
92.36   Trenching operation
   
92.37   Restoring opening
   
92.38   Temporary trench covering
   
92.39   Permanent trench covering
   
92.40   Permit fees per utility right-of-way
   
92.41   Roadway and parking lot design criteria
   
92.42   Driveway permits
Sidewalks
   
92.55   Design, construction and repair; compliance required
   
92.56   Line and grades
   
92.57   Permits to construct or repair; fee
   
92.58   Necessity of construction or repair
   
92.59   Partial payment of repair by village
   
92.60   Responsibility for construction costs; method of payment
   
92.61   Notice to repair or construct; action by village
   
92.62   Removal of snow, ice, debris or dirt
   
92.63   Business district snow, ice, debris, dirt and encroachment removal
   
92.64   Encroachments
 
   
92.99   Penalty
STREET AND STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY PROTECTION
§ 92.01 NAME.
   This subchapter shall hereafter be known as the Village of Pinckney Street
and Street Right-of-Way Protection Ordinance.
(Ord. 57, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 92.02 PURPOSE.
   The Village of Pinckney needs to be able to monitor work in or upon the
village streets and street right-of-ways through the permitting process in
order to maintain and protect the condition of the streets and street right-of-
ways within the jurisdiction and control of the village. This enables the
village to coordinate activities between the village and other entities,
maintain a record of work within village streets, establish specific village
requirements to help protect village streets and street right-of-ways and to
supervise activities on village streets or within street right-of-ways that
could damage those streets or street right-of-ways.
(Ord. 57, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 92.03 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Any work within or upon any village street or street right-of-way that will
include, but not be limited to, disturbing the pavement, curb and/or gutter,
driveway entrance or sidewalk, requires a permit for that purpose. A Utility
company, property owner, or his/her authorized agent, shall complete an
"application for authorization to construct utilities, excavate, or perform
work in village streets or right-of-way" to apply for a street right-of-way
permit at the village. The work would also include the movement of any trucks,
truck tractors or other heavy equipment upon village streets outside
established truck routes as established pursuant to §
71.06 and in accordance with the Motor Vehicle Code adopted by the village by
reference in §
70.01. The terms TRUCK and/or TRUCK TRACTOR as used herein, shall have the
meaning as set forth in M.C.L.A. § 257.75 and M.C.L.A. § 257.77, respectively.
Since there might be circumstances where travel by a truck or truck tractor
over a village street or street that is not a designated truck route is
necessary, especially for the development and/or construction of projects that
involve more than, or other than, a single-family dwelling, this subchapter
will provide a means by which the use of a non-designated truck route street
may be used. Any work that does not disturb the right-of-way is exempt from
permitting requirements except that traffic detours or lane closures must be
approved by the Director of Public Works and/or his or her designee. Work
covered under §§
92.25 et seq. shall be subject to the permitting process under §§
92.25 et seq.
   (B)   This subchapter shall not be deemed to apply to construction traffic
related to the construction, remodeling or repair of a new or existing single-
family home.
(Ord. 57, passed 9-9-2002; Ord. passed 10-2-2002; Ord. passed 10-7-2002; Ord.
155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.04 OBTAINING A PERMIT.
   (A)   Prior to commencement of any work that would include, but not be
limited to, disturbing the pavement, curb and/or gutter, driveway entrance,
sidewalk, the street or street right-of-way or the movement of trucks, truck
tractors or heavy equipment upon village streets outside village established
truck routes, the necessary permit shall be obtained from the Director of
Public Works and/or his or her designee. If work on an existing permit has not
been started by the expiration date, the permit will become void and a new
permit will then be required to initiate the work. The fee for the permit shall
be in accordance with the fee schedule then in effect, plus any financial
guarantees that might be required, depending upon the nature of the work for
which the permit is sought. No permit will be issued until all fees and
guarantees have been paid and/or posted. The permit will be issued in the name
of the person who requests the permit and not in the name of the contractor or
subcontractor.
   (B)   In the event that the work proposed to be done provides a risk of
damage to the surface of the street or is the result of truck or truck tractor
traffic, or the movement of heavy equipment on streets outside established
village truck routes, the Director of Public Works shall refer the permit
applicant to the Village Council for issuance of a permit. The Village Council
shall review the application and, if a majority of the Council finds there is a
risk of damage or destruction to the street(s), the Council may decide to
withhold issuance of the permit until the applicant posts with the village an
adequate financial guarantee in cash, bond or a letter of credit acceptable to
the Village Council per § 152.026 regarding performance guarantee. The
guarantee shall be deemed adequate if it is in an amount equal to the cost that
would be incurred if the street surface had to be replaced for the length of
the street that will be traveled by the trucks, truck tractors or heavy
equipment. This replacement cost shall be computed by the Village Engineer
based upon then prevailing costs. The financial guarantee shall be held by the
village until two years after the work has been completed and all truck, truck
tractor and/or heavy equipment traffic has ceased its use of the village street
(s) or street right-of-way for the work for which the permit was issued or as
otherwise approved by the Village Council. Thereafter the Village Engineer
shall inspect the street to determine the extent of damage attributable to the
use. If any repairs or replacement is necessary the village shall order the
repairs to be made and the cost shall be deducted from the financial guarantee
and any remaining balance returned to the applicant. In the event the financial
guarantee proves to be insufficient to cover the repair costs, the applicant
shall be responsible to pay any shortfall. During the period of time when the
work is being done, or while the trucks, truck tractors or heavy equipment
traffic is using the street(s), the applicant shall insure that any dirt,
debris and the like from the work or work site is not allowed to accumulate on
village streets and shall clean the village street(s) for which the travel
route is specified as needed to accomplish this, unless otherwise agreed by the
Village Council. Failure of the applicant to so clean the street will be
grounds to allow the village, at its option, to clean the street(s) and assess
those costs to the applicant including obtaining reimbursement from the
guarantee.
(Ord. 57, passed 9-9-2002; Ord. passed 10-2-2002; Ord. passed 10-7-2002; Ord.
155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.05 RESPONSIBILITY.
   The applicant receiving the permit is responsible for the work performed,
and the village will contact the applicant to whom the permit was issued for
required adjustments or corrections regardless of whether the applicant
performed the work himself or herself or subcontracted and assigned the work.
The permit is issued to the person applying for the permit and that person is
solely responsible for the work performed.
(Ord. 57, passed 9-9-2002; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.06 INSPECTION.
   In all cases the permit applicant shall notify the village when the work
will commence so, if necessary, arrangements may be made to have the Village
Engineer or qualified Village Agent present while the work is in progress. The
applicant will be billed for the necessary expense of this inspection in
accordance with the Village Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 57, passed 9-9-2002; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.07 GENERAL WORK SITE RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The applicant shall be responsible to ensure that the condition of any
village street or street right-of-way is not damaged as a result of the project
for which the permit was issued. Pavement repairs shall be warranted until the
time as the village shall overlay or reconstruct the pavement. Should the
condition of a patch become such that additional pavement is in jeopardy of
failure, the applicant may be held responsible for an area larger than the
original repair. Other repairs (sidewalk, curb and gutter, trenches and the
like) shall be warranted for the reasonable life of the structures.
(Ord. 57, passed 9-9-2002; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.08 ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS.
   (A)   In granting a permit, the Director of Public Works or the Village
Council may attach the conditions thereto as may be reasonably necessary to
prevent damage to public or private property or to prevent the operation from
being conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner likely
to create a nuisance.
   (B)   The conditions may include, but shall not be limited to:
      (1)   Limitations on the period of time in which the work may be
performed;
      (2)   Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment commensurate with
the work to be done;
      (3)   Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported;
      (4)   The place and manner of disposal of excavated materials;
      (5)   Requirements as to the laying of dust palliative, the cleaning of
streets, the prevention of noise and other results offensive or injurious to
the neighborhood, the general public or any portion thereof in accordance with
the Village Technical Standards; and
      (6)   Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work
which could also include setting the hours during which work can be done in
accordance with the Village Technical Standards.
(Ord. 57, passed 9-9-2002; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.09 PERMIT FEES.
   Permit fees shall be set forth in the Village Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 57, passed 9-9-2002; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.10 ROADWAY AND PARKING LOT DESIGN CRITERIA.
   Roadway and parking lot design plans must be submitted to the village as
part of the final site plan application. The plans shall be designed and the
project constructed in accordance with the Village Technical Standards. Plans
are not required for projects limited to resurfacing of roadways or parking
lots.
(Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
STREET UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 92.25 PURPOSE.
   The Village of Pinckney needs to be able to monitor work in the village
streets and street right-of- ways through the permitting process in order to
maintain and protect the condition of the streets and street right-of-ways
within the jurisdiction and control of the village. This enables the village to
coordinate activities between the village and other entities, maintain a record
of work within village streets, establish specific village requirements to help
protect village streets and street right-of-ways and to supervise activities on
village streets or within street right-of-ways that could damage those streets
or street right-of-ways.
(Ord. 56, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. passed 9-9-2002)
§ 92.26 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Any work within any village street or street right-of-way that will include,
but not be limited to, disturbing the pavement, curb and/or gutter, driveway
entrance, sidewalk, landscaping or grassed areas requires a permit. A utility
company, property owner, or his/her authorized agent, shall complete an
“application for authorization to construct utilities, excavate, or perform
work in village streets or right-of-way” to apply for a street right-of-way
permit at the village. This work may include, but is not limited to, utility
main and/or lateral replacement and repair, valve replacement and repair,
installation of new underground mains or laterals, structures or accessories,
splices, buried drops (under pavement or sidewalks), pole changes for height,
accident and the like, cathodic protection, boxes and vault installations and
jacking or boring under the right-of-way where disturbance within the right-of-
way may occur. The work could also include the travel of any trucks, truck
tractors or other heavy equipment upon village streets outside established
truck routes as established pursuant to §
71.06 and in accordance with the Motor Vehicle Code adopted by the village by
reference in §
70.01. The terms TRUCK and TRUCK TRACTOR as used herein, shall have the meaning
as set forth in M.C.L.A § 257.75 and M.C.L.A. § 257.77, respectively. Any
utility work that does not disturb the right-of-way is exempt from the
permitting requirements except that traffic detours or lane closures must be
approved by the Director of Public Works and/or his or her designee.
(Ord. 56, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. passed 9-9-2002; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.27 EMERGENCY STREET CUTS.
   The Village Engineer, or qualified Village Agent may, if the public safety
requires immediate action, grant permission to make a necessary street cut or
excavation before a permit is issued. Street cuts shall be per § 92.31.
(Ord. 56, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.28 OBTAINING PERMITS.
   (A)   Prior to commencement of any work that would include, but not be
limited to, disturbing the pavement, curb and/or gutter, driveway entrance,
sidewalk, the street or street right-of-way or the movement of trucks or heavy
equipment upon village streets outside established truck routes, the necessary
permit shall be obtained from the village. Unless otherwise agreed, emergency
work requires that a permit be obtained as soon as possible but not later than
48 hours after the onset of work. Permits are usually issued for the time
period requested by the applicant. However, when situations warrant, the permit
expiration date may be extended if prior notification is received and the
applicant is otherwise in compliance with applicable village ordinances. If
work on an existing permit has not been started by the expiration date, the
permit will be canceled and a new permit will then be required to initiate the
work. The fee for the permit shall be in accordance with the fee schedule then
in effect, plus any financial guarantees that might be required, depending upon
the nature of the work for which the permit is sought. No permit will be issued
until all fees and guarantees have been paid and/or posted per Village Fee
Schedule and §
152.026.
   (B)   In the event that the work proposed to be done provides a risk of
damage to the surface of the street as the result of truck traffic, or the
movement of heavy equipment on streets outside established village truck
routes, the Village Engineer, Director of Public Works, or other qualified
Village Agent shall refer the permit applicant to the Village Council for
issuance of a permit. The Village Council shall review the application and, if
a majority of the Council finds there is a risk of damage or destruction to the
street(s), the Council may decide to withhold issuance of the permit until the
applicant posts with the village an adequate financial guarantee in cash or a
letter of credit acceptable to the Village Council. The guarantee shall be
deemed adequate if it is in an amount equal to the cost that would be incurred
if the street surface had to be replaced for the length of the street that will
be traveled by the trucks or heavy equipment. This replacement cost shall be
computed by the Village Engineer based upon then prevailing costs. The
financial guarantee shall be held by the village until one year after the work
has been completed and all truck and/or heavy equipment traffic has ceased its
use of the village street(s) or street right-of-way for the work for which the
permit was issued. Thereafter the Village Engineer shall inspect the street to
determine the extent of damage attributable to the use. If any repairs or
replacement is necessary, the village shall order the repairs to be made and
the cost shall be deducted from the financial guarantee and any remaining
balance returned to the applicant. In the event the financial guarantee proves
to be insufficient to cover the repair costs, the applicant shall be
responsible to pay any shortfall. During the period of time when the work is
being done, or while the truck or heavy equipment traffic is using the street
(s), the applicant shall insure that any dirt, debris and the like from the
work or work site is cleaned from the village street(s) on a daily basis unless
otherwise agreed by the Village Council. Failure of the applicant to so clean
the street will be grounds to allow the village, at its option, to clean the
street(s) and deduct those costs from the guarantee.
(Ord. 56, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. passed 9-9-2002; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.29 RESPONSIBILITY.
   The applicant receiving the permit is responsible for the work performed and
the Village of Pinckney will contact the applicant to whom the permit was
issued for required adjustments or corrections regardless of whether the
applicant performed the work himself or herself or subcontracted and assigned
the work. The permit is issued to the person applying for the permit and that
person is solely responsible for the work performed.
(Ord. 56, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. passed 9-9-2002; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.30 INSPECTION.
   In all cases the permit applicant shall notify the village when the work
will commence so, if necessary, arrangements may be made to have the Village
Engineer or qualified Village Agent present while the work is in progress. The
applicant will be billed for the necessary expense of this inspection in
accordance with the Village Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 56, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. passed 9-9-2002; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.31 STREET CUTS AND NEW PAVEMENT.
   (A)   Street excavations. No permit shall be granted for making an
excavation or opening within the limits of a street, which will result in
permanent or prolonged interference with public use of the street.
   (B)   Open cuts. No permit to make an opening or excavation in or under a
paved street shall be granted to any person within seven years after the
completion of any paving or resurfacing thereof. Open cuts on graveled streets
are permitted. Paved streets that have been resurfaced within seven years will
be subject to bore and jack of the street unless authorized by Village Council.
   (C)   Saw cuts. All pavement cuts shall be saw cut in a straight manner and
shall be made at right angles or parallel with the centerline of the pavement.
   (D)   Emergency openings. Pavements less than seven years old may be cut in
emergency situations or as a necessity as determined by the Village President
and the Director of the Department of Public Works.
(Ord. 56, passed 11-27-2000)
§ 92.32 GENERAL WORK SITE RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   A copy of the permit shall be kept on the job site at all times. The
person to whom the permit was issued shall be responsible to insure that the
condition of any village street or street right-of-way is not damaged as a
result of the project for which the permit was issued.
   (B)   Bonds, insurance, and other requirements.
      (1)   At its sole discretion, the village shall determine which
requirements and procedures as set forth in the village ordinances.
      (2)   Pavement repairs shall be warranted for a period of two years.
Should the condition of the patch become such that additional pavement is in
jeopardy of failure, the permittee may be held responsible for an area larger
than the original repair. Other repairs (sidewalk, curb and gutter, trenches,
etc.) shall also be warranted for a period of two years. This requirement shall
be perfected by a maintenance and guarantee bond per §
152.026.
(Ord. 56, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. passed 9-9-2002; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.33 STANDARDS.
   Backfill and pavement replacement shall be as follows.
   (A)   Saw cut. All pavement cuts shall be saw cut in a straight and true
manner, and shall be made at right angles or parallel to the pavement
centerline. Cuts shall be made to full depth. Pavements, less than seven years
old, shall be cut in emergencies only, with the approval of the Village
Engineer or qualified Village Agent.
   (B)   Backfill. All trenches, holes and pits shall be backfilled in
accordance with the Village Technical Standards. All excavated material shall
be entirely removed from the street. Excavated material that is wet or
otherwise unfit for backfill shall be entirely removed and legally disposed of
off site.
   (C)   Pavement replacement.
      (1)   The work of final restoration, including both paving surface and
paving base, shall be performed by the permittee according to the Village
Technical Standards, unless prior arrangements for final restoration have been
made with the Village Engineer or qualified Village Agent.
      (2)   Pavement less than seven years old: the existing pavement shall be
removed to provide a minimum replacement of 100 square feet with a minimum
width of ten feet (measured parallel to the pavement centerline), with the same
materials used in the existing pavement. The repair shall be made to the
original pavement thickness or six inches, whichever is greater.
      (3)   Where the line of cut would be less than five feet from an existing
expansion or weakened plane joint, or from an existing patch or cold joint,
concrete or asphalt shall be removed to the joint.
      (4)   Pavement more than seven years old: the existing pavement shall be
removed to provide a replacement of not less than five feet in width. The
repair shall be made to the original pavement thickness or six inches,
whichever is greater.
      (5)   All concrete replacement: including base material, shall be high-
early strength concrete and shall be returned to traffic as soon as its
strength reaches 2,800 psi (three days).
      (6)   Undermined pavement: All pavement undermined during construction
shall be removed and replaced as directed by the Village Engineer or qualified
Village Agent.
(Ord. 56, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.34 REPLACING SIDEWALK, DRIVEWAY AND CURB.
   Whenever a part of a block, square or section of curb, sidewalk or driveway
is broken or damaged by the person making any excavation or opening in or under
any street, alley or public place, the entire block, square or section shall be
removed to the score, groove or saw cut line and replaced or reconstructed;
when the line of cut would be less than two feet from an existing expansion or
weakened plan joint, the concrete shall be removed to the joint all according
to the Village Technical Standards.
(Ord. 56, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.35 MARKINGS.
   Each street cut shall be marked on its four corners with a six-inch diameter
circle in accordance with § 8 of Public Act 53 of 1974, being M.C.L.A. §§
460.701 through 460.718,Amendment of Michigan's Miss Dig Color Code.
(Ord. 56, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.36 TRENCHING OPERATION.
   Trenching shall be in accordance with Village Technical Standards.
(Ord. 56, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.37 RESTORING OPENING.
   (A)   If the Village Engineer or qualified Village Agent finds that the
paving surfaces and adjacent surfaces to the street opening may be damaged
where trenches are made parallel to the street, or where a number of cross
trenches are laid in close proximity to one another, or where the equipment
used may cause the damage, the Village Engineer or qualified Village Agent may
require a negotiated contribution from the permittee for the resurfacing in
place of patching the street. The total area for the proposed patch or probably
damaged area must exceed 25% of the total pavement surfacing between curb faces
or between concrete gutter edges in any block. The negotiations shall be
carried on and contributions agreed upon prior to issuance of a permit.
2021 S-11
   Streets and Sidewalks   19
   (B)   Any operation in the right-of-way not covered by the above
specifications, submitted with this permit, shall be done in accordance with
instruction of the Village Engineer or qualified Village Agent.
   (C)   (1)   In granting a permit, the Village Engineer or qualified Village
Agent or the Village Council may attach the conditions thereto as may be
reasonably necessary to prevent damage to public or private property or to
prevent the operation from being conducted in a manner hazardous to life or
property or in a manner likely to create a nuisance.
      (2)   The conditions may include, but shall not be limited to:
         (a)   Limitations on the period of time in which the work may be
performed;
         (b)   Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment commensurate
with the work to be done;
         (c)   Designation of routes upon which materials may be transported;
         (d)   The place and manner of disposal of excavated materials;
         (e)   Requirements as to the application of dust palliative, the
cleaning of streets, the prevention of noise and other nuisances offensive or
injurious to the neighborhood, the general public or any portion thereof; and
         (f)   Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work
which could also include setting the hours during which work can be done.
   (D)   The permittee shall notify the Village Engineer or qualified Village
Agent in writing upon completion of all work accomplished under the provisions
of the permit in accordance with the Village Technical Standards.
   (E)   If any settlement in a restored area occurs within a period of two
years from the date of completion of the permanent restoration, any expense
incurred by the village in corrected the settlement shall be paid by the
permittee or recovered from his or her bond according to the Village Technical
Standards, unless the permittee submits proof satisfactory to the Village
Engineer or qualified Village Agent that the settlement was not due to
defective backfilling.
   (F)   In no case shall any opening made by the permittee be considered in
the charge or case of the village, or any of its officers or employees, and no
officer or employee is authorized in any way to take or assume any jurisdiction
over any opening, except in the exercise of the police power, when it is
necessary to protect life and property.
(Ord. 56, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. passed 9-9-2002; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.38 TEMPORARY TRENCH COVERING.
   All trenches across traffic lanes, where it becomes necessary to remove any
existing surfacing or pavement, shall be provided in accordance with the
Village Technical Standards.
(Ord. 56, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.39 PERMANENT TRENCH COVERING.
   The pavement placement shall take place before the construction year ends,
no later than November 15, and all cuts made in the off season, November 15 to
April 15, shall be completed before June 15 of the following constructions
season, unless prior arrangements have been made with the Director of Public
Works or qualified Village Agent.
(Ord. 56, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.40 PERMIT FEES PER UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Permit fees per utility right-of-way shall be as set forth in the Village
Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.41 ROADWAY AND PARKING LOT DESIGN CRITERIA.
   Roadway and parking lot design plans must be submitted to the village as
part of the final site plan application. The plans shall be designed and the
project constructed in accordance with the Village Technical Standards.
(Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.42 DRIVEWAY PERMITS.
   (A)   Any work to construct a driveway that will be accomplished within the
right-of-way of any road under the jurisdiction of the Village of Pinckney
requires a permit as set forth in §
92.04. A plot plan shall be attached to the application and the location of the
property corners and proposed driveway approach must be clearly staked. All
driveways must be constructed in accordance with the Village Technical
Standards.
   (B)   All pre-existing driveways that are to be resurfaced or paved shall
comply with this section.
   (C)   The property owner or his/her authorized agent shall maintain in
perpetuity all conditions set forth in the permit.
   (D)   The property owner or his/her authorized agent shall undertake all
necessary precautions to prevent injury or damages to persons and property from
operations covered by the permit and shall use warning signs and safety devices
which are in accordance with the current MMUTCD requirements.
   (E)   In the event of a failure to comply with the terms and conditions of
any permit issued in accordance with these rules or failure to obtain an
appropriate permit, the village shall have the right to halt such activity
until such time that adequate compliance is made. All costs incurred by the
village in correcting the following shall be borne by the property owner or
his/her authorized agent:
      (1)   A failure to comply with the conditions and standards of a permit;
      (2)   A failure to obtain a permit;
      (3)   Defective workmanship or materials.
   (F)   Driveway approach: application, permit and inspection procedures.
      (1)   A property owner or his/her authorized agent shall complete an
application for authorization to construct utilities, excavate, or perform work
in village streets or right-of-way as set forth in §
92.04 to apply for a street right-of-way permit and include a plot plan.
      (2)   Fees associated with the application, permit and inspection
activities will be included in the fee schedule and indicated on the
application form. All fees are due when the application is submitted to the
village. The village may also require security as provided in the fee schedule
to secure the cost of restoring the disturbed portion of the public street
right-of-way to a safe and acceptable level. Upon submittal of the application
and fees, the applicant will be issued a receipt, and the Village Zoning
Administrator will schedule an initial field inspection.
      (3)   The receipt issued to the applicant will designate an application
number and anticipated completion date of the initial field inspection. The
applicant will be responsible for contacting the village on or after the date
indicated on the receipt for a full status of the initial field inspection. The
Village Engineer or qualified Village Agent will conduct the initial field
inspection and determine if, in their opinion, the approach standards can be
met.
      (4)   If any of the approach standards cannot be met, the applicant will
be advised about the deficiencies. All deficiencies must be corrected to the
satisfaction of the Village Zoning Administrator or qualified Village Agent
prior to issuance of a street right-of-way permit and in some instances, plans
may be submitted, or previously submitted plans may be revised, to indicate
proposed corrections. However, the Village Zoning Administrator or qualified
Village Agent may require the applicant, or the applicant may prefer to correct
the deficiencies under the terms of an interim permit. All of the conditions of
the interim permit must be completed, and verified by an interim inspection,
prior to issuance of a street right-of-way permit.
      (5)   If all of the approach standards can be satisfied, the applicant
will be issued a street right-of-way permit. Any additional costs incurred by
the village, not covered by fees submitted during application, are due at this
time. The county building department, prior to their issuance of a building
permit, may require a copy of the street right-of-way permit and/or soil
erosion and sedimentation control permit.
      (6)   The permittee will be responsible for completing all items of
construction set forth in the street right-of-way permit prior to the
expiration date on the permit. Once completed, the permittee will be
responsible for notifying the village so that a compliance inspection can be
scheduled. Failure to notify the village by the expiration date may result in
revocation of the permit and removal (without notice) of any portion of the
approach within the public street right-of-way.
      (7)   Upon satisfactory completion of the approach, verified by a
compliance inspection, the village will issue a compliance report to the
permittee indicating compliance. If the approach is determined to be in
noncompliance, it will be so noted on the compliance report. Items of
noncompliance are to be corrected by the permit holder within a reasonable time
period, or the permit and approach are subject to revocation and removal, with
the permit holder responsible for all costs incurred by the village.
      (8)   The county building department, prior to their issuance of a
certificate of occupancy may require a compliance report indicating
satisfactory completion.
   (G)   Driveway approach definition.
      (1)   A driveway approach for the purpose of serving the residents of one
single-family dwelling shall be defined as a residential driveway approach.
      (2)   A driveway approach for the purpose of serving any property other
than one single family dwelling shall be defined as a commercial driveway
approach.
(Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
SIDEWALKS
§ 92.55 DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   The sidewalks and curb adjacent to sidewalks of all public streets and
alleys in the village designed, constructed or repaired after the effective
date of this subchapter shall, unless otherwise ordered by Council, be
designed, constructed or repaired in the manner provided in this subchapter and
shall meet the requirements of the Village Technical Standards. Sidewalks shall
be constructed on all road frontages within the village unless otherwise waived
by the Village Council.
(Ord. 33, passed 7-10-2000; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.56 LINE AND GRADES.
   (A)   All sidewalks constructed or repaired as set forth in this subchapter
shall conform to the established grade of the street in accordance with the
Village Technical Standards, unless otherwise ordered by Council. The line and
grade for all walks constructed or repaired as set forth in this subchapter
shall be given by, and all of the construction work shall be under the
supervision of the Village Engineer or qualified Village Agent.
   (B)   All sidewalks shall be constructed or repaired in accordance with the
Village Technical Standards.
(Ord. 33, passed 7-10-2000; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.57 PERMITS TO CONSTRUCT OR REPAIR; FEE.
   (A)   Every person who constructs a sidewalk or repairs and/or replaces
sidewalks in the village shall, for each job, first obtain from the appropriate
permit to proceed with the proposed work. For sidewalks within the right of
way, an application for authorization to construct utilities, excavate, or
perform work in village streets or right-of-way is required. For any sidewalks
outside the right of way, a land use permit is required. All permits for
sidewalk require a plot plan. The permit is to be issued upon receipt of a
completed permit application and submission of the permit fee as set forth in
the Village Fee Schedule. Every permittee shall comply with all requirements as
to grade, width, specifications and all other provisions of this subchapter and
the Village Technical Standards relative to the laying, constructing and
repairing of sidewalks.
   (B)   The Council, Village Engineer or qualified Village Agent may revoke a
permit issued under this subchapter for incompetency or failure to comply with
this subchapter or the rules, regulations, plans and the Village Technical
Standards for the construction or repair of sidewalks.
   (C)   The Village Engineer or qualified Village Agent may cause work to be
stopped under a permit granted for the construction or repair of a sidewalk,
for any of the causes enumerated in this section, until the next regular
meeting of Council.
(Ord. 33, passed 7-10-2000; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.58 NECESSITY OF CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR.
   The Council shall determine the necessity of construction, repair or
replacement of public sidewalks to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. The construction of a new sidewalk is required when a vacant parcel is
developed, as well as when there is a building addition or usage change
requiring site plan approval. The Council may waive the new sidewalk
requirement for good cause shown, provided the landowners sign a recordable
instrument guaranteeing construction and payment therefore at a future time as
directed by the village.
(Ord. 33, passed 7-10-2000; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.59 PARTIAL PAYMENT OF REPAIR BY VILLAGE.
   (A)   The village may authorize payment, from an appropriate budgetary
account, of an amount as determined by resolution of Council, from time to
time, toward the cost of existing sidewalk repair and/or replacement, upon
receipt from the property owner involved of a request for the payment. The
request for payment by the village shall include a statement from the Village
President and/or qualified Village Agent approving the request and the amount
thereof. No payment by the village shall be authorized unless:
      (1)   A sidewalk construction permit was obtained prior to making the
repair and/or payment therefore is recommended by the Village President and/or
qualified Village Agent; or
      (2)   The Village President and/or qualified Village Agent caused the
work to be done pursuant to §
92.61.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the construction of new sidewalks.
   (C)   Pursuant to division (A) above, the village may elect to pay an
amount, to be established by Council resolution of the replacement cost through
the Village's Sidewalk Replacement Program, toward the cost of sidewalk repair
and/or replacement from the appropriate, budgetary account upon receipt from
the property owner involved of a request for each payment and upon compliance
with the provisions of division (A) above.
(Ord. 33, passed 7-10-2000; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.60 RESPONSIBILITY FOR CONSTRUCTION COSTS; METHOD OF PAYMENT.
   (A)   The village may elect to pay a percentage established by Council
resolution of the construction cost for sidewalk replacement in the right-of-
way abutting private property, in addition to the cost in public areas,
intersections and the like. For property owners performing their own sidewalk
replacement, the village may choose, based on appropriate documentation, to
reimburse the property owner at a rate to be established by Council resolution.
   (B)   Property owners shall pay the costs of the sidewalk work in full at
the time statements and/or invoices are mailed by the village to the property
owners. In the event that the property owners cannot pay or wish to pay in
installment payments, installment payments of not less than $300 per year shall
be paid by each property owner on or before February 28, the first installment,
however, being due and owing within 30 days of the date of the statement and/or
invoice. Statements and/or invoices for subsequent installment payments shall
be mailed by the village on or before January of each of the successive years
until the time as all payments are made. Interest shall be charged at the rate
of 1/2%per month (or any portion thereof) on the unpaid balance, beginning 30
days after the first installment becomes due and owing, if the property owner
chooses the installment payment method, any annual installment payment which is
not made on or before April 1 of the year in which it is due, the entire unpaid
balance, with interest, shall be certified as delinquent and placed on the tax
roll of the village for that year. The certification shall make the entire
amount due and owing by the property owner a lien on the real estate and the
amount shall be collected in a method as set forth and provided for in the
Village Charter.
(Ord. 33, passed 7-10-2000)
§ 92.61 NOTICE TO REPAIR OR CONSTRUCT; ACTION BY VILLAGE.
   (A)   Whenever Council, by resolution, declare the necessity for the
construction or repair of the sidewalk in and on any street in front of or
adjacent to private property, the resolution shall state the names of the
owners, their addresses and the location of the construction or repair. The
Village Clerk shall cause to be prepared two notices. The first notice shall be
a notice sent to the property owners affected, and the second notice shall be a
notice for public hearing, which notice will notify the public at-large of the
intention of the village to make the sidewalk improvements and to charge the
cost thereof against the abutting property owner. The form of the notice sent
to affected owners shall set forth the owners assessed, the estimated amount of
sidewalk to be repaired or replaced, any new sidewalk to be installed and an
estimated amount for the work. The notice shall also state that the property
owner may cause the work to be done at his or her expense in conformity with
the plans and specifications on file in the office of the Village Clerk,
provided that this work is completed by a date to be determined by Council
after the date of the public hearing. The notice shall also include the public
hearing notice. The form of the public hearing notice shall state the time and
place at which the Council shall meet for the purpose of reviewing the list of
sidewalks so affected and hearing any persons so assessed who consider himself
or herself aggrieved thereby. The public notice shall not contain the list of
sidewalks so affected, but shall make reference that the list may be reviewed
at the Village Clerk's office prior to the hearing. The notice to property
owners shall be sent at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing by
Council, and the Clerk shall notify the owners by first class mail, so far as
the same are known and as shown on the tax rolls of the village. The Village
Clerk shall cause the public notice to be published, once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the village at least ten days before the public hearing.
   (B)   At the time and place designated in the notice for public hearing, the
Council shall meet and hear all persons interested or affected in the
construction or repair of sidewalks within the village, and shall consider all
objections either given orally at the public hearing or filed with the Village
Clerk. At the time and place, the Council shall review the resolution of
necessity and the list of owners affected. The Council may alter, change or
correct the same if necessary or may refer the list set forth in the resolution
back to the Village President and/or Manager for revision. However, in
altering, changing or conflicting the list set forth in the resolution, the
Council shall not add any other sidewalk construction or repair not included in
the original resolution, except as is necessitated during on-site construction
or upon the approval of the affected property owner. Further, the Council may
adjourn and continue the hearing from time to time. When the list set forth in
the resolution has been set and confirmed by the Council, the Council shall, by
resolution, approve the resolution of necessity and authorize the Village
President and/or qualified Village Agent to commence work on the construction
or repair of sidewalks so affected. The Village President and/or qualified
Village Agent shall authorize additional sidewalk repair and/or replacement
when, during construction, it is found that the repairs and/or replacement is
necessary due to on-site inspection, or at the request of the property owner to
enlarge the affected area for repair and/or replacement. A change made under
these circumstances shall not require further Council approval or a corrected
resolution.
   (C)   If the property owner fails to cause the work to be done within the
time allotted by the Council after the date of the public hearing, then the
Village President and/or qualified Village Agent shall proceed to have the work
done and shall bill the property owner. The method of payment to be made by the
property owner shall conform to §
92.60.
(Ord. 33, passed 7-10-2000; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.62 REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE, DEBRIS OR DIRT.
   (A)   No person owning or occupying any lot or premises abutting upon any
street in the village shall permit sidewalks abutting the lot or premises to
become obstructed by snow, ice, debris or dirt so as to inconvenience public
traffic.
   (B)   All owners or occupants of any lot, lots or premises within the
corporate limits of the village shall be required to remove all snow, ice,
debris or dirt from the sidewalks that are adjacent to and abutting upon such
lot, lots or premises within the following time frames:
      (1)   Within 24 hours for any obstructing debris or dirt.
      (2)   Within 24 hours after any snow or sleet storm shall cease, if the
storm results in four or less inches of snow or precipitation.
      (3)   Within 48 hours after any snow or sleet storm shall cease, if the
storm results in more than four inches of snow or precipitation.
      (4)   Ice control. The owner or occupant shall make a prudent effort to
control ice accumulation by complete removal or by applying sufficient amounts
of deicing material or sand, within the above time frames.
   (C)   If the sidewalk abutting any lot or premises in the village are not
cleared of snow, ice, debris or dirt in the manner and within the time provided
in divisions (A) and (B) above, then the village shall cause the sidewalks to
be cleared at the expense of the property owner. After cleaning by the village,
the actual cost thereof shall be reported to the Village Clerk. The Village
Clerk shall keep a record specifying the description of the premises cleaned as
aforesaid and, based upon these expenses, issue a certificate determining and
certifying the reasonable cost involved for the work with respect to each
parcel of property. Within ten days after receipt of the certificate, the
Village Treasurer shall forward a statement of the total charges assessed on
each parcel of property to the person as shown as the owner by the last current
tax roll and the assessment shall be payable to the Village Treasurer within 30
days from the date the statement was forwarded.
   (D)   If the owner of a lot, lots or premises fails to pay the bill within
30 days from the date the bill is mailed, the Council may cause the amount of
the expense incurred, together with a penalty and administrative fee of 10%, to
be levied by them as a special assessment upon the lot, lots or premises as
provided in this Code for single lot assessments, or the amount thereof shall
be collected by court action.
   (E)   No person shall place, throw, deposit or dump any snow, ice, debris or
dirt in or on any public right-of-way in any manner which impedes or interferes
with the free flow of traffic, unless consent to do so is based upon necessity
and permission is granted by the village.
(Ord. 33, passed 7-10-2000; Ord. 125, passed 2-23-2015) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.63 BUSINESS DISTRICT SNOW, ICE, DEBRIS, DIRT AND ENCROACHMENT REMOVAL.
   (A)   The BUSINESS DISTRICT, as used in this section, is defined as that
area zoned Central Business District, Secondary Business District and
Residential Office Business District, as designated on the village zoning map.
Every person having the care, either as owner or occupant of any business
premises or any unoccupied premises bordered by a paved sidewalk in the
Business District shall promptly remove all snow, ice, debris or dirt from the
sidewalk within 12 hours after same has fallen, and keep the same free from
obstruction, dirt, encroachments, encumbrances, filth and other nuisances. The
owner or occupant shall make a prudent effort to control ice accumulation by
complete removal or by applying sufficient amounts of deicing material or sand,
within the above time frame.
   (B)   If the sidewalks abutting any business, as defined in the Business
District, are not cleared of snow, ice, debris or dirt in the manner and within
the time provided in division (A) above, then the village shall cause the
sidewalks to be cleared at the expense of the business owner. After the
cleaning by the village, the actual cost thereof shall be reported to the
Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall keep a record specifying the description
of the premises cleaned as aforesaid and, based upon these expenses, issue a
certificate determining and certifying the reasonable cost involved for the
work with respect to each parcel of property. Within ten days after receipt of
the certificate, the Village Treasurer shall forward a statement of the total
charges assessed on each parcel of property to the person as shown as the owner
by the last current tax roll and the assessment shall be payable to the Village
Treasurer within 30 days from the date the statement was forwarded.
   (C)   If the owner of a lot, lots or premises fails to pay the bill within
30 days from the date the bill is mailed, the Council may cause the amount of
the expense incurred, together with a penalty and administrative fee of 10%, to
be levied by them as a special assessment upon the lot, lots or premises as
provided in this code for single lot assessments, or the amount thereof shall
be collected by court action.
(Ord. 33, passed 7-10-2000; Ord. 92, passed 10-26-2009; Ord. 125, passed 2-23-
2015)
§ 92.64 ENCROACHMENTS.
   (A)   Trees, bushes and shrubs.
      (1)   All trees, bushes and shrubs in the street right-of-way of the
Village of Pinckney shall be trimmed or pruned by the abutting property owner
so that no branch thereof grows or hangs lower than eight and one-half feet
above the level of the sidewalk and the road, and shall also be pruned so that
they shall not encroach onto the sidewalk or street.
      (2)   All trees, bushes and shrubs on private property, the branches of
which extend over the line of a street, or sidewalk shall be trimmed and pruned
so that no branch grows or hangs over the line of the street or sidewalk lower
than eight and one-half feet above the level of the sidewalk and the road, and
shall also be pruned so that they shall not encroach onto the street or
sidewalk.
      (3)   For any tree, bush or shrub in the street right-of-way or on
private property that has not been trimmed or pruned as provided in division
(A)(1) above or division (A)(2) above, the village shall cause those trees,
bushes or shrubs to be trimmed or removed at the expense of the property owner.
After the trimming or removal by the village, the actual cost thereof shall be
reported to the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall keep a record specifying
the description of the premises and the trees, bushes or shrubs trimmed or
removed, and the cost, to the making of the annual assessment roll by the
Village Treasurer. The Council may, by resolution, direct the Treasurer to levy
on the next general assessment roll the amount which describes the property and
trees, bushes or shrubs trimmed or removed by the village and shall state
separately the expense chargeable to each description, which amount shall be
assessed against the property in the resolution. The amounts of the special
assessment for trimming or removal of trees, bushes or shrubs herein provided
for shall be collected by the Village Treasurer at the same time and in the
same manner as general village, state and county taxes and, upon nonpayment
thereto, shall be reported to the County Treasurer in the manner provided by
law.
   (B)   Outdoor cafés.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter, the term OUTDOOR
CAFÉ shall mean an outdoor food service area operated adjacent to and in
conjunction with a lawfully established restaurant or other establishment that
sells food for immediate consumption on the premises. This definition shall
include outdoor cafes on private property, a public sidewalk and/or a public
right-of-way.
      (2)   Permit. The Zoning Administrator may issue a revocable outdoor café
permit for an outdoor café, operated in connection with a lawfully established
restaurant or other establishment that sells food for immediate consumption on
the premises. The permits shall be issued subject to annual review and the
following conditions:
         (a)   The outdoor café shall fully comply with the requirements of the
Livingston County Department of Public Health, Michigan Liquor Control
Commission and all other applicable state and local laws. For an outdoor café
adjacent to a state trunkline (M-36), the applicant must first obtain a permit
for the use from the Michigan Department of Transportation and shall submit a
copy of the permit to the Zoning Administrator.
         (b)   The outdoor café shall not be detrimental to the health, safety
or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity.
         (c)   The outdoor café shall be permitted to operate only during the
normal operating hours of the associated restaurant.
         (d)   No furnishings may be attached by any means to any public area
or public property.
         (e)   All tables, chairs and other equipment shall be constructed and
set up in such a manner as to be easily removable, durable, easily cleaned, in
sound condition and good repair.
         (f)   No food may be stored, cooked or otherwise prepared in the
outdoor café area.
         (g)   No soiled food service equipment, utensils or tableware may be
kept in the outdoor café area. All clean food service equipment, utensils and
tableware must be covered at all times. Trash receptacles shall also be covered
at all times and leak proof.
         (h)   The gross area occupied by the outdoor café shall be included in
the required parking calculation under the village's Zoning Ordinance.
         (i)   No music, intercom or other noise shall be permitted that
impacts adjacent properties.
         (j)   Umbrellas and similar temporary, easily removable shading
devices are permitted provided the lowest point of the umbrella or covering is
not lower than six feet, eight inches from the ground.   
         (k)   In no event shall the operation of the outdoor café, including
the placement of equipment or furnishings:
            1.   Interfere with the passage of pedestrian or vehicle traffic,
or reduce the open portion of the public sidewalk to less than five feet, clear
of all obstructions, measured from the edge of the sidewalk closest to the
curb, lamppost or parking meter. In addition, no seating or other equipment
shall be closer than five feet to any street tree or public sign;
            2.   Interfere with the use of or access to public or private
property, including any building, parking space, curb cut, bus stop, crosswalk,
mailbox, fire hydrant, fire escape, fire door or other means of ingress or
egress;
            3.   Obstruct the clear view of any traffic signal, regulatory sign
or street sign;
            4.   Interfere with street cleaning or snow removal activities; and
            5.   Cause damage to any street, sidewalk, tree, public bench,
landscaping or other object lawfully located therein.
         (l)   The outdoor café may be located only along the length of the
associated restaurant building. Under no circumstances shall the area of the
outdoor café extend beyond the exterior building facade of the associated
restaurant, or in any way encroach upon adjacent private or public property,
except as provided for herein.
         (m)   The permit holder shall provide the village, in a form
acceptable to the Village Attorney:
            1.   An agreement to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
village for any and all claims for liability or damages to persons or property
resulting from the operation of the outdoor café; and
            2.   A certificate of general liability insurance naming the
Village of Pinckney as the insured party. The amount of required general
liability coverage shall be in accordance with the Fee Schedule for the injury
or death of a person in any one incident and for damage to property in any one
incident. Evidence of the required insurance shall consist of certification
executed by an authorized agent of the insurance company indicating the amount
and type of insurance, the location of coverage and shall certify that the
insurance shall not be canceled unless notice of the intent to cancel is filed
with the village at least ten days prior to the cancellation. The insurer shall
have no less than a B++ rating by the most recent AM Best Insurance Rating
Guide.
         (n)   The permit holder shall be responsible for the maintenance and
upkeep of the public or private area used for the outdoor café and the
replacement of damaged public property. Maintenance shall include daily
cleaning of the area and repair or replacement of damaged pavement.
         (o)   The plot plan submitted and approved as part of the outdoor café
permit shall show all of the information required in § 152.389(B), as well as
the following:
            1.   Existing facade of the associated building;
            2.   All points of ingress and egress;
            3.   Proposed location of tables, chairs, serving equipment,
planters, borders, awnings, umbrellas and other facilities to be included in
the seating area; and
            4.   Location of existing public improvements including fire
hydrants, street signs, street lights, traffic signals, mail boxes, trees and
tree grates, parking meters, planting boxes, planting areas, fire escapes or
similar obstructions.
         (p)   The person requesting issuance of the outdoor café permit for an
outdoor café shall pay the permit fee as established by the Village Fee
Schedule.
      (3)   Revocation. A outdoor café permit for an outdoor café may be
revoked by the Zoning Administrator upon a finding that the outdoor café does
not meet the standards of this section, any other provisions of this code or
other applicable law, or that the space is needed for other purposes, or as
provided for the revocation of permits under §
152.023. For an outdoor café adjacent to a state trunkline (M-36), the outdoor
café permit shall be automatically revoked upon the revocation or expiration of
the permit for the use from the Michigan Department of Transportation.
      (4)   Appeal. Persons who are refused a permit for an outdoor café, have
their permit revoked or wish to protest the issuance of a permit that has been
approved, may appeal that determination before the Zoning Board of Appeals,
which shall review the appeal under the same standards applied in reviewing
appeals of decisions of the Zoning Administrator under the Village Zoning
Ordinance. Requests for a hearing or an appeal must be made within 30 calendar
days of the decision in question.
(Ord. 33, passed 7-10-2000; Ord. 77, passed 2-12-2007; Ord. 92, passed 10-26-
2009; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates §§
92.01 et seq. is responsible for a misdemeanor and subject to 90 days in jail,
a fine of up to $500 or both. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense subject to the penalties and provisions herein.
In addition, the village shall also be entitled to file an action for immediate
injunctive relief enjoining the activity or act giving rise to the violation of
the ordinance and also be entitled to recover all costs incurred by the village
in seeking the relief, including its actual attorney fees.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of §§
92.25 et seq. is responsible for a municipal civil infraction set forth in
Chapter 131of this code, subject to payment of a civil fine as specified in §
131.57 plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses
shall be subject to increased fines as provided by
Chapter 131 herein.
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of §§
92.55 et seq. is responsible for a municipal civil infraction set forth in
Chapter 131 of this code, subject to payment of a civil fine as specified in §
131.57, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. Repeat offenses
shall be subject to increased fines as provided by
Chapter 131 herein.
(Ord. 33, passed 7-10-2000; Ord. 56, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. 57, passed 9-9-
2002)
CHAPTER 93: CEMETERIES
Section
Designation, Regulation and Control of Cemetery
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   Maintenance by Board of Cemetery Trustees
   
93.03   Sale or transfer of burial spaces
   
93.04   Owner’s burial rights
   
93.05   Lot records
   
93.06   Labor charges; work in cemetery
   
93.07   Trespass; prohibited acts
   
93.08   Additional rules
   
93.09   Enforcement
 
   
93.99   Penalty
DESIGNATION, REGULATION AND CONTROL OF CEMETERY
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BURIAL SPACE. A lot, or portion of a lot, in any cemetery designated and
maintained for the internment of a human body or bodies and for no other
purpose.
   CEMETERY. The Pinckney Cemetery, as previously established, and any other
public cemetery owned, managed or controlled by the village.
   CEMETERY SEXTON. The Village President or his or her designee, and shall be
charged with management, supervision, record keeping and care of the
cemeteries.
   OWNER. Any person or persons owning or possessing the privilege, license or
right of internment in any burial space. The term owner shall not be construed
in any way to grant title to any real estate within any village cemetery.
(Ord. 78, passed 6-25-2007)
§ 93.02 MAINTENANCE BY BOARD OF CEMETERY TRUSTEES.
   The cemeteries which have been or may hereafter be established by the
village and maintained either within or without its limits, shall be under the
management, supervision and care of the Board of Cemetery Trustees as provided
for in M.C.L.A. § 67.57, as amended.
(Ord. 78, passed 6-25-2007)
§ 93.03 SALE OR TRANSFER OF BURIAL SPACES.
   (A)   All burial right agreements for grave sites shall be executed on
behalf of the village by the Village Clerk. Any person desiring to purchase a
burial space in any village cemetery shall make application and pay the
required amount for the grave site selected to the village. Upon the purchase
of any burial space, the Village Clerk shall prepare and deliver to the
purchaser, a duly executed burial right agreement for the burial space. The
issuance of a burial right agreement shall not constitute a right in land, but
rather a right to burial within the village cemetery subject to the rules and
regulations of the village and the laws of the state.
   (B)   The Village Council shall determine the burial space purchase price
and transfer fees by resolution and shall set the fees for cemetery services.
The required charges shall be paid to the Village Treasurer and shall be
deposited in the Cemetery Fund.
   (C)   No transfer of the burial rights other than by inheritance shall be
recognized. Any person owning any burial space who has not used a portion of
the burial space and wishes to relinquish his or her ownership, may convey the
same to the village and will be paid $75 for the unused grave site of the
burial space at the time of the reconveyance. If any person wishing to
relinquish rights for any burial space is not the original purchaser of the
space, then that person must provide written proof of ownership of burial
rights by inheritance prior to any reconveyance under this section. Private
sale of burial rights shall be allowed if registered with the Village Clerk's
office and payment of a $10 fee.
   (D)   The right to use burial spaces sold, after the effective date of this
subchapter, that remain vacant for a period of 50 years from the date of sale
shall automatically and unequivocally revert to the Village of Pinckney upon
the completion of the following notification:
      (1)   Notice shall be sent by the Village Clerk by registered first class
mail to the last owner of record of burial rights informing of the expiration
of the 50-year period and that all rights with respect to a space will be
vacated and fully forfeited, if the owner of the rights does not affirmatively
respond in writing to the Village Clerk of a desire to retain the burial rights
within 60 days from the date of mailing.
      (2)   Should the Village Clerk not receive a written response to the
notice from the last owner of record of the burial rights or from an
appropriate heir or legal representative within the 60-day period, all rights
shall be considered forfeited to the village.
(Ord. 78, passed 6-25-2007)
§ 93.04 OWNER’S BURIAL RIGHTS.
   (A)   The owner of any burial space in any village cemetery shall have the
right of burial of the dead only and shall allow no internments for
remuneration. A grave site shall be used for a single adult internment only,
however, it may also be used for two infant internments, provided that space
necessary for the internment does not occupy any other grave site. Additional
cremane burials may be interred in any occupied grave site upon filing a
request with the Cemetery Sexton, and upon his or her approval of same. Up to a
maximum of two cremane burials per grave, or one cremane and one traditional
burial per grave site.
   (B)   No burial shall take place unless lot purchase price has been paid in
full.
   (C)   The use of any grave site shall be subject to the rules and
regulations and the applicable fees governing the installation of markers and
monuments for any village cemetery.
(Ord. 78, passed 6-25-2007)
§ 93.05 LOT RECORDS.
   The Village Clerk shall keep proper records in which the burial right
agreements to all burial spaces shall be recorded at length. In connection with
all the records, the Village Clerk shall also keep a general index in which it
shall be noted alphabetically the name of the party or parties to every
instrument of conveyance.
(Ord. 78, passed 6-25-2007)
§ 93.06 LABOR CHARGES; WORK IN CEMETERY.
   (A)   The Board of Cemetery Trustees shall charge and cause to be collected
on behalf of the village, the fees for work performed in the village cemeteries
as may from time to time be fixed by resolution or otherwise by the Village
Council. All the fees shall be paid to the Village Treasurer or his or her
agents provided for in M.C.L.A. § 67.61, as amended.
   (B)   No person other than an employee of the village, or contractor
approved by the village acting under the direction of the Cemetery Sexton,
shall dig or open any grave, nor shall any person grade or fill in burial space
or otherwise do any work in connection therewith, i.e. foundation footings for
headstones, unless the work be done under supervision of the Village Clerk in
charge of the cemetery.
(Ord. 78, passed 6-25-2007) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.07 TRESPASS; PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person shall trespass on any lot or burial space within any village
cemetery, nor pick or cut any flowers or shrubs except on his or her own burial
space, or cut down, injure or disturb any tree or shrub or otherwise remove any
fixture within any village cemetery.
   (B)   Village cemetery hours shall be set by resolution, and any person in
or upon any village cemetery during the closed hours shall be in violation of
this subchapter.
   (C)   No person shall desecrate, or in any manner violate, the sanctity of
any cemetery or the appurtenances thereof.
   (D)   No horses, snowmobiles, minibikes or any other type of recreational
vehicle shall be permitted at any time in any municipal cemetery in the
village.
(Ord. 78, passed 6-25-2007) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.08 ADDITIONAL RULES.
   (A)   The Board of Cemetery Trustees, with the approval by resolution by the
Village Council, shall from time to time, make the other rules and regulations
for the burial of the dead, care, improvement and protection of the grounds,
mausoleums, monuments and appurtenances of the cemetery and orderly conduct of
persons visiting the same as be deemed necessary and as are consistent with the
terms of this subchapter.
   (B)   Village cemetery regulations shall be available for inspection to the
general public at the office of the Village Clerk during regular village
business hours. In the event that any rules or regulations are found to be
inconsistent with the terms of this subchapter, or with the applicable terms of
the Village Charter, being M.C.L.A. §§ 67.55 et seq., as amended, this
subchapter or the Village Charter, shall govern.
(Ord. 78, passed 6-25-2007)
§ 93.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Village President, or his or her designees and the village's police
officers, shall see that this subchapter, and all rules and regulations enacted
under it in respect to a cemetery, are strictly enforced.
(Ord. 78, passed 6-25-2007)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   A person who violates any provision of §§
93.01 et seq. is responsible for a municipal civil infraction set forth in
Chapter 131 of this code, subject to payment of a civil fine as specified in
the Village's Municipal Civil Infraction Ordinance, plus costs and other
sanctions for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased
fines.
(Ord. 78, passed 6-25-2007)
CHAPTER 94: WEEDS
Section
Control of Tall Weeds, Grass and Brush
   
94.01   Title
   
94.02   Purpose and intent
   
94.03   Definitions
   
94.04   Application of ordinances
   
94.05   Violation to permit tall weeds, grass and brush; public nuisance
   
94.06   Exemptions
   
94.07   Duty of owner
   
94.08   Notice
   
94.09   Abatement by village
   
94.10   Designation of enforcing official; authority
   
94.11   Reimbursement to village
   
94.12   Appeals
 
   
94.99   Penalty
CONTROL OF TALL WEEDS, GRASS AND BRUSH
§ 94.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be referred to as the Tall Grass and Tall Brush
Control Ordinance and shall apply to all property within the Village of
Pinckney.
(Ord. 73, passed 7-10-2006)
§ 94.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the intent of this subchapter to control and eradicate tall weeds,
tall grass and tall brush within the Village of Pinckney, to impose obligations
upon the owner, agent or occupant of lots or parcels with respect to control
and eradication, to implement enforcement of the obligations by lien on the
lots or parcels involved, to permit officials of the Village of Pinckney to
enter upon property for the enforcement of the control and eradication efforts
and further to appoint a commissioner of weeds, grass and brush control, to
define their powers, duties and compensation as determined.
(Ord. 73, passed 7-10-2006)
§ 94.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED STREET. Any platted or un-platted street or highway, road or right-
of-way, maintained or not maintained.
   COMMISSIONER OF TALL WEEDS, TALL GRASS AND TALL BRUSH CONTROL or
COMMISSIONER. The Department of Public Works Director or the Director's
designee.
   LOT. A parcel or parcels that are continuous and located within the Village
of Pinckney as identified on the tax rolls for the County of Livingston,
including the unpaved portion of any public right-of-way or easement
immediately adjacent thereto.
   OTHER PLANTS. Those recognized as deleterious to health, safety or public
welfare and recognized as a common nuisance.
   OWNER. The person(s) listed on the current property tax roll.
   PARCEL. Any lot of land located within the Village of Pinckney as identified
on the tax rolls for the County of Livingston, including the unpaved portion of
any public right-of-way or easement immediately adjacent thereto.
   TALL BRUSH. Any brush exceeding three feet in height.
   TALL GRASS. Any grass exceeding nine inches in height.
   TALL WEEDS. Any weed exceeding nine inches in height.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Pinckney.
   VILLAGE COUNCIL. The Village of Pinckney Council.
(Ord. 73, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 120, passed 7-8-2013)
§ 94.04 APPLICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   This subchapter shall apply to and cover TALL WEEDS, TALL GRASS and TALL
BRUSH, as defined above, found growing in the Village of Pinckney.
(Ord. 73, passed 7-10-2006)
§ 94.05 VIOLATION TO PERMIT TALL WEEDS, GRASS AND BRUSH; PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any owner, occupant,
agent or other person having control or management of any lot or parcel within
the Village of Pinckney of one acre or less in size to cause or permit to grow
on the lot or parcel any tall weeds, tall grass and/or tall brush.
   (B)   On lots or parcels in excess of one acre in size within the Village of
Pinckney, it shall be a violation of this subchapter for any owner, occupant,
agent or other person having control or management of the lots or parcels to
cause or permit to grow on the lots or parcels any tall weeds, tall grass and/
or tall brush within 50 feet of any occupied dwelling, or within 50 feet of an
approved street, road or highway right-of-way.
   (C)   The presence of tall weeds, tall grass or tall brush upon any lots or
parcels contrary to this subchapter is hereby deemed to be detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare and shall constitute a public nuisance.
(Ord. 73, passed 7-10-2006) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.06 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exempted from the provisions of this subchapter are:
      (1)   Trees, flower gardens, plots of shrubbery, vegetable gardens and
vegetation planted for ornamental purposes; and
      (2)   Lots or parcels of land devoted to growing corn or small grains
such as wheat, oats, barley or rye. An exemption under the terms of division
(A) above cannot be claimed unless the land has been cultivated and cared for
in a manner appropriated to the exempt categories.
   (B)   The provisions and requirements of this subchapter shall not apply to
any lands which are situated within the wetlands or floodplains of any natural
lakes, ponds, streams or watercourses, or any area between the lower or upper
banks of the lakes, ponds, streams or watercourses.
   (C)   The provisions and requirements of this subchapter shall not apply to
an area designated a natural area by the village, or over which lot or parcel
of land a conservation easement is recorded and in effect.
   (D)   The provisions and requirements of this subchapter shall not apply to
an area:
      (1)   That by virtue of its size and location, the area would be suitable
to retain in a natural state;
      (2)   The unique vegetation located on the proposed natural area should
be preserved in a natural state to enhance the environment;
      (3)   The topography of the proposed natural area (such as steep slope,
wetness, inaccessibility and the like) would create a substantial undue
hardship to the owner were the subchapter cutting requirements strictly
enforced as to the designated natural area; or
      (4)   Is within the village designated as parts of public recreation
areas.
   (E)   The owners, occupants, agents and other persons having control or
management of land may ask the Commissioner for an exception to this subchapter
based on compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of
land in a socially and economically desirable manner. The Commissioner is
authorized to grant the exceptions.
   (F)   Exceptions authorized under division (E) above will be valid for one
year and must be renewed each year. Exceptions will be valid from January 1 of
the current year to December 31 of the current year. All exception requests
granted by the Commissioner under division (E) above must be presented to the
Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting, or as soon as possible.
(Ord. 73, passed 7-10-2006)
§ 94.07 DUTY OF OWNER.
   It shall be the duty of all owners, occupants, agents and other persons
having control or management of land on which tall weeds, tall grass and/or
tall brush are found to be growing contrary to this subchapter to cut the tall
weeds, tall grass and/or tall brush.
(Ord. 73, passed 7-10-2006)
§ 94.08 NOTICE.
   (A)   In any case in which the owner, occupant, agent or other person having
control or management of any lot or parcel within the village allows the
presence on any lot or parcel or on any portion of any lot or parcel of any
tall weeds, tall grass and/or tall brush in violation of the provisions of this
subchapter, the enforcing official shall notify the owner, occupant, agent or
person having control of the lot or parcel to abate the violation within ten
calendar days.
   (B)   The notice shall be given to the owner, occupant, agent or person
having control of the land by certified mail with return receipt requested or
by personal service. In addition, the village may publish a notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village during the month of March that
weeds not cut by June 1 of that year, and as necessary after each June 1 to
remain in compliance with this subchapter, will be cut by the village and the
owner of the property charged with the cost under the provisions of this
subchapter. The village may cut weeds as many times after June 1 as is
necessary to keep the lot or parcel in compliance with this subchapter and
charge the cost to the property owner. Failure to publish this notice will not
relieve property owners of their responsibility.
(Ord. 73, passed 7-10-2006)
§ 94.09 ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE.
   If any person shall fail to comply with the provisions of this subchapter by
the specified time, the village shall, through the Department of Public Works
or through an independent contractor working under the Commissioner's
supervision, cause all the tall weeds, tall grass and/or tall brush to be cut
or destroyed upon lands of the person not complying with the provisions of this
subchapter. The Commissioner shall keep an accurate account of all expense
incurred with respect to each parcel of land entered upon in carrying out the
provisions of this subchapter and shall make a sworn statement of the account
and present it to the Village Treasurer and the Village Council.
(Ord. 73, passed 7-10-2006)
§ 94.10 DESIGNATION OF ENFORCING OFFICIAL; AUTHORITY.
   The Commissioner, being the Village Department of Public Works Director, is
hereby designated the enforcing official of this subchapter. The enforcing
official and the official's authorized representatives, employees or agents or
independent contractors, are hereby granted access to and from any land for the
purpose of investigation to determine whether violations of this subchapter
exist, and for the purpose of completing work necessary to accomplish the
abatement of any violations of this subchapter found to exist. No person shall
deny entry to or otherwise obstruct, molest or interfere with what they are
investigating to determine whether violations of this subchapter exist, or are
engaged in destroying weeds, as provided herein. Any person found in violation
of this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject
to payment of a civil fine as specified in the Village's Municipal Civil
Infraction Ordinance.
(Ord. 73, passed 7-10-2006) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.11 REIMBURSEMENT TO VILLAGE.
   (A)   Whenever the village shall enter upon any lot or parcel of land in
order to accomplish abatement of an existing violation, pursuant to provisions
of this subchapter, the Village Department of Public Works Director is hereby
authorized and directed to keep an accurate account of all expenses incurred,
and, based upon these expenses, to issue a certificate determining and
certifying the reasonable cost involved for the work with respect to each
parcel of property.
   (B)   Within ten days after receipt of the certificate, the Village
Treasurer shall forward a statement of the total charges assessed on each
parcel of property to the person as shown by the last current tax roll and the
assessment shall be payable to the Village Treasurer within 30 days from the
date the statement was forwarded.
   (C)   The Treasurer at the end of each quarter shall report to the Village
Council all sums so owing to the village and which have not been paid within 30
days after the mailing of the bill theretofore. The Council shall, at such
times as it may deem advisable direct the Treasurer to prepare a special
assessment roll covering all the charges reported to it. The roll shall be
filed with the Clerk who shall advise the Council of the filing of the roll,
and the Council shall thereupon set a date for the hearing of objections to the
assessment roll. The assessment roll shall be open to public inspection for a
period of seven days before the Council shall meet to review the roll and hear
complaints. The Village Clerk shall give notice in advance by publication of
the opening of the roll to public inspection and of the meeting of the Council
to hear complaints and shall also give like notice to the owners of and persons
having an interest in property affected by first class mail at their addresses
as shown on the last tax roll of the village, at least ten full days prior to
the date of the hearing. The special assessments and all interest and charge's
thereon, shall, from the date of confirmation of the roll, be and remain a lien
upon the property assessed, of the same character and effect as a lien created
by general law for state and county taxes until paid. The same penalty and
interest shall be paid on the assessments, when delinquent from the date after
confirmation as shall be fixed by the Council, as are provided by the Village
Charter to be paid on delinquent general village taxes and the assessments,
with penalties and interest, shall be added by the Treasurer to the next
general Village Tax Roll and shall thereafter, be collected and returned in the
same manner as general village taxes.
(Ord. 73, passed 7-10-2006)
§ 94.12 APPEALS.
   A person who receives a notice of violation may appeal his or her violation
to the Village Council in writing or in person.
(Ord. 73, passed 7-10-2006)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   A person who violates any provision of §§
94.01 et seq. is responsible for a municipal civil infraction set forth in
Chapter 131 of this code, subject to payment of a civil fine as specified in
Village's Municipal Civil Infraction Ordinance, plus costs and other sanctions,
for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines.
(Ord. 73, passed 7-10-2006)
CHAPTER 95: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
95.01   Title
   
95.02   Special event defined
   
95.03   Permit required; exceptions
   
95.04   Application for permit; investigation
   
95.05   Notification to agencies
   
95.06   Criteria for issuing permit
   
95.07   Determination; restrictions, additional permitting required
   
95.08   Classes of permits
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Special Event
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 90, passed 9-9-2009)
§ 95.02 SPECIAL EVENT DEFINED.
   For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter, the term SPECIAL EVENT
shall mean any event outside the normal course of business that has not
received the approval of the Village Council independent of this chapter, and
which can reasonably be expected to exceed the interior capacity of the
building as set by the State Fire Safety Board, and/or to block, close or
significantly hinder or impair the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on
any street, road or other public right-of-way within the village. The term
SPECIAL EVENT shall include, but not be limited to, a parade, demonstration,
display, concert, entertainment, special promotion, advertising event,
festival, show, celebration, performance, display, seasonal event, video or
film production and certain kinds of athletic events (e.g. running races on
public streets).
(Ord. 90, passed 9-9-2009; Ord. 125, passed 4-10-2017)
§ 95.03 PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, organization, group or entity to
stage or hold a special event without first obtaining a permit from the
village.
   (B)   Exceptions to the permit requirement include, but are not limited to,
the following:
      (1)   Funeral processions; and
      (2)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its governmental
functions.
(Ord. 90, passed 9-9-2009) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 95.04 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   The applicant shall pay a permit application fee, as set by Village
Council resolution.
   (B)   An application for a special event permit must be submitted to the
Village Clerk on a form provided by the village not less than 60 days prior to
the date of the event. Village Council may consider applications submitted less
than 60 days prior to the event.
   (C)   The application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person or
organization requesting the permit;
      (2)   A complete description of the event, the location, the number of
participants and the estimated number of those expected to attend the event;
      (3)   The date the event is to be conducted and the hour or hours the
event will commence and terminate, including time for set-up and clean-up;
      (4)   A proposed plan to provide necessary parking, security, crowd
control, traffic control, sanitation facilities, noise control and clean-up of
the area of the event. In the case of a parade, proposed route and assembly
areas must be provided, with written permission from the owners of any property
to be used for assembly;
      (5)   Whether any music will be provided, either live or recorded, and
whether loudspeakers and/or amplifying devices will be used;
      (6)   Whether any animals will be participating in the event, what type
and any clean-up arrangements that may be required;
      (7)   Whether the use of alcoholic beverages will be permitted on the
premises upon which the event is to be conducted and, if so, what measures or
procedures will be taken to prohibit the sale of alcohol to minors or to
visibly intoxicated individuals;
      (8)   Evidence of insurance, including satisfactory proof that the
applicant’s insurance carrier has been apprised of the applicant’s proposed use
of alcoholic beverages (if any), naming the village as additional insured in an
amount sufficient to protect the village from any and all claims for damages
from personal injury, property damage or any other injury arising from or as a
result of the activity or event. This provision may be waived at the discretion
of the Village Council;
      (9)   The applicant may be required to indemnify the village for and hold
it harmless from and defend it against any and all claims, lawsuits or other
liability arising from or as a result of the activity or event; and
      (10)   Any other information deemed pertinent by the village in
evaluating the effect the event may have on the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the village.
   (D)   Upon receipt of an application, the Village Clerk will refer it to the
Chief of Police and any other department or organization deemed necessary for
investigation and a recommendation concerning the application. The findings
resulting from the investigation shall be reported to the Village Council.
(Ord. 90, passed 9-9-2009)
§ 95.05 NOTIFICATION TO AGENCIES.
   The Village Clerk will send copies of the permit application to the
appropriate governmental agencies, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   Putnam Township Fire Department;
   (B)   Pinckney Department of Public Works;
   (C)   Michigan Department of Transportation;
   (D)   Pinckney Community Schools; and
   (E)   Livingston County Department of Public Health.
(Ord. 90, passed 9-9-2009)
§ 95.06 CRITERIA FOR ISSUING PERMIT.
   A permit shall be issued by the Village Council if the following criteria
are met:
   (A)   The application was fully and accurately completed;
   (B)   Adequate provisions have been made for the protection of the health,
safety and welfare of the community;
   (C)   The event will not unreasonably affect the use or enjoyment of private
or public property and will not cause unreasonable traffic hazards or delays;
   (D)   The event will not constitute a public nuisance;
   (E)   The applicant makes payment to the village prior to the event of the
costs anticipated to be incurred by the village in assigning personnel to the
special event to assure the health, safety and welfare of the community, as
determined by evaluating the information submitted in the application. This may
include additional police coverage or Department of Public Works services. In
addition, the payment shall also include the cost incurred by the village in
notifying area property owners, if such notification is determined necessary by
the Village Council. The final billing will be adjusted to reflect the actual
utilization of village personnel and equipment;
   (F)   The applicant is current on taxes and utilities owed to the village;
and
   (G)   The event will not adversely impact or unreasonably affect the use or
enjoyment of the private property in the vicinity of the event.
(Ord. 90, passed 9-9-2009)
§ 95.07 DETERMINATION; RESTRICTIONS, ADDITIONAL PERMITTING REQUIRED.
   The village will act upon the application within 30 days of receipt of
permit application. The village may impose restrictions on any special event in
the interest of the health and safety of residents and participants. Other
restrictions and permits may be required from other agencies.
(Ord. 90, passed 9-9-2009)
§ 95.08 CLASSES OF PERMITS.
   (A)   In addition to any other provisions of this chapter, the following
classes of permits are established for special events associated with events
held in the village (such as Art in the Park, parades and the like), and using
the public right-of-way.
      (1)   New sales permit. For outdoor on-premises sales by an existing
licensed business of a type not normally carried on by that business.
      (2)   Outdoor sales permit. For outdoor on-premises sales by an existing
licensed business of the type that is normally carried on inside of the
business (for example, a sidewalk sale), not including the sale of alcohol.
      (3)   Outdoor sales with alcohol. For outdoor on-premises sales by an
existing licensed business of the type that is normally carried on inside the
business, including the sale of alcohol (for example, a beer tent).
      (4)   Third-party permit. For a special event, either indoor or outdoor,
conducted by any individual or entity on-premises normally occupied by an
existing licensed business, pursuant to any form of agreement with the existing
licensed business.
   (B)   Every applicant for a permit to stage or hold a special event
associated with events held in the village shall file an application with the
Village Clerk on a form provided by the village at least 60 days prior to the
event. Village Council may consider applications submitted less than 60 days
prior to the event.
(Ord. 90, passed 9-9-2009)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in §
10.99.
(Ord. 90, passed 9-9-2009)
CHAPTER 96: NOISE
Section
   
96.01   Noise disturbances; definitions
   
96.02   Prima facie violations
   
96.03   General prohibition
   
96.04   Specific prohibitions
   
96.05   Exceptions
   
96.06   Special permits
   
96.07   Violations, fines and penalties
§ 96.01 NOISE DISTURBANCES; DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NOISE. Any sound that disturbs humans or animals, or that causes or tends to
cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans or other
animals.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound that:
      (1)   Disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or
      (2)   Is plainly audible as defined in this section.
   PLAINLY AUDIBLE. Any sound or noise that can be detected by a person using
his or her unaided hearing faculties at a distance of 50 feet or more from the
real property line of the source of the sound or noise, or which are plainly
audible within any neighboring private residence.
   SOUND. Shall be broadly interpreted to mean any sound, noise, music, voice,
or any other forms of noise or sound, whether generated electronically, by any
person, an acoustic instrument(s) or device(s), or any other method of sound
creation or transmission.
(Ord. 113, passed 8-13-2012)
§ 96.02 PRIMA FACIE VIOLATIONS.
   The making of any of the specific noises set forth in §§
96.03 -
96.05 which are plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the source, or
which are plainly audible within any neighboring private residence, hospital or
court, shall constitute prima facie evidence of an unlawful noise in violation
of this chapter.
(Ord. 113, passed 8-13-2012)
§ 96.03 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to make, cause or allow
the making of any sound that causes a noise disturbance, as defined herein.
(Ord. 113, passed 8-13-2012)
§ 96.04 SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS.
   In addition to the general prohibition, and unless otherwise exempted by
this chapter, the following specific acts, or the causing or permitting
thereof, are declared to be loud, disturbing, injurious, and unnecessary noise
disturbances in violation of this chapter; but this enumeration shall not be
deemed to be exclusive:
   (A)   Audio equipment, musical instrument or similar device. Operating,
playing, or permitting the playing of any radio, televisions, electronic audio
equipment, musical instrument or similar device in a residential area such that
a noise disturbance is created across a real property boundary in a residential
zoning district between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (B)   Loudspeakers. Operating, or permitting the operation of, any
loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device for any commercial
purpose, on any public road or in any public space between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (C)   Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing. Yelling, shouting,
hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets shall be prohibited between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place as to cause a
noise disturbance.
   (D)   Explosives, firearms, and similar devices. The use or firing of
explosives, firearms, firecrackers and other fireworks, or similar devices,
which create impulsive sound so as to cause a noise disturbance across a real
property boundary or on a public space or right-of-way, except as specifically
authorized by law. Fireworks may not be discharged in a manner that may create
a nuisance nor in violation of §
91.03 of this code.
   (E)   School, church or hospital. Emitting or creating any excessive noise
that unreasonably interferes with the operation of any school, church or
hospital.
   (F)   Animals. Owning, possessing, or harboring a dog, bird or other animal,
that howls, barks, meows, squawks, or makes any sound to cause an annoyance,
alarm, or noise disturbance to an ordinary reasonable person of normal
sensitivities across a residential or commercial boundary line or within a
noise-sensitive area. For the purpose of this section, a BARKING DOG shall mean
a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise incessantly for a
period of 15 minutes in any one-hour interval, or barks continuously for one-
half hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any time of day or night,
regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in or upon private
property. However, a dog shall not be deemed a BARKING DOG in violation of this
section if, at the time the dog is barking making any other noise, a person is
trespassing or threatening to trespass upon property in or upon which the dog
is situated. A person shall be deemed to be HARBORING an animal when that
person has a property right in or has it in his or her care, custody or control
or permits the animal to remain on or about the premises he or she occupies.
   (G)   Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises. The provisions of this section shall not apply to motor
vehicles operated on a highway or public street and subject to the noise
regulations of §§ 707a - 707e of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code (M.C.L.A. §§
257.707a - 257.707e) or comparable provisions of the Uniform Traffic Code; and
in such case, violations shall be enforced under the procedures set forth in
such codes for civil infractions.
   (H)   Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise or so as to disturb the
peace and quiet of streets or other public places.
   (I)   Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the
opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
   (J)   Construction or repairing of buildings, streets or utilities. The
erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any
building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health
and safety, and then only with a permit from the building official, which
permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days while the emergency
continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less
while the emergency continues. If the building official should determine that
the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition,
alteration or repair of any building within the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., and if the official shall further determine that substantial loss or
inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he or she may grant
permission for such work to be done between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is
awarded or during the progress of the work. The construction, alteration or
repair of public streets or utilities shall not be conducted other than between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. unless the Director of Public Works or a
bona fide public utilities service employee determines that an emergency exists
which requires such work, or determines that the public health and welfare will
not be adversely affected by such work.
   (K)   Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and
vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
   (L)   Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show
or sale.
   (M)   Operating any machinery, equipment or mechanical device so as to
create a noise disturbance; this prohibition does not include domestic power
tools as provided below.
(Ord. 113, passed 8-13-2012; Ord. 119, passed 6-24-2013)
§ 96.05 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the regulations
contained in this chapter:
   (A)   Use of motorized lawn mowers, and other lawn, landscaping, and yard
maintenance equipment or domestic power tools, provided such equipment is
utilized between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
   (B)   Residential use of snow blowers, if in good working order and if used
only as needed, and snow removal from commercial or industrial properties by
any internal combustion device, if the snow removal equipment has a properly
functioning muffler.
   (C)   The unamplified human voice, except for yelling, shouting, whistling,
hooting, or generally creation of a racket such that it creates a noise
disturbance during the nighttime hours (11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) in a
residential area in other than a time of emergency.
   (D)   [Reserved].
   (E)   Sounds resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding
to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency.
   (F)   Any non-amplified noise generated by noncommercial public speaking
activities conducted on any public property or public right-of-way pursuant to
a permit issued under this chapter.
   (G)   Sounds produced at organized sports events, by lawful fireworks, and
by permitted parades on public property or public rights-of-way, between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
   (H)   Highway maintenance and construction. Necessary excavations or repairs
of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the village or the state
during the night, when the public safety, welfare and convenience render it
impossible to perform such work during the day.
   (I)   Snow removal. The operation of snow removal equipment necessary for
the removal of snow or ice from public or private streets, alleys, drives,
sidewalks, and parking areas.
   (J)   Sacred music. The use of sound amplifiers or other such devices by
religious organizations or other organizations approved by the Council.
   (K)   Parades, festivals and similar events. City approved or sponsored
parades, festivals, fairs, or events or city sponsored music.
(Ord. 113, passed 8-13-2012)
§ 96.06 SPECIAL PERMITS.
   (A)   The Village Council may grant a special permit for the generation,
operation, or use of sound that would otherwise violate this chapter when the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The application contains information that demonstrates that
bringing the source of sound or activity for which the special permit is sought
into compliance with this chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on
the applicant, on the community, or on other persons; and
      (2)   Such relief would be within the spirit and intent of this chapter,
would not adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare, and would
not be materially injurious to surrounding properties and improvements.
   (B)   Applicants for a permit may be required to submit any information the
Council may reasonably require. In granting or denying an application, the
Council shall place on public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for
denying or granting the permit. The permit shall be granted by notice to the
applicant containing all necessary conditions, including the time limit on the
permitted activity. The permit shall not become effective until all conditions
are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of the permit
shall terminate it and subject the applicant to the provisions of this chapter
regulating the source of sound or activity for which the permit was granted.
(Ord. 113, passed 8-13-2012)
§ 96.07 VIOLATIONS, FINES AND PENALTIES.
   Persons who violate a provision of this chapter or fail to comply with any
of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction
and subject to the civil fines set forth in the schedule of civil fines in §
10.99(C), and shall be subject to any other relief that may be imposed by a
court for such conduct, which shall also be considered a nuisance per se. Each
act of violation and each day upon which such violation occurs shall constitute
a separate violation.
(Ord. 113, passed 8-13-2012)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS
      
111.   AMUSEMENTS
      
112.   CABLE TELEVISION
      
113.   MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESSES REQUIRING A LICENSE
      
114.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CHAPTER 110: PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS, AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   License requirement
   
110.03   Application procedure
   
110.04   Standards for issuance
   
110.05   Revocation procedure
   
110.06   Standards for revocation
   
110.07   Appeal procedure
   
110.08   Exhibition of identification
   
110.09   Village policy on soliciting
   
110.10   Notice regulating soliciting
   
110.11   Duty of solicitors to ascertain notice
   
110.12   Prohibited solicitation
   
110.13   Hours of operation
 
   
110.99   Violations, fines and penalties
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler, or solicitor as defined in this section.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but is not
restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent, or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the village and who, in
the furtherance of such business, uses any building, structure, vehicle, or any
place within the village.
   PEDDLER. Any person, not an itinerant merchant, who:
      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for sale,
or making sales, or making deliveries; or
      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for
sale from any public place within the village.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a solicitor is not
a peddler.
§ 110.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor shall
obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the village.
   (B)   The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be as set from
time to time by the Village Council.
   (C)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
   (D)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire 90 days after the
date of issuance thereof.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall file an
application with the Clerk. This application shall be signed by the applicant
if an individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by the president if a
corporation. The applicant may be requested to provide information concerning
the following items:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   (a)   The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the village;
         (b)   The local address of such individual;
         (c)   The permanent address of such individual;
         (d)   The capacity in which such individual will act;
      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the
business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation;
      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on
applicant's business;
      (5)   (a)   The nature, character, and quality of the goods or services
to be offered for sale or delivered;
         (b)   If goods, their invoice value and whether they are to be sold by
sample as well as from stock;
         (c)   If goods, where and by whom such goods are manufactured or
grown, and where such goods are at the time of application;
      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business;
      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual identified in
division (A)(2)(a) above, or the person identified in division (A)(3) has been
convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of each offense
and the penalty assessed for each offense.
   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required to
provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to that
requested under division (A) above:
      (1)   A description of the applicant;
      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its registration number, if any.
   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall attach to
their application, if required by the village, credentials from the person, if
any, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant
to act as such representative.
   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach to their
application, in addition to any attachments required under division (C), a
statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than ten days prior to the
date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious or
communicable disease.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.04 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant's
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (B)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant's business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. In
particular, tangible evidence that the applicant:
      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude; or
      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application; or
      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to
itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors, and the like; or
      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts; or
      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited contracts.
will constitute valid reasons for disapproval of an application.
§ 110.05 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the Clerk
after notice and hearing, pursuant to the standards in §
110.06. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his last known address,
at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 110.06 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
or
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the license; or
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter; or
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, or general welfare
of the public.
§ 110.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§
110.04 or
110.06 shall have the right to appeal to the Village Council. The appeal shall
be taken by filing with the Village Council, within 14 days after notice of the
decision has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written
statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The Village Council shall set
the time and place for a hearing, and notice for such hearing shall be given to
such person in the same manner as provided in §
110.05.
   (B)   The order of the Village Council after the hearing shall be final.
§ 110.08 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter shall
be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event more
than one place within the village shall be used to conduct the business
licensed, separate licenses shall be issued for each place.
   (B)   The Clerk shall issue a license to each peddler or solicitor licensed
under this chapter. The license shall contain the words “Licensed Peddler” or
“Licensed Solicitor,” the expiration date of the license, and the number of the
license. The license shall be kept with the licensee during such time as he is
engaged in the business licensed.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.09 VILLAGE POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village that the occupants of
the residences in the village shall make the determination of whether
solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.
§ 110.10 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence,
shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four
inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows:
   “NO SOLICITORS INVITED”
   (B)   The letters shall be at least 1/3-inch in height. For the purpose of
uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Chief of Police to persons
requesting, at the cost thereof.
   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
§ 110.11 DUTY OF SOLICITORS TO ASCERTAIN NOTICE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises
in the village upon which a residence is located to first examine the notice
provided for in §
110.10 if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice. If the notice states “NO SOLICITORS INVITED,” then the solicitor,
whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.12 PROHIBITED SOLICITATION.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting in defiance of the notice exhibited
at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
110.10 above.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.13 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No peddler, itinerant merchant or commercial solicitor shall engage in such
business in the village after the hour of 8:00 p.m. and before the hour of 10:
00 a.m. during the months of April 1 thru September 30; and from one-half hour
after the official sunset time and before the hour of 10:00 a.m. during the
months of October 1 to March 31. Commercial solicitation means the request of a
donation or transfer of goods or services for a purpose other than a
charitable, religious, or political purpose.
(Ord. 132, passed 8-8-2016)
§ 110.99 VIOLATIONS, FINES AND PENALTIES.
   Persons who violate a provision of this chapter or fail to comply with any
of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction
and be subject to the civil fines set forth in the schedule of civil fines in §
10.99(C), and shall be subject to any other relief that may be imposed by a
court for such conduct, which shall also be considered a nuisance per se. Each
act of violation and each day upon which such violation occurs shall constitute
a separate violation.
(Ord. 132, passed 8-8-2016)
CHAPTER 111: AMUSEMENTS
Section
Video Game and Arcades
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Coin-operated amusement device arcade license required
   
111.03   Coin-operated amusement device arcade license application
   
111.04   Coin-operated amusement devices arcade; inspection of premises
   
111.05   Coin-operated amusement device arcade; denial of license
   
111.06   Coin-operated device arcade; granting of license
   
111.07   Coin-operated amusement device arcade license fee, term, renewal and
additional coin-operated amusement devices and relocation of devices
   
111.08   Coin-operated amusement device license required
   
111.09   Coin-operated amusement device license application
   
111.10   Coin-operated amusement device; inspection of premises
   
111.11   Coin-operated amusement device; denial of license
   
111.12   Coin-operated amusement device; granting of license
   
111.13   Coin-operated amusement device license fees, term, renewal and
additional coin-operated amusement devices and relocation of devices
   
111.14   Regulations governing coin-operated amusement device arcades and coin-
operated amusement devices
   
111.15   Conduct on the premises of coin-operated amusement device arcades and
those containing coin-operated amusement devices
   
111.16   Suspension or revocation of coin-operated amusement device arcade
license or coin-operated amusement device license
Rules and Regulations of Recreation Facilities
   
111.30   Definitions
   
111.31   Enforcement
   
111.32   Rules
   
111.33   Use permits and fees
 
   
111.99   Penalty
VIDEO GAME AND ARCADES
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any mechanical or electrical instrument,
machine or contrivance which provides amusement or entertainment which may be
operated or set in motion by insertion of a coin or token or which may be
permitted by the payment of a fee, excluding juke boxes and vending machines.
   COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE ARCADE. Any place of business or
establishment wherein is located coin-operated amusement devices, or the
principle business purpose of the establishment is the offering of coin-
operated amusement devices to the public.
   OWNER. Any person who has attained the age of 21 years or older, firm,
partnership, corporation or entity who owns, operates or conducts or proposes
to conduct any business or establishment in which any coin-operated amusement
device may be operated, placed or kept for use or play.
   PREMISES. Any building, or part of a building, wherein coin-operated
amusement devices are located under the control of the owner.
(Ord. 28, passed 10-11-1982)
§ 111.02 COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE ARCADE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No coin-operated amusement device arcade shall be established, maintained or
conducted in the Village of Pinckney by any owner without first obtaining a
license or renewal thereof to operate the place from the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 28, passed 10-11-1982) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03 COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE ARCADE LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a coin-operated amusement device arcade license shall
be made to the Village Clerk on a form prescribed by the Village Clerk together
with an application fee or the fee as is hereafter provided by resolution of
the Village of Pinckney. The application shall include the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner if an individual, or if a
partnership, association or other entity, the names and addresses of each
member of the partnership, association or other entity, or if a corporation,
the names and addresses of its officers;
      (2)   The length of time the owner has resided in the State of Michigan;
      (3)   The owner's places of residence for the past five years immediately
before the time of the application;
      (4)   The full name and location of the proposed business;
      (5)   Whether or not the owner has ever been convicted of any crime
involving a controlled substance, alcohol, minors, moral turpitude or the
operation of a coin-operated arcade;
      (6)   At least three references of reputable citizens of each community
wherein the owner has last resided; and
      (7)   A drawing showing the floor plan of the proposed business, all
exits and the proposed location of each coin-operated amusement device.
   (B)   If the applicant for the license is a corporation authorized to do
business in the State of Michigan, the application shall be made by the
authorized agent of the corporation who will have principal charge of the
premises, and the application shall contain all of the statements and furnish
all the facts and recommendations in respect to the agent as are required in
the case of an individual. The license to a corporation shall be revocable upon
the occurrence of a change in the agent so managing the premises, and a new
license may be required by the Village of Pinckney before any new agent shall
take charge of the premises for the corporation. In the case of a partnership,
each active or general partner in the proposed business shall join in the
application for the license, and shall furnish all of the information and
recommendations required of an individual.
(Ord. 28, passed 10-11-1982)
§ 111.04 COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES ARCADE; INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   Before the issuance of a coin-operated amusement device arcade license, the
Village of Pinckney shall transmit the application to the Chief of Police for
further inspection and investigation of the owner's fitness to obtain a coin-
operated amusement device arcade license. Fitness of the owner shall consist of
the compliance by the owner and the premises with all applicable ordinances of
the Village of Pinckney and the State of Michigan pertaining to the operation
of the business.
(Ord. 28, passed 10-11-1982)
§ 111.05 COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE ARCADE; DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   No coin-operated amusement device license shall be issued:
   (A)   Where the owner or managing agent of a corporation has been convicted
of a crime involving a controlled substance, alcohol, minor, moral turpitude or
the operation of a coin-operated amusement device arcade within a five-year
period preceding the application;
   (B)   Where the application is found by the Village of Pinckney to be
incomplete or contain material inaccuracies;
   (C)   Where the premises fail to comply with the pertinent provisions of the
laws or ordinances of the Village of Pinckney or the State of Michigan; and
   (D)   Where the location of the coin-operated amusement devices does not
provide for safe ingress or egress within the premises.
(Ord. 28, passed 10-11-1982) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.06 COIN-OPERATED DEVICE ARCADE; GRANTING OF LICENSE.
   The Village of Pinckney, upon receiving the application, if presented in due
form, shall pass upon the same at its next regular meeting, or any adjournment
thereof, and if satisfied that the application possesses the qualifications
herein prescribed and the premises conform to the requirements hereof, shall
issue the coin-operated amusement device arcade license. All coin operated
amusement device arcade licenses shall be in the form as the Village of
Pinckney may prescribe and shall contain the owner's name, address, place of
business, number of coin-operated amusement devices allowed on the premises and
the date of expiration of the license. The license shall be issued to a
specific person, firm, association, partnership or corporation and is deemed
nontransferable.
(Ord. 28, passed 10-11-1982)
§ 111.07 COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE ARCADE LICENSE FEE, TERM, RENEWAL AND
ADDITIONAL COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND RELOCATION OF DEVICES.
   (A)   Fees. The fee to be paid upon granting of any coin-operated amusement
device arcade license or renewal thereof issued hereunder shall be as set forth
by the Village by resolution.
   (B)   Term. The term of any coin-operated amusement device arcade license
shall begin November 1 of the license year and shall terminate on October 31 of
the following year. Original coin-operated amusement device arcade licenses
shall be issued for the balance of the license year at the full license fee.
   (C)   Renewal. Application for renewal of any coin-operated amusement device
arcade license shall be in a form prescribed by the Village of Pinckney and be
filed with the Village Clerk no later than 30 days prior to the annual
expiration date. The Village Clerk shall not renew a coin-operated amusement
device arcade license until he or she has determined that the owner remains
eligible to receive a renewal and that the premises referred to in the license
are in compliance with all applicable provisions of the ordinance or laws of
the Village of Pinckney and the State of Michigan. In the event of a non-
renewal decision by the Village Clerk, the owner shall be allowed an
opportunity for hearing before the Village Council. If an owner is denied a
renewal of a license and requests a hearing before the Village Council, then
the existing license does not expire until a final decision is made by the
Village Council.
(Ord. 28, passed 10-11-1982)
§ 111.08 COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No coin-operated amusement device shall be kept, maintained or operated in
the Village of Pinckney without the owner first obtaining a license or renewal
thereof from the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 28, passed 10-11-1982) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.09 COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a coin-operated amusement device license shall be made
to the Village Clerk on a form prescribed by the Village Clerk together with an
application fee as is hereafter provided by resolution of the Village of
Pinckney. The application shall include the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner, if an individual or if a
partnership, association or other entity, the names and addresses of each
member of the partnership, association or other entity, or is a corporation,
the names and addresses of its officers.
      (2)   A diagram showing a floor plan of the premises in which the coin-
operated amusement device will be located, showing all exits and the proposed
location of each coin-operated amusement device.
   (B)   If the applicant for the license is a corporation authorized to do
business in the State of Michigan, the application shall be made by the
authorized agent of the corporation who will have principal charge of the
premises, and the agent shall set forth on the application all of the
statements as are required in the case of an individual.
(Ord. 28, passed 10-11-1982)
§ 111.10 COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE; INSPECTION OF PREMISES.
   Before the issuance of a coin-operated amusement device license, the Village
of Pinckney shall transmit the application to the Chief of Police for further
inspection and investigation of the owners’ fitness to obtain a coin-operated
amusement device license. Fitness of the owner shall consist of the compliance
by the owner and the premises with all applicable ordinances of the Village of
Pinckney and the State of Michigan pertaining to the operation of a device and
place of business.
(Ord. 28, passed 10-11-1982)
§ 111.11 COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE; DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   No coin-operated amusement device license shall be issued:
   (A)   Where the owner or managing agent of a corporation has been convicted
of a crime involving a controlled substance, alcohol, minor, moral turpitude or
the operation of a coin-operated amusement device, within a five-year period
preceding the application;
   (B)   Where the premises fails to comply with the pertinent provisions of
the ordinances or laws of the Village of Pinckney or the State of Michigan; and
   (C)   Where the location of such does not provide for safe ingress or egress
within the premises.
(Ord. 28, passed 10-11-1982) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.12 COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE; GRANTING OF LICENSE.
   The Village of Pinckney, upon receiving the application, if presented in due
form, shall pass upon the same within 60 days, following receipt of the
application and if satisfied that the application possesses the qualifications
herein prescribed and the premises conform to the requirements hereof, shall
issue the coin-operated amusement device license. All coin-operated amusement
device licenses shall be in such form as the Village Clerk prescribes and shall
contain the owners name, address, place of business, number of coin-operated
amusement devices allowed on the premises and the date of expiration of the
license. The license shall be issued to a specific person, firm, association,
partnership or corporation and is deemed non-transferable.
(Ord. 28, passed 10-11-1982)
§ 111.13 COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE LICENSE FEES, TERM, RENEWAL AND
ADDITIONAL COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND RELOCATION OF DEVICES.
   (A)   Fees. The fees to be paid upon granting of any coin-operated amusement
device license or renewal thereof issued hereunder shall be as set forth by the
Village by resolution providing no more than four devices are permitted on a
premises.
   (B)   Term. The term of any coin-operated amusement device license shall
begin November 1 of the license year and shall terminate on October 31 of the
following year. Original coin-operated amusement device licenses shall be
issued for the balance of the license year at the full license fee.
   (C)   Renewal. Application for renewal of any coin-operated amusement device
license shall be in a form prescribed by the Village Clerk and be filed with
the Clerk no later than 30 days prior to the annual expiration date. The
Village Clerk shall not renew a coin-operated amusement device license until he
or she has determined that the owner remains eligible to receive a renewal and
that the premises referred to in the license is in compliance with all
applicable provisions of the ordinances or laws of the Village of Pinckney and
the State of Michigan. In the event of a non-renewal decision by the Village
Clerk, the owner shall be allowed an opportunity for hearing before the Village
Council. If an owner is denied a renewal of a license and requests a hearing
before the Village Council, then the existing license does not expire until a
final decision is made by the Village Council.
   (D)   Additional coin-operated devices and relocation of devices. If, after
issuance of any coin-operated amusement device license, the owner desires to
operate additional coin-operated devices up to a maximum of four devices, or to
relocate those devices already in place, the owner shall submit an amended
application to the Village Clerk showing the additions, changes or
modifications desired.
(Ord. 28, passed 10-11-1982)
§ 111.14 REGULATIONS GOVERNING COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE ARCADES AND COIN-
OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
   (A)   Each owner shall, at all times, open each and every portion of the
premises for inspection by the Police, Fire and other village Departments for
the purpose of enforcing any provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Each owner shall, at all times, display the license granted hereunder
in a conspicuous place near the entrance to the licensed establishment.
   (C)   Each owner shall have present on the premises at least one adult
manager or employee at all times that the premises are open to the public, who
has not been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude and who has been so
certified by the Pinckney Police Department.
(Ord. 28, passed 10-11-1982)
§ 111.15 CONDUCT ON THE PREMISES OF COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE ARCADES AND
THOSE CONTAINING COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
   No owner, by himself or herself, directly or indirectly, or by any servant,
agent or employee shall:
   (A)   Permit any indecent, immoral or profane language, or indecent, immoral
or disorderly conduct;
   (B)   Permit gambling or the use, possession or presence of gambling
paraphernalia in the premises;
   (C)   Permit intoxicated persons in the premises;
   (D)   Permit the possession or use of any alcoholic liquor in the premises.
This provision shall not apply while a Michigan Liquor Control Commission
License is in effect at the licensed premises;
   (E)   Permit the use of any controlled substance or narcotic, including
marijuana, on the premises; and
   (F)   Permit the premises to constitute a public nuisance.
(Ord. 28, passed 10-11-1982) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.16 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE ARCADE
LICENSE OR COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE LICENSE.
   All licenses issued to the provisions of this subchapter are subject to
suspension or revocation by the Chief of Police for the violation of any of the
provisions hereof, the ordinances of the Village of Pinckney or the laws of the
State of Michigan. Before the commencement of proceedings for suspension or
revocation, the Village Chief of Police shall give notice, personally or by
mail, to the owner of the facts or conduct which warrant the intended action.
The owner shall be given the opportunity to show compliance with all lawful
requirements for retention of the license. If the Village Chief of Police finds
that the public health, safety or welfare requires emergency action and
incorporates this finding in his or her order, summary suspension of a license
may be ordered effective on the date specified in the order or in the service
of a certified copy on the owner, whichever is later and effective during the
proceedings. The proceedings shall be promptly commenced and determined.
(Ord. 28, passed 10-11-1982)
RULES AND REGULATIONS OF RECREATION FACILITIES
§ 111.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHAIRPERSON. The chairperson of the Parks and Recreation Committee or his or
her authorized representative.
   GOVERNING BODY. The governing body shall be the Parks and Recreation
Committee.
   PERMISSION. In writing unless otherwise specified.
   RECREATION FACILITIES. Any or all bodies of water, grounds, buildings,
structure, equipment, machinery or other appurtenance owned, managed,
controlled or operated by the Village of Pinckney.
(Ord. 26, passed 8-11-1980)
§ 111.31 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Chairperson, his or her authorized representative and/or village
police shall enforce the provisions hereof and shall have the authority to
eject from the village's recreational facilities any person acting in violation
of these rules and regulations. Further, the Chairperson, his or her authorized
representative and/or village police shall have the authority to deny use of
facilities to individuals or groups who refuse to comply with these rules and
regulations.
   (B)   All persons entering upon land or water owned, managed, controlled or
operated by the Village of Pinckney shall abide by the rules and regulations of
the Village of Pinckney, County of Livingston and State of Michigan, and
federal laws and the instructions and directions of duly authorized employees
of the Village of Pinckney.
(Ord. 26, passed 8-11-1980)
§ 111.32 RULES.
   (A)   Hours of use. Park areas will be closed from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
daily. Lighted fields and courts will be closed as specified. It shall be
unlawful for any person to enter, loiter or remain in or on any Village of
Pinckney facility after the facility is closed for public use except as may
otherwise be posted or with permission of the Chairperson or his or her
authorized representative.
   (B)   Care of public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to mark,
deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove or attach to, any
building, bridges, tables, benches, fencing, paving or, paving material, water
lines or other public utilities, or parts of appurtenances thereof; signs,
notices placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or
other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities of Village
of Pinckney property whatsoever, either real or personal.
   (C)   Restrooms, dressing rooms and washrooms. Male persons shall not resort
to any restroom and washroom facilities set apart for women and female persons
shall not resort to restroom and washroom facilities set apart for men,
provided, that this shall not apply to children accompanied by an adult person.
Further, no person shall loiter in or about the facilities nor shall any person
use the facilities for purposes other than those intended.
   (D)   Care of trees, shrubbery and lawns. It shall be unlawful for any
person to misuse, damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree, plant,
wood turf or ground cover, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant,
or attach any rope, wire or other object to any tree or plant, except as
authorized.
   (E)   Climbing trees or other objects. It shall be unlawful for any person
to climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, fountains, railing,
fences or upon other property not designated or customarily used for the
purposes.
   (F)   Care of wild life. It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt,
molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw objects at any
animal, reptile or bird except for normal protective action against dangerous
animals and poisonous reptiles, or pick, harm or destroy the natural plants,
flowers, shrubs or wild life.
   (G)   Fishing. It shall be unlawful for any person to take or collect fish
or any other marine life except in areas and at times designated under law by
the Department of Natural Resources, State of Michigan.
   (H)   Possession of firearms and other weapons. It shall be unlawful for a
person, other than peace officers and authorized staff in the discharge of
their duties, to use, carry or possess firearms, air rifles, BB guns, bow and
arrows, cross bows, spears, slings or any other dangerous weapons, except in
specific times set aside for the uses.
   (I)   Refuse, trash and litter. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump,
deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, bottle
caps, cartons, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or any other trash except that
incidental to the use of the facility (land or water) and which must be
deposited in the receptacles provided.
   (J)   Advertising matter. It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute,
circulate, give away, throw or deposit in or on any Village of Pinckney
facility any handbills, circulars, pamphlets, papers or advertisements or post
the same to any tree, fence or structure in any Village of Pinckney facility
without permission of the Chairperson. The permission shall be granted upon
satisfactory showing that no public nuisance shall be created.
   (K)   Automobiles and other wheeled vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate or drive an automobile, bicycle, motorcycle, truck trailer,
motor scooter, snowmobile or ATV on other than roads, riding trails or paths
designated for the purpose, except with permission of the Chairperson. A
bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy
area and walkway reserved for pedestrian use. Automobiles, bicycles,
motorcycles, trucks, trailers, motor scooters, snowmobiles or ATV's shall at
all times be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of others. In no
event shall the maximum speed of any conveyance exceed ten mph except as
otherwise designated. All the conveyances when left unattended shall be parked
in an area and manner designated. No conveyances shall be left unattended in
any place or position where other persons may trip over or be injured by them.
At no time shall maintenance work, or washing of vehicles take place in or on
Village of Pinckney parks.
   (L)   Control of dogs or other animals. No horse or other animal except dogs
or cats shall be permitted in or upon land or water owned, managed, controlled
or operated by the Village of Pinckney. A dog or cat must be under full and
proper control by the person responsible for the animal on a leash of no more
than six feet in length.
   (M)   Abandonment of dogs, cats or other animals. Persons shall not leave or
deposit dogs, cats or other animals or fowl or fish, whether dead or alive,
within the boundaries of land or water owned, managed, controlled or operated
by the Village of Pinckney.
   (N)   Building of fires. No person, other than one acting under
authorization, direction or permission of the Chairperson, shall build, light,
kindle or maintain any open or outdoor fire at any place within the boundaries
of land or water owned, managed, controlled or operated by the Village of
Pinckney, except in areas or facilities specifically built and designated for
this purpose.
   (O)   Alcoholic beverages. No person shall sell, serve or cause to be
served, consume or possess alcoholic beverages of any kind whatsoever on or
about any Village of Pinckney facility on village maintained or owned parks,
unless authorized by the Village of Pinckney Council.
   (P)   Duplication of keys. No person other than one acting under
authorization, direction or permission of the Chairperson shall duplicate keys
used for padlocks, door locks or other of any type or description.
   (Q)   Horseback riding. No person other than one acting under authorization
or direction of the Chairperson or his or her authorized representative shall
ride a horse, pony or animal of any description onto or over land owned,
managed, controlled or operated by the Village of Pinckeny other than upon
roads, trails and areas and at times designated for horseback riding.
   (R)   Model crafts. No person shall operate powered, line attached model
crafts or remote controlled crafts of any kind or description including
airplanes, boats, automobiles on or over land or water owned, managed,
controlled or operated by the Village of Pinckney except in areas set aside for
those specific activities.
   (S)   Appropriation or encumbrance of real property. No person shall enter
upon any of the public land, water front or submerged lands or any other lands
belonging to or held by the Village of Pinckney and dig up the earth or deposit
any earth, rock or other substances or shall erect or attempt to erect any
structures of any kind, or in any other manner appropriate or encumber any
portion of the real estate belonging to or held by the Village of Pinckney
unless the person shall have first obtained proper authority to do so.
   (T)   Limitations on active sports and games. The playing or engaging in an
active sport or game is to be done on areas suitable and set apart for the use,
and with suitable equipment and performed in a manner as to provide for
reasonable protection to both individuals and property.
   (U)   Washing or repairing autos or other conveyances. Washing or repairing
of any private individual's automobiles is not allowed except for certain group
activities as approved by the Chairperson.
   (V)   Wearing of proper footgear. No person shall wear footgear that will
damage, injure or create need for excessive maintenance on any field, court,
deck, floor, turf or specialized surface prepared for particular games or
activities. In areas posted with a sign specifying footgear authorized or
approved, it shall be unlawful for any person to enter any area other than with
the footgear so designated.
   (W)   Boating. All persons operating a boat on water owned, managed,
controlled or operated by the Village of Pinckney shall comply with conditions,
limitations and all applicable laws contingent to the body of water used.
   (X)   Limitations on swimming. No person shall enter any body of water
owned, managed, controlled or operated by the Village of Pinckney for the
purposes of swimming, wading or bathing except in those areas and times
designated.
   (Y)   Overnight parking. No person shall park, abandon or otherwise allow to
remain, automobiles and other conveyances in the Village of Pinckney
recreational facilities between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; except
with permission of the Chairperson or as otherwise posted. Any automobile or
other conveyance parked, abandoned or otherwise allowed to remain in the
Village of Pinckney recreation facilities after 10:00 p.m. without permission
will, unless otherwise posted, be deemed to be unlawfully parked or left
standing and the vehicle may be ordered towed away.
   (Z)   Water pollution. No person shall pollute in any way, any water owned,
managed, controlled or operated by the Village of Pinckney. No person shall
deposit or cause to be deposited any foreign material such as glass, metal,
paper, garbage, waste or rubbish or any kind in the waters, or alter the
chemical balance so as to cause harm to any marine life or the health of
humans.
   (AA)   Unintended use of facilities. No person, group or organization shall
use of Village of Pinckney facility for a purpose other than that for which it
is intended by the Village of Pinckney except with permission of the
Chairperson.
(Ord. 26, passed 8-11-1980) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.33 USE PERMITS AND FEES.
   (A)   Persons using a Village of Pinckney facility or equipment subject to a
fee or service charge may only use such upon paying the proper amount for the
corresponding time and period.
   (B)   Further, persons using a facility which is subject to reservation by
permit, but who do not possess the permit shall vacate the facility when
holders of permits present themselves.
(Ord. 26, passed 8-11-1980)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision §§
111.01 et seq. is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to
payment of a civil fine as specified in §
131.57, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. Repeat offenses
shall be subject to increased fines as provided by
Chapter 131 herein.
   (C)    (1)   Violation of any provisions or rules of §§
111.30 et seq. shall be considered a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of up
to $100 and/or 90 days in jail. Each day that a violation shall continue shall
be considered a separate offense and punishable by the full penalties provided
herein.
      (2)   In addition to the penalties provided for violating its provisions,
any person convicted of an act of vandalism shall reimburse the Village of
Pinckney for up to three times the amount of the damage as determined by the
court. In every case of conviction for the offenses, the court before whom the
conviction is obtained, shall enter judgment in favor of the Village of
Pinckney and against the defendant for liquidated damages in a sum as provided
above. The Village of Pinckney shall, with the assistance of the prosecuting
attorney, collect the award by execution or otherwise. If two or more
defendants are convicted of the vandalism, the judgment for damages shall be
entered against them jointly. If the defendant is a minor, the judgment shall
be entered against his or her parents.
      (3)   Upon collection, the sums shall be credited, to the general fund of
the Village of Pinckney and shall be used for repairs and improvements to the
parks.
(Ord. 26, passed 8-11-1980; Ord. 28, passed 10-11-1982; Ord. passed 5-22-2000)
CHAPTER 112: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Short title
   
112.02   Purpose
   
112.03   Definitions
   
112.04   Undefined words or terms
Rules and Regulations
   
112.20   Rate regulation; adoption of F.C.C. rules and/or regulations
   
112.21   Designation of Cable Franchising Authority
   
112.22   Regulated cable operators
   
112.23   Submission of existing rate schedule
   
112.24   Franchising Authority; existing rate review
   
112.25   Regulation of rate increases
   
112.26   Franchise Authority rate increase review
   
112.27   Tolling order
   
112.28   Public hearing
   
112.29   Public hearing notice
   
112.30   Franchising Authority decision on review of existing rates or proposed
rate increase
   
112.31   Refund hearing
   
112.32   Refund hearing; decision
   
112.33   Notice of Franchising Authority decisions
   
112.34   Proprietary information and product documents
   
112.35   Cable Television Commission
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter may be known and referred to as the Village of Pinckney Cable
Television Rate Regulation Ordinance.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate rates of cable television basic
service and associated equipment through adoption of regulations consistent
with the provisions of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended,
including the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992,
Pub. Law No. 102-385 and the Federal Communication Commission's rules and/or
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto; and to provide procedures applicable
to rate regulation which offer a reasonable opportunity for comment by
interested parties.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended, specifically
including the amendments contained in the Cable Television Consumer Protection
and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. Law No. 102-385.
   ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT. Equipment used by a subscriber to receive basic
service cable programming regardless of whether the equipment is also used to
receive other tiers of regulated programming service and/or unregulated tiers
of programming service(s). ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT includes, but is not limited
to:
      (1)   Converter boxes;
      (2)   Remote control units;
      (3)   Connections for additional television receivers; and
      (4)   Other cable home wiring.
   BASIC SERVICE. The level or tier of cable television programming which
includes, at a minimum, all signals of domestic television broadcast stations
provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily transmitted by
satellite carrier beyond the local service area of the station, regardless of
how the signal is ultimately received by the cable system), a public,
educational and/or governmental programming required by the Franchise Authority
to be carried as a basic service and any additional video programming signals
added to the basic service by the Regulated Cable Operator.
   CABLE TELEVISION COMMISSION. The agent of the Franchising Authority with all
the powers of the Franchising Authority.
   EXISTING RATES. The rates for basic service and associated equipment charged
by a regulated cable operator on the initial date of regulation by the
Franchising Authority.
   F.C.C. The United States Federal Communications Commission.
   F.C.C. RULES and/or REGULATIONS. Any and all rules and/or regulations which
the F.C.C. promulgates and/or adopts pursuant to the Act.
   FRANCHISING AUTHORITY. The Village Council.
   ORDINANCE. This Cable Television Basic Service Regulation Ordinance.
   RATE INCREASE. An increase in rates for basic service and/or associated
equipment including among others increases in rates that are the result of
reductions in programming provided under the basic service.
     REGULATED CABLE OPERATOR. Any operator of a cable television system that
is subject to regulation by a Certified Franchising Authority.
   VILLAGE. The general law Village of Pinckney.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.04 UNDEFINED WORDS OR TERMS.
   Any word or term which is not specifically defined in §
112.03 shall be given its normal, ordinary meaning. Provided that any word or
term which is used in this chapter and which is not specifically defined in §
112.03 but is defined in F.C.C. rules and/or regulations, shall have the
meaning given to the word or term in the F.C.C. rules and/or regulations.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 112.20 RATE REGULATION; ADOPTION OF F.C.C. RULES AND/OR REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The village, by this reference, hereby adopts all rules and/or
regulations regarding basic service rates and associated equipment rates which
the F.C.C. promulgates pursuant to the Act, and makes the rules and/or
regulations part of this chapter.
   (B)   The village has submitted an application to the F.C.C. for
certification as a cable Franchising Authority pursuant to the Act. Upon
certification as a cable Franchising Authority, the village shall regulate the
basic service rates and associated equipment rates in compliance with the Act,
the F.C.C. rules and/or regulations and this chapter.
   (C)   Upon receiving its certification, the Franchising Authority shall send
written notice of its certification and notice that it has adopted the required
regulations, return receipt requested, to all regulated cable operators within
the village. The date upon which the Franchising Authority gives this notice is
the initial date of regulation.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.21 DESIGNATION OF CABLE FRANCHISING AUTHORITY.
    Effective upon certification of the village as a cable Franchising
Authority, the Village Council is hereby designated as the cable Franchising
Authority for the village and shall execute the powers, duties and
responsibilities given to the Cable Franchising Authority in this chapter, the
Act and the F.C.C. rules and/or regulations, unless a Cable Television
Commission is established and the Cable Television Commission shall be the
agent for the Village Council and shall have all the powers designated to the
Franchising Authority.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.22 REGULATED CABLE OPERATORS.
   (A)   A regulated cable operator shall comply with all duties and
obligations imposed upon the regulated cable operator by the Act, F.C.C. rules
and/or regulations and this chapter.
   (B)   A regulated cable operator has the burden of proving that its
submitted existing rates or a proposed rate increase comply with the Act and
F.C.C. rules and/or regulations.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.23 SUBMISSION OF EXISTING RATE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Within 30 days of receiving the notice identified in §
112.20, a regulated cable operator shall submit an original and eight copies of
a written schedule of the regulated cable operator's existing rates to the
Franchising Authority. The schedules shall be addressed in care of the Village
Clerk.
   (B)   The schedule(s) identified in division (A) above shall contain a
detailed statement explaining whether the regulated cable operator's existing
rates comply with existing F.C.C. rules and/or regulations for basic service
rates and associated equipment rates.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the existing basic service rate and associated
equipment rate schedule(s), the Village Clerk shall provide the schedule(s) to
the Franchising Authority or its agent, within seven days.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.24 FRANCHISING AUTHORITY; EXISTING RATE REVIEW.
   (A)   Unless the time for conducting the public hearing and entering a
decision is extended by the issuance of a Tolling Order by the Franchising
Authority pursuant to §
112.23, the Franchising Authority shall hold a public hearing on the existing
rate schedule(s) which the regulated cable operator submitted to the
Franchising Authority, and enter a decision on the submitted schedule(s) within
30 days of the date the Village Clerk received the schedules(s). If the time
for conducting the public hearing is extended pursuant to §
112.23, a public hearing should be held and decision rendered before the
extended time period expires.
   (B)   The existing rates identified in the submitted schedule(s) of rates
shall go into effect 30 days from the date of the Village Clerk's receipt of
the schedule(s) unless the Franchising Authority disapproves the rate or
extends the time period for conducting the review of existing rates pursuant to
§
112.23.
   (C)   If the Franchising Authority fails to act on the submitted existing
rates by the end of the respective tolling period, then the rates will remain
in effect. If the Franchising Authority subsequently disapproves any portion of
the rates, refunds may not be ordered unless a brief written order is issued by
the Franchising Authority before the end of the respective tolling period
directing the regulated cable operator to keep an accurate accounting of all
its customers and the amounts paid by each as a result of the rates.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.25 REGULATION OF RATE INCREASES.
   (A)   A regulated cable operator cannot institute a rate increase charged to
its subscribers unless the regulated cable operator complies with the Act,
F.C.C. rules and/or regulations of this chapter.
   (B)   A regulated cable operator which proposes a rate increase must submit
at least eight copies of the proposed rate increase(s) request to the
Franchising Authority in care of the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.26 FRANCHISE AUTHORITY RATE INCREASE REVIEW.
   (A)   Unless the time for conducting the public hearing and entering a
decision is extended by the issuance of a Tolling Order by the Franchising
Authority pursuant to §
112.23, the Franchising Authority shall conduct a public hearing and render a
decision upon the regulated cable operator's proposed rate increase request
within 30 days of the Village Clerk's receipt of a proposed rate increase
request. If the time for holding the public hearing is extended pursuant to §
112.23, the public hearing should be held and a decision rendered, before the
extended time period expires.
   (B)   A proposed rate increase requested by a regulated cable operator will
become effective after 30 days have elapsed from the date the Village Clerk
received the proposed rate increase request unless the Franchising Authority
disproves the proposed rate increase or extends the time period for conducting
the review of the proposed rate increase pursuant to §
112.23.
   (C)   If the Franchising Authority allows rate increases to go into effect
at the end of the respective tolling period through inaction and then
subsequently disapproves any portion of the rates, then refunds may not be
ordered unless a brief written order is issued by the Franchising Authority
before the end of the respective tolling period, directing the regulated cable
operator to keep an accurate accounting of all its customers and the amounts
paid by each as a result of the rates.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.27 TOLLING ORDER.
   (A)   If the Franchising Authority is unable to determine, based upon the
material submitted by the regulated cable operator, that the existing rates or
proposed rate increase(s) are reasonable or if the regulated cable operator has
submitted a cost of service showing, then the Franchising Authority may toll
the 30-day deadline for an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost of
service showings.
   (B)   In order for the Franchising Authority to toll the 30-day period
pursuant to §
112.23, the Franchising Authority must issue an order explaining that
additional time and/or information is necessary in order for the Franchising
Authority to act upon the existing rates or the proposed rate increase. The
order must be in writing, by resolution adopted within the 30-day period.
   (C)   The Franchising Authority shall send a copy of the tolling order to
the regulated cable operator by first class mail within seven days after the
effective date of the decision.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.28 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   During the public hearing on the review of a regulated cable
operator's existing rates or on review of a proposed rate increase, the
Franchising Authority shall provide the regulated cable operator and all other
interested persons with the opportunity to comment on the rates either in
person, in writing or by agent.
   (B)   The Franchising Authority may conduct as many public hearings as
necessary to carry out the provisions of the Act, F.C.C. rules and/or
regulations and this chapter.
   (C)   If the Franchising Authority deems it necessary, either prior to or
following a public hearing, the Franchising Authority may direct the
preparation of a written report for the Franchising Authority. This report may
contain recommendation to the Franchising Authority for its decision on the
review of the existing rate schedule(s) or proposed rate request submitted by a
regulated cable operator. This recommendation should also summarize and be
based upon the schedule or request submitted by the regulated cable operator,
comments or objections to the schedule or request which the Franchising
Authority received from the regulated cable operator, any additional
information received from the regulated cable operator, information which the
Franchising Authority received from a consultant, its staff or its attorney and
other information which it deems appropriate.
   (D)   The Franchising Authority shall send, by first class mail, a copy of
any report to the regulated cable operator prior to the Franchising Authority's
consideration of the report at a public hearing.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.29 PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE.
   (A)   The Franchising Authority shall send a written notice of the date,
time and location of the public hearing to the regulated cable operator which
submitted the existing rates or proposed rate increase for review no less than
seven days before the date of the public hearing. The notice is to be sent to
the regulated cable operator by first class mail.
   (B)   The Franchising Authority shall cause to be published, in a qualified
newspaper of general circulation within the village, a notice of the public
hearing on the existing rate schedule(s) or proposed rate increase request no
less than seven days before the public hearing. The notice shall:
      (1)   State that a regulated cable operator has submitted the existing
rate schedule(s) or proposed rate increase request to the Franchising Authority
for review pursuant to this chapter;
      (2)   State the location and times at which the public may examine the
submitted schedule(s) of existing rates or proposed rate increase request;
      (3)   State the date, time and location at which the Franchising
Authority will conduct the public hearing; and
      (4)   State that all interested persons shall have an opportunity to
comment on the rates at the public hearing, and/or to submit written comments
on or before the date of the public hearing to the Franchising Authority.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.30 FRANCHISING AUTHORITY DECISION ON REVIEW OF EXISTING RATES OR PROPOSED
RATE INCREASE.
   The Franchising Authority shall issue a written order supported by its
reasons, by resolution which:
   (A)   Approves the regulated cable operator's existing rate or proposed rate
increase;
   (B)   Disapproves the regulated cable operator's existing rate or proposed
rate increase;
   (C)   Approves, in part, and disapproves, in part, the regulated cable
operator's existing rate or proposed rate increase;
   (D)   Orders a rate reduction;
   (E)   Prescribes a reasonable rate;
   (F)   Determines that a refund hearing should be held pursuant to §
112.31; and/or
   (G)   Orders any further appropriate relief permitted by this chapter, the
act or the F.C.C. rules and/or regulations.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.31 REFUND HEARING.
   (A)   If the Franchising Authority determines that the subscribers to a
regulated cable operator may be entitled to a refund pursuant to F.C.C. rules
and/or regulations (specifically 47 C.F.R. § 76.942), the Franchising Authority
shall include a notice in its decision issued pursuant to §
112.30, that the Franchising Authority will hold a public hearing to consider
ordering the regulated cable operator to make a refund to subscribers.
   (B)   The Franchising Authority shall then conduct a public hearing to
determine whether to order a refund to subscribers and the amount of the
refund.
   (C)   The Franchising Authority shall send, by first class mail, to the
regulated cable operator, written notice of the date, time and location of the
public hearing. The notice must be sent no less than seven days before the
public hearing.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.32 REFUND HEARING; DECISION.
   (A)   Refund hearing. At any refund hearing, the regulated cable operator
may appear in person, by agent or in writing to comment upon whether the
Franchising Authority should order a refund.
   (B)   Public. Members of the public may also comment at the refund hearing
in person, by agent or in writing.
   (C)   Authority refund. At the conclusion of the refund hearing, the
Franchising Authority shall issue a written order, by resolution:
      (1)   Denying a refund; or
      (2)   Ordering the regulated cable operator to implement.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.33 NOTICE OF FRANCHISING AUTHORITY DECISIONS.
   (A)   All decisions of the Franchising Authority issued pursuant to §
112.30 and/or §
112.32 of this chapter shall be:
      (1)   In writing, by resolution, supported by its reasons; and
      (2)   Effective as of the date the Franchising Authority makes the
decision.
   (B)   Notice of all decisions of the Franchising Authority issued pursuant
to §
112.30 and/or §
112.32 shall be published in a qualified newspaper of general circulation in
the village no less than 15 days after the effective date of the decision. The
notice shall include:
      (1)   A summary of the Franchising Authority’s decision;
      (2)   A statement that copies of the Franchising Authority decision are
available for public inspection; and
      (3)   A statement as to the location at which, and times during which,
the public may inspect copies of the Franchising Authority's decision.
   (C)   The Franchising Authority shall send, by first class mail, a copy of
the Franchising Authority's decision to the regulated cable operator not more
than seven days after the effective date of the Franchising Authority's
decision.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.34 PROPRIETARY INFORMATION AND PRODUCT DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   The Franchising Authority may require the regulated cable operator to
produce documents needed to make rate decisions.
   (B)   Requests that proprietary information be held confidential shall be
supported by the regulated cable operator and be handled in a manner analogous
to the procedures and criteria set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 0.459.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
§ 112.35 CABLE TELEVISION COMMISSION.
   The Franchising Authority may create a Cable Television Commission. The
Cable Television Commission shall have the same authority as the Franchising
Authority and shall act as the agent of the Village Council. The authority of
the Cable Television Commission may be created by an ordinance setting up the
Commission with the full authority of the franchising authority and with all of
the powers of the Village Council acting as its agent.
(Ord. 46, passed 11-8-1993)
CHAPTER 113: MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESSES REQUIRING A LICENSE
Section
Sexually-Oriented Business
   
113.01   Prohibiting nude entertainment
Marihuana Establishments
   
113.30   Purpose
   
113.31   Definitions
   
113.32   Acts prohibited
   
113.33   Authorization of marihuana establishments
   
113.34   Requirements and procedures for issuing municipal licenses
   
113.35   Application fee
   
113.36   Licenses generally
   
113.37   Renewals
   
113.38   License revocation or suspension
   
113.39   Criteria for nonrenewal, suspension, or revocation of license
 
   
113.40   Penalty
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS
§ 113.01 PROHIBITING NUDE ENTERTAINMENT.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, ALCOHOLIC COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT
shall mean any hotel, motel, tavern, restaurant, park, nightclub, cocktail
lounge, burlesque house, bar, cabaret, taproom or club, licensed by the State
of Michigan Liquor Control Commission or where alcoholic beverages, including
beer, are dispensed and consumed. This definition shall exclude any theater or
auditorium.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform in any alcoholic
commercial establishment as defined above, or for any person who owns or
operates premises constituting an alcoholic commercial establishment to
knowingly permit or allow to be performed therein, any of the following acts or
conduct:
      (1)   The public performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual
intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or
any sexual acts which are prohibited by law;
      (2)   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling on the
breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals in public; or
      (3)   The actual or simulated public displaying of the pubic hair, anus,
vulva or genitals.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, agent or employee of an
alcoholic commercial establishment to allow any female to appear in an
alcoholic commercial establishment so costumed or dressed that one or both
breasts are wholly or substantially exposed to public view. Topless or
bottomless or totally uncovered waitresses, bartenders or barmaids,
entertainers including dancers, impersonators, or any other form for the
attraction or entertainment of customers is strictly prohibited. Wholly or
substantially exposed to public view, as it pertains to breasts, shall mean the
showing of the female breast in an establishment with less than a fully opaque
covering of all portions of the areola and nipple.
   (D)   It shall further be unlawful for any employee, agent, servant or
contractor of an alcoholic commercial establishment to permit himself or
herself to be subjected to any of the acts prohibited in division (A) above by
any other persons, including but not limited to, customers, patrons or fellow
servants.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-12-1996) Penalty, see §
10.99
MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 113.30 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate recreational Marihuana
Establishments, consistent with the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of
Marihuana Act, 2018 IL 1, M.C.L.A. 333.27951 et seq. (hereafter referred to as
the "MRTMA"), The Village finds that these activities are significantly
connected to the public health, safety, security and welfare of its residents
and it is therefore necessary to regulate and enforce safety, security, fire,
policing, health and sanitation practices related to such activities. This
ordinance also provides a method to defray the costs incurred by such
regulation and enforcement.
   (B)   It is not the intent of this subchapter to diminish, abrogate or
restrict protections for the medical use of marihuana provided in the Michigan
Medical Marihuana Act. Nothing in this subchapter is intended to grant
individuals immunity from the enforcement of federal laws prohibiting marihuana
activity. The provisions of this subchapter are regulatory in nature and not
intended to be interpreted as zoning laws.
(Ord. 151, passed 11-23-2020; Ord. 152, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 113.31 DEFINITIONS.
   Words and phrases used herein shall have the definitions as provided for in
Initiated Law 1 of 2018, M.C.L.A. 333.27953 of the MRTMA, as the same may be
amended from time to time, which words and phrases are incorporated herein by
reference.
(Ord. 151, passed 11-23-2020; Ord. 152, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 113.32 ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a marihuana establishment in the village
without first obtaining a state license as per the State of Michigan Marihuana
Regulatory Agency (hereafter referred to as the “Agency”) and village license
pursuant to the MRTMA and in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
   (B)   A licensed marihuana establishment in the village shall be subject to
all applicable village zoning regulations including but not limited to site
plan, design, location, signage, parking, lot and building size, and occupancy,
as well as those regulations and building specifications unique to this type of
business.
(Ord. 151, passed 11-23-2020; Ord. 152, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 113.33 AUTHORIZATION OF MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS.
   Except as provided herein and pursuant to the MRTMA, the village shall
authorize the following number of state licensed marihuana establishments to
operate within its boundaries:
   (A)   Marihuana safety compliance facility - one license.
   (B)   Marihuana secure transporter - one license.
   (C)   Marihuana microbusiness - one license.
   (D)   Marihuana Class A microbusiness - one license.
   (E)   Marihuana retailer - one license.
   (F)   Marihuana processor - one license.
   (G)   Marihuana grower (any class) - one license.
(Ord. 151, passed 11-23-2020; Ord. 152, passed 11-23-2020; Ord. 157, passed 5-
10-2021; Ord. 171, passed 9-25-2023)
§ 113.34 REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES FOR ISSUING MUNICIPAL LICENSES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a marihuana establishment in the village
without a valid municipal license issued by the village pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   No person shall be issued a municipal license by the village without
first having obtained a special use permit authorizing the operation of the
establishment pursuant to the village zoning ordinance.
   (C)   No person who is employed by the village, acts as a consultant for the
village or acts as an advisor to the village, and is involved in the
implementation, administration or enforcement of this subchapter shall have an
interest, directly or indirectly, in a marihuana establishment.
   (D)   Every applicant for a municipal license to operate a marihuana
establishment shall file an application in the Village Clerk's office upon a
form provided by the village. The application shall include:
      (1)   The appropriate nonrefundable municipal license application fee in
the amount determined by the village;
      (2)   If the applicant is an individual, the applicant's name; date of
birth; Social Security number; physical address, including residential and any
business address; copy of government-issued photo identification; email
address; one or more phone numbers, including emergency contact information;
      (3)   If the applicant is not an individual, the names; dates of birth;
physical addresses, including residential and any business address; copy of
government-issued photo identifications; email address; and one or more phone
numbers of each stakeholder of the applicant, including designation of the
highest ranking representative as an emergency contact person; contact
information for the emergency contact person; articles of incorporation or
organization; assumed name registration; Internal Revenue Service EIN
confirmation letter; copy of the operating agreement of the applicant, if a
limited liability company; copy of the partnership agreement, if a partnership;
names and addresses of the beneficiaries, if a trust, or a copy of the bylaws
or shareholder agreement, if a corporation;
      (4)   The name and address of the proposed marihuana establishment;
      (5)   A copy of the special use permit issued by the village Planning
Commission;
      (6)   A location area map of the marihuana establishment and surrounding
area that identifies the relative locations and the distances (closest property
line to the subject marihuana establishment's building) to the closest real
property comprising a public or private elementary, vocational or secondary
school;
      (7)   A signed acknowledgment that the applicant is aware and understands
that all matters related to marihuana growing, cultivation, possession,
testing, safety compliance and transporting, are currently subject to state and
federal laws, rules and regulations, and that the approval or granting of a
license hereunder does not exonerate or exculpate the applicant from abiding by
the provisions and requirements and penalties associated with those laws,
rules, and regulations, or exposure to any penalties associated therewith; and
further, the applicant waives and forever releases any claim, demand, action,
legal redress, or recourse against the village, its elected and appointed
officials, and its employees and agents for any claims, damages, liabilities,
causes of action, damages, or attorney fees that the applicant may incur as a
result of the violation by the applicant, its stakeholders and agents of those
laws, rules, and regulations; and
      (8)   Any other information which may be required by the Village Clerk.
   (E)   Upon an applicant's completion of the above-described form and
furnishing of all required information and documentation, the Village Clerk
shall file the same and assign it a sequential application number by
establishment type based on the date and time of acceptance. The Village Clerk
shall act to approve or deny an application not later than 90 days from the
date the completed application is filed. If approved, the Village Clerk shall
issue the applicant a provisional license. A final license shall be approved by
Village Council after issuance by the state of Michigan of an operating
license. Such approval will occur at Council's regularly scheduled meeting
after village has received notice of state approval of an operating license.
   (F)   If the application is denied, the Village Clerk shall issue a written
notice of denial to the applicant and mail the same by first class mail to the
address for the applicant provided in the application.
   (G)   Should the Village Clerk deny an application, the applicant shall have
30 days from the mailing of the denial to appeal the denial to the Village
Council. To appeal the decision of the Village Clerk the applicant must file a
notice of appeal with the Village Clerk. Village Council shall hear the appeal
at its next regular meeting, but not sooner than seven days from the receipt of
the appeal.
   (H)   Maintaining a valid license issued by the state is a condition for the
maintenance of a license under this subchapter and continued operation of a
marihuana establishment. A provisional license does not authorize operations
until a final license is issued, which will only occur upon issuance of the
appropriate license by the state of Michigan and the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy.
   (I)   A license issued under this subchapter is not transferable without the
prior approval of the village under the same terms and conditions required for
the initial issuance of a license under this subchapter.
   (J)   The MRTMA in Section 9.4. (M.C.L.A. 333.27959 4.) requires that the
village establish a competitive process to select applicants who are best
suited to operate in compliance with the MRTMA and this subchapter, when more
than one applicant has applied for a single available license. The process for
scoring and ranking applications in competition shall be detailed in the
village's Marihuana business scoring and ranking policy. Pursuant to this
requirement the village requires that applicants provide:
      (1)   An estimate of the number and type of jobs that the marihuana
establishment is expected to create, and the amount and type of compensation
expected to be paid for such jobs;
      (2)   A business plan which contains, but is not limited to, the
following: The applicant's experience in operating other similarly permitted or
licensed businesses and the applicant's general business management experience;
The proposed ownership structure of the establishment, including percentage
ownership of each person or entity; A current organizational chart that
includes position descriptions and the names of each person holding each
position; Planned tangible capital investment in the village, including if
multiple permits are proposed, an explanation of the economic benefits to the
village and job creation, if any, to be achieved through the award of such
multiple permits, with supporting factual data; Expected job creation from the
proposed marihuana establishment(s); If a marihuana grower establishment is
proposed, the number of plants anticipated; Financial structure and financing
of the proposed marihuana establishment(s); and; Community outreach/education
plans and strategies.
      (3)   A written description of the training and education that the
applicant will provide to all employees, including planned continuing education
for existing employees. Further, a written description of the method(s) for
record retention of all training provided to existing and former employees; and
      (4)   A facility sanitation plan to protect against any marihuana being
ingested by any person or animal, indicating how the waste will be stored and
disposed of, and how any marihuana will be rendered unusable upon disposal.
Disposal by on-site burning or introduction into the sewerage system is
prohibited.
   (K)   Stacked license. A municipal license holder that is requesting an
initial Class C grower license or a municipal license holder that has been
issued a Class C grower license may apply for one or more stacked licenses at
the same municipally licensed premise subject to all requirements of the MRTMA,
administrative rules and local regulations. Each stacked license is subject to
all applicable fees for application and renewal. There are two categories for a
stacked license: minor or major.
      (1)   Stacked license - minor. A minor stacked license is one that does
not require changes to the municipally licensed premise or municipally licensed
property and does not require changes to the information provided in the
original Class C grower application. This license type does not require an
additional special land use approved by the Planning Commission and can be
approved by Village Council. A review by the Village Department of Public Works
in conjunction with the Village Engineer may be required to assess any
additional impact to water and wastewater capacity and treatment. Such review
would be paid for by the applicant.
      (2)   Stacked license - major. A major license is one that requires
changes to the municipally licensed premise or municipally licensed property
and/or has changes to the information provided in the original Class C grower
application; for example, changes to owner/operator information, alterations to
the premises or any site changes, among others. This license type must follow
all of the application requirements and approvals, including site plan review,
special use permits and any other requirements that may be imposed by the
village.
(Ord. 151, passed 11-23-2020; Ord. 152, passed 11-23-2020; Ord. 162, passed 9-
12-2022)
§ 113.35 APPLICATION FEE.
   (A)   The village shall establish a nonrefundable provisional license
application fee to be paid upon filing any application for a marihuana
establishment by a local applicant. The amount of the initial provisional
license application fee shall be set by Council annually as part of the village
fee schedule and to be paid to the village upon approval of a state operating
license issued by the agency for the license type at the business facility
address.
   (B)   The municipal license fee is in addition to any other fees required,
including but not limited to zoning fees.
(Ord. 151, passed 11-23-2020; Ord. 152, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 113.36 LICENSES GENERALLY.
   (A)   A village full license authorization that is issued under this Code,
and the state operating license shall be posted at all times inside the
marihuana establishment in a conspicuous location near the entrance.
   (B)   Except as provided in this Code, the term of a village full license
authorization shall be for one calendar year subject to renewal.
(Ord. 151, passed 11-23-2020; Ord. 152, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 113.37 RENEWALS.
   (A)   Provisional licenses shall be valid for one calendar year from the
date they are issued.
   (B)   Application for a village full license authorization renewal shall be
made in writing to the Clerk at least 90 days prior to the expiration of an
existing license. Licenses shall be renewed annually.
   (C)   An application for a provisional license renewal or a village full
license authorization renewal required by this Code shall be made under oath on
forms provided by the Clerk.
   (D)   An application for a provisional license renewal or a village full
license authorization renewal shall be accompanied by a renewal fee, which
shall be set by resolution of the Village Council, but shall not exceed $5,000.
(Ord. 151, passed 11-23-2020; Ord. 152, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 113.38 LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   Each marihuana establishment within the village for which a village full
license authorization is granted shall be operated and maintained in accordance
with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations in the village and state. Upon
any material violation of this Code that a local applicant has failed to
remedy, the Clerk may revoke or suspend such license as hereinafter provided.
The time allowed for remedy will depend upon the violation but shall be no
fewer than three days and no more than 14 days.
(Ord. 151, passed 11-23-2020; Ord. 152, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 113.39 CRITERIA FOR NONRENEWAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   In addition to any other reasons set forth in this Code, the village may
refuse to issue a license or grant renewal of the license or suspend or revoke
the license for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   A material violation of any provision of this Code that a license
holder has failed to remedy after being provided with sufficient time to make
the correction. Failure to meet the requirements of §
113.39 (C) of this Code shall be considered a material violation of this Code.
   (B)   The inability of the licensee or provisional license holder to obtain
or maintain a license from the agency pursuant to the MRTMA within one calendar
year after the issuance of a provisional license subject to.
   (C)   Failure of the licensee to demonstrate to the village that it has
complied with minimum business standards (see above).
(Ord. 151, passed 11-23-2020; Ord. 152, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 113.40 PENALTY.
   A person or entity who violates any of the provisions of §
113.30 through §
113.40 of this Code of Ordinances shall be responsible for a municipal civil
infraction punishable by a civil fine of no more than $500, as provided in §
10.99 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 151, passed 11-23-2020; Ord. 152, passed 11-23-2020)
CHAPTER 114: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
114.01   Purpose
   
114.02   Conflict
   
114.03   Terms defined
Permit
   
114.20   Permit required
   
114.21   Issuance of permit
   
114.22   Construction and/or engineering permit
Poles and Map
   
114.35   Conduit or utility poles
   
114.36   Route maps
   
114.37   Repair damage
Fees and Funds
   
114.50   Establishment and payment of maintenance fee
   
114.51   Modification of existing fees
   
114.52   Savings clause
   
114.53   Use of funds
Miscellaneous Provisions
   
114.70   Annual report
   
114.71   Cable television operators
   
114.72   Existing rights
   
114.73   Compliance
   
114.74   Reservation of police powers
   
114.75   Authorized village officials
 
   
114.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.01 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use of
public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §§
484.3101 through 484.3120) (Act) and other applicable law, and to ensure that
the village qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees
charged to providers and complying with the Act.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
§ 114.02 CONFLICT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict
with the Act or other applicable law.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
§ 114.03 TERMS DEFINED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ACT. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002, being M.C.L.A. §§
484.3101 through 484.3120), as amended from time to time.
      PERMIT. A non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this
chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the
village for its telecommunications facilities.
      VILLAGE. The Village of Pinckney.
      VILLAGE COUNCIL. The Village Council of the Village of Pinckney or its
designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or
function that is required by law to be made by the Village Council.
      VILLAGE PRESIDENT. The Village President or his or her designee.
   (B)   Defined words. All other terms used in this chapter shall have the
same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation
the following:
      AUTHORITY. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Authority created pursuant to § 3 of the Act.
      MPSC. The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of
Consumer and Industry Services and shall have the same meaning as the term
COMMISSION in the Act.
      PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity or any other legal entity.
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below or above a public roadway,
highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY does not
include a federal, state or private right-of-way.
      TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES. The equipment or personal
property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits,
pipes and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry,
amplify or provide telecommunication services or signals. TELECOMMUNICATION
FACILITIES or FACILITIES do not include antennas, supporting structures for
antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and
miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile
service as defined in § 332(d) of part I of title HI of the Communications Act
of 1934, Ch. 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. § 332 and further defined as
commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. § 20.3, and service provided by
any wireless, two-way communication device.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER and TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.
Those terms as defined in § 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991
Public Act 179, being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.2101 through 484.2701. TELECOMMUNICATION
PROVIDER does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when
providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in §
332(d) of part 1 of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064,
47 U.S.C. § 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47
C.F.R. § 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication
device. For the purpose of the Act and this chapter only, a PROVIDER also
includes all of the following:
         (a)   A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications
service;
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns
telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way; and
         (c)   A person providing broadband internet transport access service.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
PERMIT
§ 114.20 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the
village for its telecommunications, facilities shall apply for and obtain a
permit pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on
an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with § 6(1) of the Act.
A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the
Village Clerk and 1 copy with the Village President. Upon receipt, the Village
Clerk shall make two copies of the application and distribute a copy to the
head of the DPW and to the Chief of Police. Applications shall be complete and
include all information required by the Act, including, without limitation, a
route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed
facilities in accordance with § 6(5) of the Act.
   (C)   Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that
any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application
contain trade secret, proprietary or confidential information, which is exempt
from the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231
to 15.246, pursuant to § 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall
prominently so indicate on the face of each map.
   (D)   Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the
application shall be accompanied by a one time non-refundable application fee
in the amount of $500.
   (E)   Additional information. The Village President may request an applicant
to submit additional information which the Village President deems reasonably
necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all the requests in
compliance with reasonable deadlines for the additional information established
by the Village President. If the village and the applicant cannot agree on the
requirement of additional information requested by the village, the village or
the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in § 6(2) of the Act.
   (F)   Previously issued permits. Pursuant to § 5(1) of the Act,
authorizations or permits previously issued by the village under § 251 of the
Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991, M.C.L.A.§§ 484.2101
through 484.2701 and authorizations or permits issued by the village to
telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of § 251 of the
Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit
requirements of this chapter.
   (G)   Existing providers. Pursuant to § 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days
from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications
provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the village as of
the date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under §
251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 Public Act 179, M.C.L.A. §§
484.2101 through 484.2701, shall submit to the village an application for a
permit in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to § 5(3)
of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this
section is not required to pay the $500 application fee required under division
(D) above. A provider under this section shall be given up to an additional 180
days to submit the permit application if allowed by the Authority, as provided
in § 5(4) of the Act.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
§ 114.21 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application
for a permit is hereby delegated to the Village President. Pursuant to § 15(3)
of the Act, the Village President shall approve or deny an application for a
permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an
application for a permit under § 4(b) of this chapter for access to a public
right-of-way within the village. Pursuant to § 6(6) of the Act, the Village
President shall notify the MPSC when the Village President has granted or
denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the
application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The
Village President shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit.
   (B)   Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the Village
President shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or
without additional or different permit terms in accordance with § 6(1), 6(2)
and 15 of the Act.
   (C)   Conditions. Pursuant to § 15(4) of the Act, the Village President may
impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be
limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public
right-of-way.
   (D)   Bond requirement. Pursuant to § 15(3) of the Act, and without
limitation on division (C) above, the Village President may require that a bond
be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a
bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the
public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the
telecommunications provider's access and use.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
§ 114.22 CONSTRUCTION AND/OR ENGINEERING PERMIT.
   A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over,
across or under the public rights-of-way in the village without first obtaining
a construction or engineering permit as required under this chapter, for
construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for a
construction or engineering permit.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
POLES AND MAP
§ 114.35 CONDUIT OR UTILITY POLES.
   Pursuant to § 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees
required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a telecommunications
provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
§ 114.36 ROUTE MAPS.
   (A)   Pursuant to § 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall,
within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new
telecommunications facilities in the village, submit route maps showing the
location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the
village.
   (B)   The route maps should be in paper or electronic format unless and
until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with § 6(8) of the Act.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
§ 114.37 REPAIR DAMAGE.
   Pursuant to § 15(5) f the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an
excavation, construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a
public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the
village, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to
the street surface and all installations under, over, below or within the
public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its
preexisting condition.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
FEES AND FUNDS
§ 114.50 ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE FEE.
   In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the village set
forth in §
114.20(D) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications
facilities in the village's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual
maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to § 8 of the Act.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
§ 114.51 MODIFICATION OF EXISTING FEES.
   In compliance with the requirements of § 13(1) of the Act, the village
hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to
telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the
Act relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not
exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall
be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the requirements of § 13(4) of the
Act, the village also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers
with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the village's
boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under § 8 of
the Act. The village shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by
the fee with a copy of this chapter, in compliance with the requirement of § 13
(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers
in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise
inconsistent with the Act, the imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to
the village's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or
discovery by the village, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in
error.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
§ 114.52 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   Pursuant to § 13(5) of the Act, if § 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or
unconstitutional, the modification of fees under §
114.51 shall be void from the date the modification was made.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
§ 114.53 USE OF FUNDS.
   Pursuant to § 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the village from the
Authority shall be used by the village solely for rights-of-way related
purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the
village from the Authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or
the Local Street Fund maintained by the village under Public Act 51 of 1951,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 247.651 through 247.675.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 114.70 ANNUAL REPORT.
   Pursuant to § 10(5) o the Act, the Village President shall file an annual
report with the Authority on the use and disposition of funds annually
distributed by the Authority.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
§ 114.71 CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS.
   Pursuant to § 13(6) of the Act, the village shall not hold a cable
television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an
obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this
Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from
charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through
broadband internet transport access services.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
§ 114.72 EXISTING RIGHTS.
   Pursuant to § 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with
respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that a
telecommunications provider or the village may have under a permit issued by
the village or under a contract between the village and a telecommunications
provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
§ 114.73 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The village hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting
this chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the
provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that
purpose.
   (B)   The village shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the
Act, including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act,
Public Act 442 of 1976, M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in §
114.20(C);
      (2)   Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit
requirements hereof, in accordance with §
114.20(F);
      (3)   Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an
application for a permit and excusing the providers from the $500 application
fee, in accordance with §
114.20(G);
      (4)   Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days
from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit
for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the village, in
accordance with §
114.21(A);
      (5)   Notifying the MPSC when the village has granted or denied a permit,
in accordance with §
114.21(A);
      (6)   Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance
with §
114.21(A);
      (7)   Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in §
114.21(B);
      (8)   Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the
telecommunications provider access and usage of the public right-of-way, in
accordance with §
114.21(C);
      (9)   Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds
the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its
original condition during and after the telecommunication provider’s access and
use, in accordance with §
114.21(D);
      (10)   Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees
for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with §
114.22;
      (11)   Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the
village's right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with §
114.51;
      (12)   Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with §
114.70; and
      (13)   Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure
to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with §
114.71.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
§ 114.74 RESERVATION OF POLICE POWERS.
   Pursuant to § 5(2) of the Act, this chapter shall not limit the village's
right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and
ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the village's authority to ensure
and protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
§ 114.75 AUTHORIZED VILLAGE OFFICIALS.
   The Village President or a member of the Village Police Department is hereby
designated as the authorized village official to issue municipal civil
infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or
municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to
appear at the Municipal Chapter Violations Bureau) for violations under this
chapter as provided by the Village Code.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or
conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and
shall be subject to payment of a civil fine as specified in §
131.57, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. Repeat offenses
shall be subject to increased fines as provided by
Chapter 131 herein. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
remedies available to the village in the event of a violation by a person of
this chapter or a permit.
(Ord. 60, passed 2-24-2003)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
      
131.   INFRACTIONS
      
132.   CRIME
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
   
130.01   Unlawful to harass another with repetitive telephone calls
§ 130.01 UNLAWFUL TO HARASS ANOTHER WITH REPETITIVE TELEPHONE CALLS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to telephone any other
person repeatedly or cause any person to be telephoned repeatedly for the sole
purpose of harassing or molesting the other person or his or her family,
whether or not conversation ensues, except for telephone calls made for
legitimate business purposes.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to use any threatening,
vulgar, indecent, obscene, immoral or insulting language over any telephone.
(Ord. 7, passed 9-8-1966) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 131: INFRACTIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Title
   
131.02   Definitions
   
131.03   Title of Office
   
131.04   Interpretation of language
   
131.05   Grammatical interpretation
   
131.06   Acts by agents
   
131.07   Prohibited acts include causing and permitting
   
131.08   Computation of time
   
131.09   Construction
   
131.10   Repeal shall not revive any ordinances
Civil Infraction
   
131.25   Commencement of municipal civil infraction action
   
131.26   Service of municipal civil infraction violation notice
Violations Bureau
   
131.40   Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau
   
131.41   Authority of Bureau
Charges and Violations
   
131.55   Election of person charged with violation
   
131.56   Procedure for persons electing not to respond to municipal civil
infractions violations notice
   
131.57   Schedule of civil fines established
 
   
131.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 TITLE.
   The title of this chapter shall be the Village of Pinckney Municipal Civil
Infractions Ordinance.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000)
§ 131.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.101
through 600.9948, as amended.
   AUTHORIZED VILLAGE OFFICIAL. A police officer or other personnel of the
village authorized by this chapter or any ordinance to issue municipal civil
infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices.
   BUREAU. The Village of Pinckney Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau.
   COUNCIL. The Village Council of the Village of Pinckney.
   COUNTY. The County of Livingston.
   PERSON. A natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership,
association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization or the
manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of
debt.
   PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY. Real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY. Lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REPEAT OFFENSE. A determination of responsibility for a second, or any
subsequent, municipal civil infraction with regard to the same ordinance,
committed by the same person within any five year period, unless some other
period is specifically provided with regard to a specific ordinance.
   RESPONSIBLE or RESPONSIBILITY. A determination entered by a court or
magistrate that a person is in violation of an ordinance prescribed to be a
municipal civil infraction.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The State of Michigan.
   STREET. All streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places,
square, curbs or other public ways in the village which have been or may
hereafter be dedicated and open to public use or the other public property so
designated in any law of this state.
   TENANT and OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, includes any person who
occupies the whole or a part of the building or land, whether alone or with
others.
   VIOLATION. Any act which is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or
an offense under an ordinance, including affirmative acts as well as omissions
and/or failures to act where the act is required by an ordinance.
   WRITTEN. Printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multi-graphed or otherwise
reproduced in permanent visible form.
   YEAR. A calendar year.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000)
§ 131.03 TITLE OF OFFICE.
   Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission
means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the Village of
Pinckney.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000)
§ 131.04 INTERPRETATION OF LANGUAGE.
   All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and
approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and others as
may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be
construed and understood according to the peculiar and appropriate meaning.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000)
§ 131.05 GRAMMATICAL INTERPRETATION.
   The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the Village
of Pinckney, unless it is apparent from the context that a difference
construction is intended:
   (A)   Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter
genders.
   (B)   Singular and plural. The singular number includes the plural and the
plural includes the singular.
   (C)   Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the
future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000)
§ 131.06 ACTS BY AGENTS.
   When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be
done as well by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be
construed to include all the acts performed by an authorized agent.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000)
§ 131.07 PROHIBITED ACTS INCLUDE CAUSING AND PERMITTING.
   Whenever in the ordinances of the Village of Pinckney any act or omission is
made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding,
abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of the act or omission.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000)
§ 131.08 COMPUTATION OF TIME.
   Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to
be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last
day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be
excluded.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000)
§ 131.09 CONSTRUCTION.
   The provisions of the ordinances of the Village of Pinckney and all
proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects
and to promote justice.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000)
§ 131.10 REPEAL SHALL NOT REVIVE ANY ORDINANCES.
   The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an
ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000)
CIVIL INFRACTION
§ 131.25 COMMENCEMENT OF MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION.
   (A)   A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance
by an authorized official of either of the following:
      (1)   A municipal civil infraction citation directing the person alleged
to be responsible to appear in court; or
      (2)   A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the person
alleged to be responsible to appear at the Village of Pinckney Municipal
Ordinance Violations Bureau.
   (B)   The form of citations used to charge municipal civil infraction
violations shall be in accordance with state law (See M.C.L.A. § 600.8709).
   (C)   The basis for issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation shall
be as set forth below:
      (1)   An authorized official who witnesses a person violate an ordinance,
the violation of which is a municipal civil infraction, shall prepare and
subscribe as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and
three copies of a citation unless the official issues a municipal civil
infraction violation notice.
      (2)   An authorized official may issue a citation to a person if, based
upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that a person
is responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
      (3)   An authorized official may issue a citation to a person if, based
upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person
violate an ordinance a violation of which is a municipal civil infraction, the
official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and if the prosecuting attorney for the Village of
Pinckney approves in writing the issuance of the citation.
   (D)   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served in the following
manner:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided below, the authorized official shall
personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator.
      (2)   In a municipal civil infraction action involving the use or
occupancy of land or a building or other structure, a copy of the citation need
not be personally served upon the alleged violator but may be served upon an
owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy on the
land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of
the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land,
building or structure at the owner's last known address.
      (3)   A citation served as provided in division (D)(2) above, for a
violation involving the use or occupancy of land or a building or other
structure, shall be processed in the same manner as a citation served
personally upon a defendant.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000)
§ 131.26 SERVICE OF MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION NOTICE.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, an authorized official shall
personally serve a copy of the municipal civil infraction violation notice upon
an alleged visitor.
   (B)   In a municipal civil infraction action involving the use or occupancy
of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the municipal civil
infraction violation notice need not be personally served upon the alleged
violator but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or
structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building
or structure. In addition, a copy of the notice shall be sent by first class
mail to the owner of the land, building or structure at the owner's last known
address.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000)
VIOLATIONS BUREAU
§ 131.40 MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU.
   (A)   The Village of Pinckney hereby establishes a Municipal Ordinance
Violations Bureau (Bureau) as authorized under § 8396 of the Act to accept
admissions of responsibility and to collect and retain civil fines and costs
for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction
violation notices.
   (B)   Payments made to the Bureau shall be retained and accounted for as
fines and shall be deposited in the general fund.
   (C)   The Bureau shall be located at the Village of Pinckney Village Hall
and shall be under the supervision and control of the Village of Pinckney
Police Department; however, payments shall be made to the Village Treasurer or
the other village official designated by the Village Council.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000)
§ 131.41 AUTHORITY OF BUREAU.
   (A)   The Bureau is authorized to accept payment of fines in response to
municipal civil infraction violation notices, and shall not be authorized to
accept monies or admissions of responsibility in response to municipal civil
infraction citations.
   (B)   The Bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who
denies having committed a municipal civil infraction charged in a municipal
civil infraction violation notice.
   (C)   The Bureau shall not have authority or jurisdiction to determine, or
attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an
alleged violation.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000)
CHARGES AND VIOLATIONS
§ 131.55 ELECTION OF PERSON CHARGED WITH VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any person receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice
shall be permitted to dispose of the charge alleged in the notice by making
payment of the fine to the Bureau. However, a person shall have the right to
elect not to have the violation processed by the Bureau and to have the alleged
violation processed in a Court of competent jurisdiction. The unwillingness of
any person to dispose of a violation at the Bureau shall not prejudice the
person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and protection
accorded by law.
   (B)   A person electing to have the alleged violation processed at the
Bureau shall appear at the Bureau and pay the specified fine within the time
specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice.
The appearance may be made by mail, in person or by representation, provided if
appearance is made by mail, the person charged in the notice shall have the
responsibility for timely delivery of the fine within the time specified in the
municipal civil infraction violation ordinance.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000)
§ 131.56 PROCEDURE FOR PERSONS ELECTING NOT TO RESPOND TO MUNICIPAL CIVIL
INFRACTIONS VIOLATIONS NOTICE.
   In the event a person elects not to admit responsibility and pay the
specified civil fine prescribed for the respective violation, a municipal civil
infraction citation may be filed with the District Court, in which case a copy
of the citation shall be served by first class mail upon the person charged
with the municipal civil infraction at the person's last known address. The
citation filed with the court shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the
allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violations notice and shall
fairly inform the defendant how to respond to the citation.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000)
§ 131.57 SCHEDULE OF CIVIL FINES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   A schedule of civil fines payable to the Bureau for admissions of
responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices is
hereby established as follows:
 
Code Provision/Ordinance Offense                       Fine
Number
Chapters                 Violations concerning the
70 and                   parking of vehicles           $25 for each infraction
71                       (excluding disabled parking
                         space violations)
Chapters                 Violations concerning parking
70 and                   spaces reserved for use by    $100 for each infraction
71                       disabled person
Any municipal civil      Failure to comply with any    $125
infraction               provision
Any municipal civil      First repeat offense (second  $200
infraction               offense)
                         Second (or any subsequent)
Any municipal civil      repeat offense (Third         $400
infraction               Offense, Fourth Offense and
                         the like)
 
   (B)   A copy of the schedule, as may be amended from time to time, shall be
posted at the Bureau.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000; Ord. 115, passed 1-14-2013; Ord. 131, passed 8-8-
2016)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   General penalties and sanctions for violations village ordinances,
continuing violations and injunctive relief.
   (A)   Unless a violation of an ordinance of the Village of Pinckney is
specifically designated in the ordinance as a municipal civil infraction, the
violations shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor.
   (B)   The penalty for a misdemeanor violation shall be a fine not exceeding
$500 (plus costs of prosecution), or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or
both, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided for the violation by the
ordinance.
   (C)   The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction
shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this or any ordinance, plus
any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions as authorized by law.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in a particular
ordinance, the civil fine for a municipal infraction violation shall be not
less than $125, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction.
      (2)   Increased civil fines shall be imposed for repeated violations of
an ordinance. Unless otherwise specifically provided by an ordinance for a
particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a first
repeat offense (Second Offense) shall be not less than $200, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense, and the increased fine for second (or any
subsequent) repeat offenses (Third Offense, Fourth Offense and the like) shall
be not less than $400, plus costs and other sanctions for each offense.
      (3)   The judge or magistrate shall be authorized to reduce a fine upon a
determination of extraordinary circumstances.
      (4)   The Judge or magistrate shall also be authorized to impose costs,
damages and expenses as provided by law.
      (5)   In addition to ordering the Defendant determined to be responsible
for a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the judge or magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgment,
writ or order necessary to enforce or enjoin violation of an ordinance.
   (D)   Each day on which any violation of any ordinance continues constitutes
a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate
offense.
   (E)   In addition to any remedies available at law, the village may bring an
action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent
or abate any violation of an ordinance.
(Ord. 54, passed 5-22-2000; Ord. 115, passed 1-14-2013)
CHAPTER 132: CRIME
Section
General Provisions
   
132.001   Short title
   
132.002   Rules of construction
   
132.003   Definitions and rules of construction
Disorderly Persons and Related Offenses
   
132.020   Assault
   
132.021   Disturbance in business, public and lawful meetings
   
132.022   Disturbance at athletic event
   
132.023   Throwing objects on playing area
   
132.024   Disturbing the peace
   
132.025   Disorderly persons and responsibility
   
132.026   Jostling
   
132.027   Annoying conduct
   
132.028   Fighting
   
132.029   Obstructing public passage
   
132.030   Interference with Police Department and related offenses
   
132.031   Obstruct, resist and hinder village official
   
132.032   Improper conduct
   
132.033   Indecent exposure
   
132.034   False police or fire calls
   
132.035   Malicious annoyance
   
132.036   False report of crime
   
132.037   Annoying conduct by use of telephoning
   
132.038   Window peeping
   
132.039   Intentionally aiming a firearm without malice
   
132.040   Unlawful discharge of firearms
   
132.041   Reckless use of firearms
   
132.042   Hurling projectiles from motor vehicles
   
132.043   Hurtling projectiles at persons or motor vehicles
   
132.044   Possession of a switch blade knife
   
132.045   Unlawful possession of a knife
   
132.046   Drinking
   
132.047   Trespassing
Offenses Concerning Property
   
132.065   Interference and destruction of village property
   
132.066   Damaging; unauthorized tampering; meddling with motor vehicle;
exception
   
132.067   Breaking and entering or entering without breaking, without
permission, places open to public; police officers
   
132.068   Destroying or injuring property by careless, reckless or negligent
discharging of firearm
   
132.069   Conversion of library property
   
132.070   Malicious destruction of property
   
132.071   Malicious destruction of a building
   
132.072   Malicious destruction of literary property
   
132.073   Receiving, concealing and the like, stolen, embezzled or converted
property; presumption
   
132.074   Larceny under $100
Offenses Concerning Minors
   
132.090   Prohibition of minors in place where liquor is sold
   
132.091   Alcoholic beverages; furnishing to person under 21
   
132.092   Fraudulent information or evidence as to persons under 21 to secure
liquor
   
132.093   Purchase, consumption or possession by minor furnishing or use of
fraudulent id; effect upon civil or criminal liability
   
132.094   Possession and transportation of alcohol in motor vehicle by minor
   
132.095   Contributing to neglect or delinquency of child
   
132.096   Curfew violation
   
132.097   Purchase, sale, possession of tobacco, cigarettes, papers and the
like by minors
   
132.098   Possession of knives by minors
   
132.099   Abandonment of children
Fraud and Related Offenses
   
132.115   Fraudulent procurement of food and lodging
   
132.116   Fraudulent procurement of lodging
   
132.117   Same; prima facie evidence of intent
   
132.118   Control of checks written without sufficient funds
   
132.119   False pretenses with intent to defraud
   
132.120   Obtaining credit by false device
Narcotics
   
132.140   (Reserved)
   
132.141   Hypodermic syringes, needles and the like, possession prohibited;
exceptions
   
132.142   Same; sale and the like prohibited
   
132.143   Fraud and deceit in obtaining drugs and the like
   
132.144   Inhalation prohibited
Crimes Involving Morals
   
132.160   Soliciting and accosting
   
132.161   Prostitution
   
132.162   Admitting to place for prostitution
Littering
   
132.180   Littering
   
132.181   Littering with dangerous substances
   
132.182   Objects thrown into path of vehicles
Miscellaneous Offenses
   
132.195   Abandoned ice boxes or other containers
   
132.196   Excavations
   
132.197   Coal tar ordinance
 
   
132.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 132.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Criminal Code of the
Village of Pinckney.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981)
§ 132.002 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The rule that a criminal statute is to be strictly construed shall not apply
to this chapter or any of the provisions thereof. All provisions of this code
shall be construed according to the fair import of their terms, to promote
justice and to effect the objects of the law.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981)
§ 132.003 DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PERSON and ACCUSED. Includes similar words include, unless a contrary
intention appears, public and private corporation, co-partnerships and
unincorporated or voluntary associations.
      PROPERTY. Any matter of thing upon or in respect to which any offense may
be committed.
      PUBLIC PLACE. As used in this chapter, shall mean any public building,
any place of business or assembly open to the public view, or to which the
public has access.
      WRITING and WRITTEN. Any term of like import includes words printed,
painted, engraved, lithographed, photographed or otherwise copied, traced or
made visible to the eye.
   (B)   The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
   (C)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981)
DISORDERLY PERSONS AND RELATED OFFENSES
§ 132.020 ASSAULT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or an assault and
battery on any person.
   (A)   Assault is any intentional, unlawful offer of corporal injury to
another by force under circumstances which reasonably creates fear of imminent
danger coupled with apparent ability to carry out the attempt if it is not
prevented.
   (B)   Battery or assault and battery, is willfully touching the person of
one by another or by some attack put in motion by the other without the consent
of the person being touched.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.021 DISTURBANCE IN BUSINESS, PUBLIC AND LAWFUL MEETINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or excite any disturbance or
contention in any tavern, store or grocery, manufacturing establishment or any
other business place or in any street, lane, alley, highway, public building,
grounds or park, or at any election of other public building, grounds or park,
or at any election of other public meeting where citizens are peaceably and
lawfully assembled.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.022 DISTURBANCE AT ATHLETIC EVENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to invade the playing areas of any
athletic contest or exhibition while in progress, except officials or
participants.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.023 THROWING OBJECTS ON PLAYING AREA.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, throw, hurl or fling any
bottle, can or any other object which could cause injury or damage in the
spectator or playing area while a game is in progress, intermission or delays
of the event.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.024 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the public peace and quiet by
loud, boisterous or vulgar conduct.
   (A)   Disturbance of the peace. No person shall disturb, tend to disturb or
aid in disturbing the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or
obstreperous conduct, and no person shall permit any conduct in any house or
upon any premise owned or possessed by him or her or under his or her control
or management when, within his or her power to prevent, so that others in the
vicinity are or may be disturbed thereby.
   (B)   Lights. No person shall use light(s), the installation of light(s),
light(s) emitting device or other similar device to annoy another. Nor shall
any illuminating device, structure or otherwise be so used or maintained or
directed so as to shine unto or illuminate property or premises other than that
owned, rented, leased or under the control of the person(s) not using,
maintaining or directing the illuminating device structure of or otherwise.
   (C)   Exceptions. The above shall not apply to illuminating devices such as
streetlights erected by a bona-fide governmental agency or designee thereof,
nor shall the above section apply in the event of common use or agreement
between adjoining property owners for joint illumination.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981; Ord. 113, passed 8-13-2012) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.025 DISORDERLY PERSONS AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer any
place occupied or controlled by him or her to be a report of noisy, boisterous
or disorderly persons.
   (B)   Disorderly places. No person owning, renting, managing, occupying or
trespassing upon any premises shall allow the premises to be used as a place of
assignation or as a place of resort for common prostitutes, and no person
owning, renting, managing, occupying or trespassing upon any premises shall
permit persons having the name and reputation of being common prostitutes to
congregate and assemble in or upon the premises; nor shall any person owning,
renting, managing, occupying or trespassing upon any premises allow same to be
used for gambling purposes; nor shall any person owning, renting, managing,
occupying or trespassing upon any premises allow the premises to be used for
any illegal or immoral purposes.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.026 JOSTLING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to be found jostling or roughly crowding
people unnecessarily in a public place. JOSTLING can be defined as pushing or
crowding in passing.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.027 ANNOYING CONDUCT.
   (A)   Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to insult, accost,
molest or otherwise annoy, either by word of mouth, sign or motion any person
in any public place.
   (B)   Annoy. To annoy shall include but not limited to the intentional
infliction of a feeling of discomfort, vexation, imposition or oppression upon
another.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.028 FIGHTING.
   (A)   Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any
disturbance, fight or quarrel in a public place.
   (B)   Fighting. No person shall assault, strike or fight another; provided
that the section shall not be construed to extend to authorized athletic
events.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.029 OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC PASSAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on any public street or
sidewalk or in any park, or public building or conduct himself or herself in
any public place so as to obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of the
public.
   (A)   Obstruction of travel. No person shall stand or loiter either
individually or with others in an manner resulting in the obstruction of free
travel, of either pedestrian or vehicle in any public right-of-way or in any
private right-of-way commonly used by the public under permission of the owner,
or his or her legal tenant.
   (B)   Loitering. To loiter shall include but not be limited to, standing
round or moving slowly about or spending time idly, delay or to linger.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.030 INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE DEPARTMENT AND RELATED OFFENSES.
   (A)   No person shall resist any police officer and member of the Police
Department or any person duly empowered with police authority while in the
discharge or apparent discharge of his or her duty, or in any way interfere
with or hinder him or her in the discharge of his or her duty.
   (B)   No person shall offer or endeavor to assist any person in the custody
of a police officer, a member of the Police Department or a person duly
empowered with police authority to escape or attempt to escape from the
custody.
   (C)   No person other than an official police officer of the Village of
Pinckney shall wear or carry the uniform apparel, bad identification card or
any other insignia of office like or similar to, or colorable imitation of that
adopted and worn or carried by the official police officers of the Village of
Pinckney.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.031 OBSTRUCT, RESIST AND HINDER VILLAGE OFFICIAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, resist or hinder any
Village of Pinckney official, public safety officer, firefighter or employee in
the discharge of his or her duties.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.032 IMPROPER CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any indecent, insulting,
immoral or obscene conduct in any public place.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.033 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any immoral exhibition or
indecent exposure of his or her person.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.034 FALSE POLICE OR FIRE CALLS.
   It shall be unlawful for any persona to summon, as a joke, prank or
otherwise, the Police or Fire Department or any public or private ambulance to
any address where the service called for is not needed.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.035 MALICIOUS ANNOYANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly send or deliver, make and
for the purpose of being delivered or sent, to part with the possession of, any
letter, postal card or writing containing any obscene language with or without
a name subscribe thereto or signed with a fictitious name, or with any letter,
mark or other designation, with the intent thereby to cause annoyance to any
person, or with a view or intent to extort or gain any money or property of any
description belonging to another.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.036 FALSE REPORT OF CRIME.
   No person shall make or file with the Police Department of the Village of
Pinckney, a fictitious report of the commission of any crime, knowing the same
to be false.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.037 ANNOYING CONDUCT BY USE OF TELEPHONING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any service provided by a
communications common carrier with intent to terrorize, frighten, intimidate,
threaten, harass, molest or annoy any other person, or to disturb the peace and
quiet of any other person by any of the following:
   (A)   Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in the
course of a telephone conversation;
   (B)   Falsely and deliberately reporting by telephone or telegraph message
that any person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill, has suffered death or
has been the victim of a crime or of an accident;
   (C)   Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage between a telephone and
another telephone or between a telephone and other equipment provided for the
transmissions of messages by telephone, thereby interfering with any
communications service; and/or
   (D)   Using any vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive language or
suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of telephone conversation.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.038 WINDOW PEEPING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass on property owned or under
the control of any other person for the purpose of subjecting that person to
eavesdropping or surveillance.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.039 INTENTIONALLY AIMING A FIREARM WITHOUT MALICE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally without malice, point
or aim any firearm at or toward any other person
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.040 UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm within the
village. This will include BB guns, air rifles and sling shots.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.041 RECKLESS USE OF FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly, heedlessly, willfully or
wantonly, carry or handle any firearm without due caution and circumspection
for the rights, safety or property of others.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.042 HURLING PROJECTILES FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully throw or propel any
snowball, missile or object from any moving motor vehicle.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.043 HURTLING PROJECTILES AT PERSONS OR MOTOR VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully throw or propel any
snowball missile or object at any passenger train, sleeping car, passenger
coach, express car, mail car, baggage car, locomotive, caboose, freight train,
motor vehicle or person.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.044 POSSESSION OF A SWITCH BLADE KNIFE.
   (A)   Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
sell, offer for sale, keep, possess, use or loan any switch blade knife.
   (B)   Switch blade knife. A SWITCH BLADE KNIFE is defined as any knife
having the appearance of a pocket knife, the blade or blades of which can be
opened by the flick of a button, pressure of a handle or other mechanical
contrivance.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.045 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF A KNIFE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of any knife with
blade more than three inches in length having the character of a dangerous
weapon, in any street or public place.
   (A)   A knife having a blade more than three inches in length is a dangerous
weapon if carried for the purpose of assault or defense.
   (B)   A hunting knife adapted and carried as such is exempted from this
section.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.046 DRINKING.
   No person shall drink or consume alcoholic beverages except on his or her
own private property or as an invitee on private property, duly licensed
establishments or where permitted by law in public places, and no person shall
have in his or her possession an open or unsealed container containing an
alcoholic beverage except on his or her own private property or as an invitee
on private property or in a duly licensed establishment or where permitted by
law in public places.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.047 TRESPASSING.
   Any person who shall wilfully enter, upon the lands or premises of another
without lawful authority, after having been forbidden so to do by the owner or
occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or any person being upon
the land or premises of another upon being notified to depart therefrom by the
owner or occupant, the agent or servant of either, who without lawful authority
neglects or refuses to depart therefrom, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail
for not more than 90 days or by a fine or both, in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
OFFENSES CONCERNING PROPERTY
§ 132.065 INTERFERENCE AND DESTRUCTION OF VILLAGE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully destroy, remove, damage,
alter or in any manner deface any property not his or her own; or any public
school building, park meter, bridge, fire hydrant, alarm box, street light,
street sign or make or post hand bills, on, or in any manner mar the walls of
any public building or destroy, tree or pole within the Village of Pinckney, or
destroy, take or meddle with any property belonging to the Village of Pinckney,
or remove the same from the building or place where it may be kept, placed or
stored, without proper authority, or disturb, tamper with, disconnect or damage
a water meter without proper authority. Destruction of public property; no
person shall molest, injure, deface, interfere with or obstruct the use of any
public property.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.066 DAMAGING; UNAUTHORIZED TAMPERING; MEDDLING WITH MOTOR VEHICLE;
EXCEPTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without
authority from the owner, start or cause to be started the motor of any motor
vehicle or maliciously shift or change the start device or gears of a standing
motor vehicle to a position other than in which it was left by the owner or
driver of the motor vehicle; or intentionally cut, mark, scratch or damage the
chassis, running gear, body, sides, top, covering or upholstering of any motor
vehicle, the property of another or intentionally cut, mash, mark, destroy and
damage the motor vehicle, or any of the accessories, equipment, appurtenances
or attachments thereof, or any spare or extra parts thereon being or thereto
attached, without the permission of the owner thereof.
   (B)   Intentionally release the brake upon any standing motor vehicle with
the intent to injure the machine or cause the same to remove without the
consent of the owner. Provided that this section shall not apply in case of
moving or starting of motor vehicle by the police under authority of local
ordinance or by members of Fire Departments in case of emergency in the
vicinity of a fire.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.067 BREAKING AND ENTERING OR ENTERING WITHOUT BREAKING, WITHOUT
PERMISSION, PLACES OPEN TO PUBLIC; POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to break and enter or to enter
without breaking, any dwelling, house, tent, hotel, office, store, shop,
warehouse, barn, granary, factory or other building, boat, ship railroad car or
structure used or kept for public or private use or any private apartment
therein, or any cottage, clubhouse, boathouse, hunting or fishing lodge, garage
or the out-buildings belonging thereto, without obtaining permission to enter
from the owner or occupant, agent or person having immediate control thereof.
Provided, that this section shall not apply to entering without breaking any
place which at that time of the entry was open to the public, unless the entry
has been expressly denied.
   (B)   This section shall not apply in cases where the breaking and entering
or entering without breaking were committed by a peace officer or someone under
his or her direction in the lawful performance of his or her duties as the
peace officer.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.068 DESTROYING OR INJURING PROPERTY BY CARELESS, RECKLESS OR NEGLIGENT
DISCHARGING OF FIREARM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to, because of carelessness,
recklessness or negligence, but not willfully or wantonly, cause or allow any
firearm under his or her control to be discharged so as to destroy or injure
the property of another real or personal.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.069 CONVERSION OF LIBRARY PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to procure or take in any way from any
public library or the library of any literary scientific, historical or library
society or association, whether incorporated or unincorporated, any book,
pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper,
magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part thereof, with intent to convert the
same to be his or her own use, or with intent to defraud the owner thereof, or
who having procured or taken any such book pamphlet, map, chart, painting,
picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or
any part thereof to thereafter convert the same to his or her own use or
fraudulently deprive the owner thereof.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.070 MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously destroy or
injure the personal property of another by any means.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.071 MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF A BUILDING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously destroy or
injure any house, barn or other building of another, or the appurtenances
thereof.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.072 MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF LITERARY PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or wantonly
tear, deface, mutilate or write upon or mark any book, pamphlet, map, chart,
painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or
exhibit or any part thereof belonging to or loaned to any public library, or to
the library of an literary, scientific, historical or library society or
association, whether incorporated or unincorporated.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.073 RECEIVING, CONCEALING AND THE LIKE, STOLEN, EMBEZZLED OR CONVERTED
PROPERTY; PRESUMPTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, receive or aid in the
concealment of any stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods or property
knowing the same to have been stolen, embezzled or converted.
   (B)   Any person being a dealer in or collector of any merchandise or
personal property, or the agent, employee or representative of the dealer or
collector who fails to make reasonable inquiry that the person selling or
delivering any stolen, embezzled or converted property to him or her as a legal
right to do so, shall be presumed to have bought or received the property
knowing it to have been stolen, embezzled or converted. This presumption may,
however, be rebutted by proof.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.074 LARCENY UNDER $100.
   Larceny, property subject to value, any person who shall commit the offense
of larceny, by stealing of the property of another, any money, goods or
chattels or any banknote, bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of
exchange or other bill, draft, order or certificate, or any book or accounts
for or concerning money or goods due or to become due, or to be delivered, or
any deed or writing containing a conveyance of land or any other valuable
contract in force, or any receipt, release or defeasance, or any writ, process
or public record, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
OFFENSES CONCERNING MINORS
§ 132.090 PROHIBITION OF MINORS IN PLACE WHERE LIQUOR IS SOLD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of majority to be
permitted to remain in any dance hall, saloon, barroom or any place where any
spirituous or intoxicating liquor or any wine or beer, or any beverage, liquor
or liquors containing any spirituous or intoxicating liquor, beer or malt
accompanied by parent or guardian. It shall be unlawful for any proprietor,
keeper or manager of any place to permit the minor child to remain in any
place, and it shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly encourage or induce
in any way the minor child to enter the place or to remain therein.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.091 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; FURNISHING TO PERSON UNDER 21.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly give or furnish any
alcoholic beverage to a person under age 21 except upon authority of and
pursuant to a prescription of a duly licensed physician.
   (B)   Any person, who willfully gives or furnishes any alcoholic beverages
to a person under age 21 except upon authority of and pursuant to a
prescription of a duly license physician, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.092 FRAUDULENT INFORMATION OR EVIDENCE AS TO PERSONS UNDER 21 TO SECURE
LIQUOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to give fraudulent information regarding
the age of another person under 21 years of age for the purpose of procuring
the sale of intoxicating liquor to him or her or who furnishes fraudulent
documentary evidence to a person under 21 years of age who uses the evidence to
purchase intoxicating liquor.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.093 PURCHASE, CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION BY MINOR FURNISHING OR USE OF
FRAUDULENT ID; EFFECT UPON CIVIL OR CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (A)   A person under the age of 21 who purchases or consumes alcoholic
liquor in a licensed premise or who possesses alcohol is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a person under 21
years of age or a person under 21 years of age who uses a fraudulent
identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.094 POSSESSION AND TRANSPORTATION OF ALCOHOL IN A MOTOR VEHICLE BY MINOR.
   No person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly possess or transport any
alcoholic liquor, or knowingly transport or have under his or her control in
any motor vehicle any alcoholic liquor unless the person is employed by a
licensee licensed under the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1101 through 436.2303 as amended, and is possessing,
transporting or having the alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle under his or her
control during the regular working hours and in the course of his or her
employment.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.095 CONTRIBUTING TO NEGLECT OR DELINQUENCY OF CHILD.
   No person shall by any act or by any word, encourage, contribute toward,
cause or tend to cause any minor child under the age of 17 years to become
neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the jurisdiction of
the juvenile division of the Probate Court, as defined in § 2 or chapter 12a of
Public Act 288 of 1939, being M.C.L.A. §§ 701.1 through 713.6, as added by
Public Act 54 of 1944 of the First Extra Session, being M.C.L.A. Chapter 712A,
and any amendments thereto, whereto or no child shall in fact be adjudicated a
ward of the Probate Court.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.096 CURFEW VIOLATION.
   Curfew violation, prohibiting children under certain years of age from
loitering or remaining upon the public streets or highways or in any public
place after certain hours of the night, to fix the responsibility for the
violation of the provisions thereof and to provide a penalty for the violation
thereof.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 17 years to
loiter, idle, congregate or otherwise be in or on any public street, highway,
alley or any public place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
immediately following on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday of
each week, and between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. immediately
following on Friday and Saturday of each week, except when the minor is
accompanied by a parent or guardian or where the presence of the minor in the
place or places is connected with and required by some legitimate work, trade,
profession or occupation in which the minor is engaged, or where the minor is
upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by his or her parent or
guardian.
   (B)   Any person of the age of 17 or over assisting, aiding, abetting or
encouraging any minor under the age of 17 years to violate the provisions of
division (A) above, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   When any minor is found violating the provisions of division (A)
above, a presumption shall arise that the parent or guardian having the care
and custody of the minor allowed, permitted, assisted, aided, abetted and
encouraged the minor is so violating division (A) above.
   (D)   This section does not apply to a minor who is:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor's presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults
and sponsored by the village, a civic organization, or another similar entity
that takes responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.097 PURCHASE, SALE, POSSESSION OF TOBACCO, CIGARETTES, PAPERS AND THE
LIKE BY MINORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to misrepresent his or her age
to purchase cigarettes, wrapper, tobacco and papers for the purpose of making
cigarettes.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any juvenile under the age of 18 years to
have in his or her possession any cigarettes, papers, wrappers and tobacco from
which cigarettes might be made.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish, procure for or
give away to any juvenile under the age of 18 years, any tobacco, cigarettes,
wrappers or any substitute for either, or persuade, counsel or advise any minor
to smoke cigarettes.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.098 POSSESSION OF KNIVES BY MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to be in
possession of any knife, dart or instrument of any description that could be
used for cutting or stabbing in any street or public place, (except for boy
scouts, girl scouts or work tool).
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.099 ABANDONMENT OF CHILDREN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, parent or guardian, custodian or anyone
else to whose care, children under 11 years of age are entrusted to leave,
neglect or abandon the children in a parked motor vehicle in any public place
or place open to the public without furnishing someone over the age of 17 years
for supervision of the children.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
FRAUD AND RELATED OFFENSES
§ 132.115 FRAUDULENT PROCUREMENT OF FOOD AND LODGING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, put up, board or lodge at any
boarding house as a guest or boarded by the day, week or month, or to procure
any food, entertainment or accommodation without paying therefore, unless there
is distinct and express agreement made by the person with the owner, proprietor
or keeper of the boarding house for credit, with intent to defraud the owner,
proprietor or keeper out of the pay for the board, lodging, food, entertainment
or accommodation, or for any person who, with the intent to so defraud, to
obtain credit at any boarding house for the board, lodging, food, entertainment
or accommodation by means of any false show of baggage or effects brought
thereto; provided, that no conviction shall be made within ten days of the time
of the violation thereof.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.116 FRAUDULENT PROCUREMENT OF LODGING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to put up at any hotel, motel, inn,
restaurant or café as a guest and to procure any food, entertainment or
accommodation without paying therefore, except when credit is given therefore
by express agreement, with intent to defraud the keeper thereof out of the pay
for the same, or for any person with intent to defraud the keeper out of the
pay therefore, to obtain credit at any hotel, motel, restaurant or café for
food, entertainment or accommodation, by means of any false show of baggage or
effects brought thereto.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.117 SAME; PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF INTENT.
   Obtaining food, lodging and/or accommodation by false pretense or by false
or fictitious show of baggage or other property, or refusal or neglect to pay
therefore on demand, or payment thereof with check, draft or order upon a bank
or other depository on which payment was refused, or absconding without paying,
or surreptitiously removing or attempting to remove baggage shall be prima
facie evidence of the intent to defraud mentioned in §§
132.118 and
132.119.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.118 CONTROL OF CHECKS WRITTEN WITHOUT SUFFICIENT FUNDS.
   (A)   Defraud. Any person who, with intent to defraud shall, make, draw,
utter or deliver any checks, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply
on account or otherwise, upon any bank or ether depository, knowing at the time
of the making, drawing, uttering or delivering, that the maker or drawer, has
not sufficient funds in or credit with the bank or other depository, for the
payment of the check, draft or order, in full, upon its presentation or any
person who, with the intent to defraud, shall make, draw, utter or deliver any
check, draft or order for the payment of money to apply on account or
otherwise, upon any bank or other depository and who shall not have sufficient
funds for the payment for same when presentation for payment is made to the
drawee, except where the lack of funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy
or other lawful cause, and the fact was not known to the person who made, drew,
uttered or delivered the instrument at the time of so doing, shall, if the
amount payable in the check is $100 or less, the person shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   Second offense. Punishment, second offense, any person found guilty of
a second offense under this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by imprisonment in the county jail not more than 90 days or by a fine.
   (C)   Evidence of intent to defraud. As against the maker or drawer thereof,
the making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment
of which is refused by the drawee when presented in the usual course of
business, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge
of insufficient funds in or credit with the bank or other depository, provided
the maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee thereof the amount due
thereon, together with all costs and protest fees, within five days after
receiving notice that the check, draft or order has not been paid by the
drawee.
   (D)   Notice of protest as evidence of intent to defraud. Where the check,
draft or order is protested, on the ground of insufficiency of funds or credit,
the notice of protest thereof shall be admissible as proof of presentation,
nonpayment and protest, and shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud,
and of knowledge of insufficient funds or credit with the bank or other
depository.
   (E)   Credit construed. The word CREDIT as used herein, shall be construed
to mean an arrangement or understanding with the bank or depository, for the
payment of the check, draft or order, in full, upon the presentation thereof
for payment.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.119 FALSE PRETENSES WITH INTENT TO DEFRAUD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to, with intent to defraud or cheat, to
designedly, by color or any false token or writing or by any false or bogus
check or other written, printed or engraved instrument, by spurious coin or
metal in the similitude of coin, or by an other false pretense, cause any
person to grant, convey, assign, demise, lease or mortgage any land or interest
in land, or obtain the signature of any person to any written instrument, the
making whereof would be punishable as forgery, or obtain from any person any
money or personal property or the use (of any instrument, facility or article
or other valuable thing or service, or by means of any false weights or
measures obtain a larger amount or quantity or property other than was
bargained for, if such and or interest in land, money personal property, use of
the instrument, facility or article, valuable thing, service, larger amount of
obtained or less amount disposed of.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.120 OBTAINING CREDIT BY FALSE DEVICE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly obtain or attempt to obtain
credit, or purchase or attempt to purchase any goods, property or service, by
the use of any false, fictitious or counterfeit credit card, credit number,
telephone number of other credit device, or by the use of any credit card,
without the authority of the person to whom the card, number or device was
issued, or by the use of any credit card, credit number, telephone number or
other credit card, credit number or device has been revoked and notice or
revocation has been given to the person to whom issued.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
NARCOTICS
§ 132.140 (Reserved)
§ 132.141 HYPODERMIC SYRINGES, NEEDLES AND THE LIKE, POSSESSION PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall at any time have or possess a hypodermic syringe or needle
or any other instrument or implement adapted for the use of narcotic drugs by
subcutaneous injection or intracutaneous injection or any other manner or
method of introduction and which is possessed for that purpose, unless the
possession is authorized by the certificate of a licensed medical doctor or
osteopathic physician issued within the period of one year; provided, that the
prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, research teaching
institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians,
dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists and embalmers in the normal
legal course of their respective business or profession, nor to persons
suffering from diabetes, asthma or any other medical condition requiring self
injection.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.142 SAME; SALE AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish, supply or give
away any hypodermic syringe or needle or other instrument or implement adapted
for the use of narcotic drugs by subcutaneous injection or intracutaneous
injection or any other manner or method of introduction to any person known to
be a non-medical habitual user of an narcotic drug.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, a NON-MEDICAL HABITUAL USER OF
NARCOTIC DRUGS shall mean any person who uses narcotic drugs merely to satisfy
a craving for the drugs and who does not have a legitimate medical need for
narcotic drugs.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.143 FRAUD AND DECEIT IN OBTAINING DRUGS AND THE LIKE.
   Any fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, subterfuge, concealment of a material
fact, or the use of a fraudulent name or the giving of a fraudulent address for
the purpose of obtaining any narcotic drug or barbituric acid or any
derivative, compound, preparation or mixture thereof, or hypodermic syringe or
needle or other instrument or implement or empty gelatin capsules or fraudulent
statement on any prescription blank shall be deemed a violation of this
section. No person who shall have obtained the possession of any narcotic
drugs, hypodermic syringes, needles or other instruments or implements adapted
for the use of the drugs or empty gelatin capsules pursuant to the terms of
this section shall use the same or permit or authorize his or her use for any
purpose other than that specifically authorized in the prescription or order by
means of which the possession was obtained.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.144 INHALATION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall inhale, drink, eat or otherwise introduce into his or her
respiratory or circulatory system, any compound, liquid, chemical or any
substance known as glue, adhesive, cement, mucilage, dope, plastic, solvent or
any other material or substance or combination thereof with the intent of
becoming intoxicated elated, dazed, paralyzed, irrational or in any manner
changing, distorting or disturbing the eyesight, thinking process, judgment,
balance or coordination of the person. For the purpose of this section, any
condition so induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
CRIMES INVOLVING MORALS
§ 132.160 SOLICITING AND ACCOSTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to accost, solicit or invite another in
any public place, or in or from any building or vehicle, by word, gesture or
any other means, to commit prostitution or to any lewd, illegal or immoral act.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.161 PROSTITUTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any act of prostitution.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.162 ADMITTING TO PLACE FOR PROSTITUTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to receive or admit or offer to receive
or admit any person into any place, structure, house, building or vehicle for
the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or assignation, or who shall knowingly
permit any person to remain in any place for any purpose.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
LITTERING
§ 132.180 LITTERING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly dump, deposit, place, throw
or leave, cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving
of litter on any public or private property or waters other than that property
designated and set aside for the purposes.
   (A)   The phrase public or private property or waters includes, but is not
limited to, the right-of-way of any road or highway, any body of water or
watercourse or the shores of beaches thereof, and including the ice above the
waters, any park, playground, building, refuge or conservation or recreation
area and any residential or farm properties or timberlands.
   (B)   The term LITTER as used herein, means all rubbish, refuse, waste
material, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris or other
foreign substances of every kind and description.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.181 LITTERING WITH DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or throw glass or other
dangerous pointed or edged substances in or on any beach or waters adjacent
hereto, highway or walk or on public property.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.182 OBJECTS THROWN INTO PATH OF VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly cause any litter or any
objects to fall or to be thrown into the path or to hit a vehicle traveling the
highway.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
§ 132.195 ABANDONED ICE BOXES OR OTHER CONTAINERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly leave in a place accessible
to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or
other container of a kind and size sufficient to permit the entrapment and
suffocation of a child therein, without first removing the snaplock or other
locking device from the lip or cover thereof, or otherwise render the
containers harmless.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.196 EXCAVATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hereafter dig or cause to be dug, an
excavation or a partially constructed basement for any building or structure,
and who shall fail to cover or fence, in a safe manner, the same within a
period of 90 days after the excavations have been commenced.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981) Penalty, see §
132.999
§ 132.197 COAL TAR ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Title. This section is to be known and cited as the Village of
Pinckney Coal Tar Ordinance.
   (B)   Purpose. 
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to promote the public health,
safety, comfort, and general welfare of the community through prohibiting the
use and sale of sealant products or substances containing greater than 0.1%
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) by weight, including coal tar based
sealer in the Village of Pinckney in order to protect, restore, and preserve
the quality of its waters and protect the health of its residents.
      (2)   The Village of Pinckney understands that lakes, rivers, streams and
other bodies of water are natural assets which enhance the environmental,
recreational, cultural, and economic resources and contribute to the general
health and welfare of the community.
      (3)   The use of sealers on asphalt driveways is a common practice.
However, scientific studies on the use of driveway sealers have demonstrated a
relationship between the use of coal tar based sealers and certain health and
environmental concerns, including increased cancer risk to humans and impaired
water quality in streams.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ASPHALT BASED SEALER. A petroleum based sealer material that is commonly
used on driveways, parking lots, and other surfaces.
      COAL TAR. A byproduct of the process used to manufacture coke from coal.
      COAL TAR SEALANT PRODUCT. A surface applied sealing product containing
coal tar, coal tar pitch, coal tar pitch volatiles, RT-12, refined tar, or any
variation thereof, including those substances assigned the Chemical Abstracts
Service (CAS) numbers 65996-92-1, 65996-93-2, 65996-89-6, or 8007-45-2, or
related substances containing more than 0.1% PAHs, by weight.
      HIGH PAH CONTENT SEALANT PRODUCT. A surface applied product containing
steam-cracked petroleum residues, steam-cracked asphalt, pyrolysis fuel oil,
heavy fuel oil, ethylene tar, or any variation of those substances including
those substances assigned the Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) numbers 64742-
90-1, 69013-21-4, or related substances containing more than 0.1% PAHs, by
weight.
      PAHs or POLYCYCLIC AROMATIC HYDROCARBONS. A group of organic chemicals
formed during the incomplete burning of coal, oil, gas, or other organic
substances. PAHs are present in coal tar and known to be harmful to humans,
fish, and other aquatic life.
      VILLAGE. The Village of Pinckney.
   (D)   Prohibitions. 
      (1)   No person or entity shall apply a coal tar or other high PAH
content sealant product or substance on any surfaces within the village.
      (2)   No person or entity shall sell a coal tar or other high PAH content
sealant product that is formulated or marketed for application on surfaces
within the village.
      (3)   No person or entity shall allow a coal tar or other high PAH
content sealant product to be applied upon property that is under that person's
ownership or control.
      (4)   No person or entity shall contract with any commercial sealer
product applicator, residential or commercial developer, or any other person
for the application of any coal tar or other high PAH content sealant product
to any driveway, parking lot, or other surface within the village.
      (5)   No commercial sealer product applicator, residential or commercial
developer, or other similar individual, organization, or entity shall direct
any employee, independent contractor, volunteer, entity, or other person to
apply any coal tar or other high PAH content sealant product to any driveway,
parking lot, or any other surface within the village.
   (E)   Asphalt based sealcoat products. The provisions of this section shall
only apply to coal tar or other high PAH content sealant products in the
village and shall not otherwise affect the use of asphalt based sealer products
within the village.
   (F)   Registration and reporting requirements and procedures for commercial
applicators.
      (1)   All commercial applicators shall register with the village prior to
applying pavement sealant in the village in any calendar year.
      (2)   Registration under this section shall be valid until expiration.
Registration shall begin on January 1 and shall expire on December 31 of each
calendar year.
      (3)   Commercial applicators shall submit a complete registration
application to the Village Offices, along with the registration fee according
to the schedule established by resolution of Village Council. The fee shall be
calculated to include the cost of registration application review and periodic
field inspection.
      (4)   The following information shall be included in a complete
application for registration:
         (a)   The legal name of the commercial applicator, any other names
used, the address, telephone number, and contact person for the applicant;
         (b)   The product name, type of use, and PAH content including CAS
numbers;
         (c)   A notarized, sworn statement signed by an owner or duly
authorized representative of a commercial applicator indicating that the
applicator will comply with the requirements of the this section throughout the
registration period; and
         (d)   All other information requested on the application.
      (5)   The application shall be approved if it is complete, the applicator
has complied with the previous year's reporting requirement, and the use of
pavement sealant complies with this section.
      (6)   The application for registration shall be approved or denied within
21 days of submission of a completed application.
      (7)   A registered applicator shall notify the village in writing of any
change in the information in the application for registration within seven days
of any such change.
   (G)   Establishment and enforcement. Within 30 days of passage of this
section by the Village Council, a letter will be prepared and mailed to all
identifiable area service companies and retailers that may apply, supply, or
distribute sealants containing any of the substances herein prohibited.
Enforcement shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator and the
Police Department in coordination to identify, investigate, and cite the owner
of any property in violation immediately upon being made aware. The
recognizable odor of coal tar or other high PAH substances as identified by any
village employee is considered sufficient to prove violation in the absence of
containers, packaging, receipts, or any other documents. Any person or entity
found to be in violation during or after application shall be ticketed and
fined; there is no option of a warning or relaxation of this section in any
way.
   (H)   Penalty. Any person or entity that violates any of the provisions of
this section will be responsible for a municipal civil infraction with fines up
to $500.
(Ord. 140, passed 10-9-2017)
§ 132.999 PENALTY.
   Any person or persons who violate any of the sections of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine not
to exceed $500 by the Village of Pinckney or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days, or by both the fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the
court.
(Ord. 27, passed 12-14-1981)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   LOTS AND MOBILE HOMES
      
151.   WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES
      
152.   ZONING
      
153.   DDA DEVELOPMENT PLAN
      
154.   UNSAFE BUILDINGS
      
155.   REGISTRATION OF RESIDENTIAL RENTAL DWELLING UNITS
      
156.   COLLECTION BINS
CHAPTER 150: LOTS AND MOBILE HOMES
Section
Lots
   
150.01   Lot divisions
   
150.02   Application for lot division approval
   
150.03   Procedure for review of application for lot division approval
   
150.04   Standards for approval of land division
   
150.05   Allowance for approval of other land divisions/transfers
   
150.06   Consequences of noncompliance with land division approval requirements
Mobile Homes and Trailer Coaches
   
150.20   Title
   
150.21   Purpose
   
150.22   Terms
   
150.23   Unlawful actions and exemptions
   
150.24   Valid nonconforming use of mobile homes and trailer coaches
   
150.25   Termination of valid nonconforming use
   
150.26   Establishment of parks
 
   
150.99   Penalty
LOTS
§ 150.01 LOT DIVISIONS.
   Any lot, out-lot or other parcel of land in a recorded plat may be divided
for the purpose of sale, lease or building development provided the same is
reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by Village Council, as
authorized pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 560.263. However, no such division shall be
authorized that does not fully comply with the Michigan Land Division Act,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq., as amended, and the resulting divisions are
in conformity with the ordinances of the village. The procedures in this
subchapter shall not apply to platted lots that are modified pursuant to a duly
approved replat of a recorded subdivision under the Michigan Land Division Act,
or are altered by a court order pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 560.226, as amended.
(Ord. 31, passed 11-11-1985; Ord. 142, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 150.02 APPLICATION FOR LOT DIVISION APPROVAL.
   An applicant shall file all of the following with the village Zoning
Administrator or other official designated by the Village Council. The
submittal shall include:
   (A)   A completed application on such form as may be prescribed by the
village and payment of the application fee as set by Village Council
resolution;
   (B)   Proof of fee ownership of the land proposed to be divided;
   (C)   A statement indicating any deed restrictions and/or covenants which
apply to or run with the land having bearing upon the proposed division;
   (D)   The history and specifications of any previous divisions and
combinations of land sufficient to establish the lot to be divided is subject
to further division restrictions under the Michigan Land Division Act;
   (E)   Proof that all taxes which are due and payable and all special
assessments which are outstanding pertaining to the land proposed to be divided
have been paid in full;
   (F)   A detailed written description of the development planned for such
land which is the subject of the request for division; and
   (G)   A survey map of the land proposed to be divided, prepared by a
registered land surveyor or civil engineer licensed by the State of Michigan,
which shows the dimensions and legal descriptions of the existing parcels or
tracts, the location of all existing or proposed structures and other land
improvements, the location of any existing easements and the accessibility of
the parcels for vehicular traffic and utilities from the existing public roads.
   (H)   New parcel map.
      (1)    A complete, proposed new parcel map drawn to scale is required.
The new parcel map shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor or civil
engineer licensed by the State of Michigan and shall include the following
requirements:
         (a)   Dated, north arrow, scale, and name of the individual or firm
responsible for the completion of the tentative new parcel map;
         (b)   Proposed lot lines and their dimensions;
         (c)   Location and nature of proposed ingress and egress locations to
any existing public streets;
         (d)   The location of any public or private street, driveway, or any
easements located or to be located within any proposed lot or parcel. Copies of
the instruments describing and granting such easements shall be submitted with
the application;
         (e)   General topographical features including contour intervals no
greater than ten feet and including a delineation of any wetland or floodplain
areas;
         (f)   The location of any existing buildings, structures, public or
private streets, and driveways within 50 feet of all proposed property lines;
and
         (g)   The zoning classification of all proposed lots or parcels.
      (2)   In lieu of such new parcel map, and prior to submitting a formal
application, the applicant may submit a tentative preliminary new parcel map to
be reviewed, for conceptual purposes, by the village Zoning Administrator. The
tentative preliminary new parcel map shall be drawn to a scale of not less than
that provided for in the application form, and shall include an accurate legal
description for each proposed division, and shall show the boundary lines,
dimensions, and accessibility of each proposed division from existing or
proposed public roads and public utilities. When submitting a tentative
preliminary new parcel map, the applicant shall waive the time limit
requirements for a decision and shall include a fee that is set by resolution
of the Village Council. The Zoning Administrator's recommendations regarding
the feasibility of the proposed lot division(s) is not binding upon the
Planning Commission or Village Council. The Zoning Administrator may waive the
new parcel map requirement where the foregoing tentative preliminary new parcel
map is deemed to contain adequate information to approve a proposed land
division. However, an accurate legal description of all proposed divisions
prepared by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer licensed shall at all
times be required.
   (I)   Any time limits for approval shall not commence until all of the
requirements for an application have been completed and received by the Zoning
Administrator.
(Ord. 31, passed 11-11-1985; Ord. 142, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 150.03 PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATION FOR LOT DIVISION APPROVAL.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed land division application package for
review, the Zoning Administrator shall forward the materials to the Planning
Commission, which shall set a public hearing on the application, and thereafter
shall vote on the matter and report its recommendations to the Village Council.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the Planning Commission's recommendation, Village
Council shall consider the request, may within its discretion elect to hold an
additional public hearing, and shall vote on the final decision of the village
on the application.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, Village President, or
Village Council may, if deemed appropriate and necessary, request a review and
report on the application by the Village Planner, Village Engineer, Village
Attorney, Village Treasurer, Village DPW Director, Township Assessor, County
Building Department, County Drain Commissioner, and/or other consultants or
officials.
(Ord. 31, passed 11-11-1985; Ord. 142, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 150.04 STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL OF LAND DIVISION.
   A proposed lot division shall be approved only if all of the following
criteria are met.
   (A)   All of the parcels to be created by the proposed lot division must
fully comply with the applicable lot (parcel) width, access, setback, and area
requirements of the Village Zoning Ordinance, other applicable village
ordinances, and any deed restrictions concerning the number, size, or location
of structures allowed on the parcel.
   (B)   The proposed division complies with all requirements of the Land
Division Act and the Village Zoning Ordinance.
   (C)   All parcels created and remaining have existing adequate accessibility
as defined in the Michigan Land Division Act and Village Zoning Ordinance, or
have an area available to provide such accessibility to a public road for
public utilities and emergency and other vehicles, not less than the
requirements of the applicable village ordinances and technical standards.
   (D)   There is adequate storm drainage and public utilities to serve the
parcels created by the division, as determined by the Village Engineer, or as a
condition of approval of the division, suitable easements are provided to allow
the extension of adequate storm drainage and public utilities in the future.
Unless a lot division creates a parcel which is acknowledged and declared to be
"not buildable" under §
150.05, all divisions shall result in "buildable" parcels and must each have
separate public water and sewer service with separate connections available as
required by this code; or, if public water and/or sewer service is not
available, the applicant shall provide a letter from the Livingston County
Health Department that states an on-site septic system, a well, or both where
both would be required, can be installed on the each parcel in accordance with
the legally required standards if needed.
   (E)   All taxes and special assessments on the properties sought to be
divided or combined have been paid.
   (F)   The ratio of depth to width of any parcel created by a land division
(including a remnant parcel) shall not exceed 4:1 unless otherwise provided by
the Village Zoning Ordinance.
   (G)   The proposed division shall not cause any existing building or
structure to become nonconforming.
   (H)   The proposed division would not result in a parcel containing more
than one zoning classification, unless the village has determined that multiple
zoning classifications on a resultant parcel promotes orderly and harmonious
development between adjacent parcels, such as creating a desirable transitional
buffer between adjacent parcels of different zoning classifications.
   (I)   Approval of a proposed division of land shall be subject to the
dedication of any easements necessary for current or future public roads,
public utilities, bicycle/nonmotorized vehicle paths, sidewalks, or other
necessary required public facilities.
   (J)   If the land division involves the use of a new curb cut to a public
street or road, the applicant must submit evidence of review and approval of
the curb cut location by the Village Public Works Department.
   (K)   The village may require such additional conditions and safeguards as
are deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 142, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 150.05 ALLOWANCE FOR APPROVAL OF OTHER LAND DIVISIONS/TRANSFERS.
   Notwithstanding disqualification from approval pursuant to this subchapter,
a proposed lot division which does not fully comply with the applicable lot,
setback, accessibility, and area requirements of the Village Zoning Ordinance
or this chapter may be approved where the applicant executes and records a
permanent deed restriction with the Livingston County Register of Deeds, in a
form acceptable to the village, designating the parcel as "not buildable" and
also not usable for anything other than passive uses, which restrictions shall
be enforceable by the village. Any such parcel shall also be designated as "not
buildable" in the village records, and shall not thereafter be the subject of a
request to the Zoning Board of Appeals for variance relief from the applicable
lot and/or area requirements, and shall not be used except for passive uses.
(Ord. 142, passed 2-12-2018)
§ 150.06 CONSEQUENCES OF NONCOMPLIANCE WITH LAND DIVISION APPROVAL
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any division of land in violation of any provisions of this subchapter
shall not be recognized as a lot division on the assessment roll and no
construction thereon shall be permitted which requires the issuance of a land
use, construction, or building permit; and the land shall not be eligible for
zoning approvals, such as conditional land use approval or site plan approval.
The village shall have the authority to initiate injunctive or other relief to
prevent any violation or continuance of violation of this subchapter.
   (B)   An unlawful division or attempted division shall also be voidable at
the option of the purchaser and shall subject the seller to the forfeiture of
all consideration received or pledged to be paid, together with any damages
sustained by the purchaser, recoverable in an action at law.
   (C)   Any person, firm, corporation, trust, partnership, or other legal
entity which violates or refuses to comply with any provision of this
subchapter or knowingly provides false information on an application for
approval of a lot division shall be subject to the municipal civil infraction
provisions of §
131.99 of this code.
   (D)   In addition to the penalties prescribed by §
131.99 of this code, any person who violates any of the provisions of this
subchapter shall also be subject to a civil action seeking invalidation of the
land division and appropriate injunctive or other relief.
(Ord. 142, passed 2-12-2018)
MOBILE HOMES AND TRAILER COACHES
§ 150.20 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the Village of Pinckney Mobile
Home and Trailer Coach Ordinance.
(Ord. 6, passed - -)
§ 150.21 PURPOSE.
   The comprehensive plan and scope of this subchapter is to safeguard and
promote the public health, safety, morals, prosperity and general welfare of
the residents of the Village of Pinckney by having certain regulations and
restrictions.
(Ord. 6, passed - -)
§ 150.22 TERMS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MOBILE HOME or TRAILER COACH. Any movable vehicular unit with or without
motive power, designed to permit occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping place by
one or more persons.
      TRAILER COACH PARK. Any tract, lot site, parcel of land or field arranged
or designed to accommodate three or more trailer coaches or mobile homes, for
either transient, temporary or more or less permanent type of occupancy.
   (B)   Words used in the present tense include the future; words used in the
singular include the plural; words used in the plural number include the
singular and the word SHALL is mandatory and not mere directory.
(Ord. 6, passed - -)
§ 150.23 UNLAWFUL ACTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   From and after the effective date of this subchapter, it shall be unlawful
for any person to use, within the limits of the Village of Pinckney, any mobile
home or trailer coach for dwelling purposes or any other purpose, except as
provided and permitted by this subchapter.
   (A)   The Village Council may permit, upon application, the use of a trailer
or mobile home as a temporary dwelling for a period of one year when the
occupant of the trailer is definitely engaged in the erection of a permanent
dwelling on the same lot and when necessary and proper health, sanitation,
plumbing and fresh water facilities are provided. If substantial progress has
been made toward the completion of the permanent dwelling, the Village Council
may grant an extension of 12 months.
   (B)   The Village Council may permit, upon application and upon receipt of
proof of unique hardship, the use of a trailer coach or mobile home as an
accessory dwelling to a permanent dwelling. Not more than one trailer may be
used and occupied as the accessory dwelling and then only if the occupants of
the trailer have access to and the unlimited use of the sanitary facilities of
the permanent dwelling.
   (C)   Trailers which are brought by visitors for traveling purposes may be
occupied and allowed, provided, the visitors occupying the trailers use the
toilets, bathing and laundry facilities of the dwelling of that property owner
or occupants they are visiting. Provided further, that the maximum period for
the use shall be 30 days without permit and the use shall be limited to one
visiting trailer at a dwelling. The Village Council may extend this period at
its discretion provided application is made in writing to the Council.
   (D)   Mobile homes and trailer coaches shall be legally used when located on
a farm of 40 acres or more under a temporary permit for the occupancy of
migratory farm workers. The farm owner or lessee shall first make written
application to the Village Clerk, who shall issue the permit for one or more
vehicular units after an inspection shows:
      (1)   Location of units to be not less than 200 feet from any public
highway and/or boundary of adjoining property; and
      (2)   Adequate fresh water supply and sanitary facilities a permit shall
be for a period of 60 days.
   (E)   Mobile homes and trailer coaches shall be legally used when located on
a land site approved by the village under temporary permit for the occupancy of
construction workers on a specific job. The employer shall first make written
application through the Village Clerk, giving all pertinent data, including
description of land to be used and number of vehicular units to be used.
Providing inspection shows:
      (1)   Location or units to be not less than 200 feet from any public
highway and/or boundary of adjoining property; and
      (2)   Adequate fresh water supply and sanitary facilities, then a
temporary permit shall be issued covering the period of the specific
construction job, not to exceed one year, subject to an extension for one-year
period for good cause.
   (F)   Mobile homes and trailer coaches shall be legally used when openly
parked by the owner’s own dwelling site, providing the vehicular unit is
unoccupied and located as follows: back of rear wall of dwelling not closer
than ten feet to any side or, rear line if not a street line or closer than 100
feet to any street line. The open parking or storage subject to restriction
governing the use of the premises.
(Ord. 6, passed - -) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.24 VALID NONCONFORMING USE OF MOBILE HOMES AND TRAILER COACHES.
   The use of any mobile home or trailer coach placed on a lot, parcel or tract
of land in the Village of Pinckney prior to the effective date of this
subchapter which use is prohibited by this subchapter, shall be a valid
nonconforming use, that may be continued subject to the provisions pertaining
to nonconforming uses herein contained.
(Ord. 6, passed - -)
§ 150.25 TERMINATION OF VALID NONCONFORMING USE.
   It is hereby provided that as of the effective date of this subchapter that
any nonconforming use of a mobile home or trailer coach shall cease to be valid
and shall become illegal forthwith in event of any one or more of the following
conditions pertain to the use thereof:
   (A)   If the mobile home or trailer coach is removed from the lot parcel or
tract of land on which it has boon located, the identical home or trailer
coach, nor any other vehicular unit shall be thereafter moved upon or used on
the premises; provided, however, the owner and occupant may improve the
premises by exchanging trailers or coaches so long as the exchange is
accomplished within a period of seven days and the request is made, before the
Village Council;
   (B)   If any accessory structure, garage or storage shed shall be erected
adjacent to or in proximity of the vehicular unit;
   (C)   If the mobile home or trailer coach is not connected with fresh water
supply, septic tank and drain field sewerage system prior to the effective date
of this subchapter; and
   (D)   If the yards surrounding the mobile home or trailer coach shall be
kept and unsightly to the extent or being an eyesore and a nuisance.
(Ord. 6, passed - -) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.26 ESTABLISHMENT OF PARKS.
   Establishment of trailer coach or mobile home parks shall be by permit
issued by the Village Council and under the safeguards and conditions as the
Pinckney Village Council shall prescribe.
(Ord. 6, passed - -)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Violation of §§
150.01 et seq. shall be sufficient cause for denial of an application for a
building permit.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any
provisions of §§
150.20 et seq. shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $25 nor more than
$100 for the offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. On imposition of any fine, the court shall have
the power and authority to make further order or judgement in the matter of
sentence that any person or persons so convicted shall be imprisoned in the
county jail until the fine and costs shall be paid and the imprisonment shall
be for a period of not to exceed 30 days.
(Ord. 6, passed - -; Ord. 31, passed 11-11-1985)
CHAPTER 151: WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Short title
   
151.02   Purpose
   
151.03   Definitions
General Requirements
   
151.20   Lands to which chapter applies
   
151.21   Official wetlands map
   
151.22   Notice to Department of Environment, Great Lakes and Energy
   
151.23   Property inspection
   
151.24   Use permits required
   
151.25   Permitted activities
   
151.26   Nonconforming activities
   
151.27   Use permit application
   
151.28   Review of use permit applications
   
151.29   Review standards
   
151.30   Display permits
   
151.31   Taking without compensation
   
151.32   Interpretation and application
Floodplain Management
   
151.45   Agency designated
   
151.46   Code appendix enforcement
   
151.47   Designation of regulated flood prone hazard areas
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Village of Pinckney's
Wetlands and Watercourses Ordinance.
(Ord. 34, passed 7-24-1989)
§ 151.02 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The wetlands and watercourses of the village are indispensable but
sensitive natural resources subject to flooding, erosion, soil bearing capacity
limitations and other hazards.
   (B)   In their natural state, wetlands and watercourses serve multiple
functions for flood control, stormwater storage and release, pollution control,
erosion control, wildlife habitat, aesthetics, open space and recreation.
   (C)   The continued destruction and loss of wetlands and watercourses
constitutes a distinct and immediate danger to the public health, safety and
general welfare.
   (D)   Pursuant to the Michigan Constitution 1963, Art. IV, 52, the
conservation and development of natural resources of the state is a matter of
paramount public concern in the interest of the health, safety and general
welfare of the people.
   (E)   It is, therefore, the policy of the Village of Pinckney:
      (1)   To protect wetlands and watercourses while taking into account
varying economic, ecological, hydrologic, recreation and aesthetic values;
      (2)   To provide for the protection, preservation, replacement, proper
maintenance and use of wetlands and watercourses located in the Village of
Pinckney in order to minimize disturbance to them and to prevent damage from
erosion, siltation and flooding;
      (3)   To provide for the issuance of use permits and approved activities;
      (4)   To establish standards and procedures for the review of proposed
activities in wetlands and watercourses; and
      (5)   To establish penalties for the violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 34, passed 7-24-1989)
§ 151.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVITY. Any use, operation or action including, but not limited to,
filling, dredging, constructing or excavating material and/or structures.
   AQUATIC VEGETATION. Plants and plant life forms which naturally occur in,
at, near or predominantly near water.
   BOTTOMLANCK. All land area of a lake, stream or watercourse which lies below
the ordinary high water mark and which may or may not be covered by water.
   CHANNEL. The geographical area within the natural or artificial banks of a
watercourse required to convey continuously or intermittently flowing water
under normal or average flow conditions.
   CONTIGUOUS. Any of the following:
      (1)   A permanent surface water connection or other direct physical
contact with an inland lake or pond;
      (2)   A seasonal or intermittent direct surface water connection; and
      (3)   A wetland partially or entirely located within 500 feet of the
ordinary high water mark.
   DRAINAGEWAY. Any drain, pipe, stream, creek or swale which serves to
transport water runoff to the primary watercourse system.
   FILL MATERIAL. Any soil, sand, gravel, clay, peat, debris and refuse, waste
of any kind or any other material which displaces soil or water or reduces
water retention potential.
   HYDRIC SOIL. A soil that is saturated, flooded or ponded long enough during
the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.
   MINOR ACTIVITIES. Activities that are similar in nature, that will cause
only minimal adverse environmental effects when performed separately and that
will have only minimal cumulative adverse effects on the environment.
   MINOR DRAINAGE. Includes ditching or tiling for the removal of excess soil
moisture incidental to the planting, cultivating, protecting or harvesting of
crops or improving the productivity of land in established use for agriculture,
horticulture, silviculture or lumbering.
   OFFICIAL MAP. The official Wetlands Map of the Village of Pinckney is found
on the Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes, and Energy website.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER. The line between upland and bottomland which persists
through successive changes in water levels, below which the presence and action
of the water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land is
markedly distinct from the upland and is apparent in the soil itself, the
configuration of the surface of the soil and the vegetation. On an inland lake
which has a level established by law, the ordinary high water mark means the
high establishing level. When water returns to its natural level as a result of
the permanent removal and abandonment of a dam, it means the natural ordinary
high water mark.
   OWNER. Any person who has dominion over, control of, title to and/or any
other proprietary interest in wetland and watercourse areas, or title to an
obstruction, natural or otherwise, to wetland and watercourse properties.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including governmental
agencies conducting operations within the Village of Pinckney.
   RUNOFF. Surface discharge of precipitation to a watercourse or low area.
   SEASONAL. Any intermittent or temporary activity which occurs annually and
is subject to interruption from changes in weather, water level or time of year
and may involve annual removal and replacement of a device or structure.
   STRUCTURE. Any assembly of materials above or below the surface of the land
or water, including but not limited to houses, buildings, bulkheads, piers,
docks, landings, dams, waterway obstructions, towers and utility transmission
devices.
   TEMPORARY. A time period as specified in the use permit, or if unspecified,
means an uninterruptible time period less than one year in duration.
   WATERCOURSE. Any waterway, drainageway, drain, river, stream, lake, pond or
retention basin, or any body of surface water having well defined banks,
whether continually or intermittently flowing. Watercourses subject to
regulation are designated on the official wetlands map.
   WETLANDS. Lands characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support
wetland vegetation or aquatic life and are commonly referred to as bogs,
swamps, marshes and wet meadows.
(Ord. 34, passed 7-24-1989; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 151.20 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.
   Those wetlands subject to the regulatory terms of this section include:
   (A)   All wetlands contiguous to designated watercourses including but not
limited to a 20-foot buffer zone on each side of Mill Pond, and a ten-foot
buffer zone on each side of all other streams and drains illustrated on the
official wetlands and watercourses map.
   (B)   All wetlands of more than one acre in size.
   (C)   All other wetlands determined by the Village of Pinckney to be
essential for preventing pollution, impairments or destruction of natural
resources systems and the environment, and which are so designated on the
official wetlands map.
   (D)   All retention and detention facilities constructed for the purpose of
collecting and/or directing runoff water onto any wetland or watercourse
identified but not limited to the official wetlands and watercourses map.
(Ord. 34, passed 7-24-1989; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 151.21 OFFICIAL WETLANDS MAP.
   (A)   The designated wetlands are hereby established as shown on the
official wetlands map which accompanies this chapter and which map with all
notations, references and the information shown thereon, shall be as much a
part of this chapter as if fully described herein. The official wetlands map is
not definitive of all possible wetlands within the village. Individuals may
request an on-site wetland determination from the Department of Environment,
Great Lakes and Energy. The official wetlands map was compiled from the
following sources: USGS Datum Survey, 1965 and photo revised in 1983 and the
United States Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service National
Wetlands Inventory Map. Only limited accuracy may be obtained from the use of
the official wetlands map due to scale and detail. A site specific evaluation
and field investigation by the Village Zoning Administrator or like official
will also be made during the site plan approval process to verify parcels in
question.
   (B)   The Village Council may revise the official wetlands map at any time
that new and substantial data for wetlands and watercourses are available.
Where the official wetlands map is amended to and an individual property or
several properties are affected, notice of the proposed amendment and hearing
shall be given to all owners of the property or properties at least 15 days
before the hearing.
(Ord. 34, passed 7-24-1989; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 151.22 NOTICE TO DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT, GREAT LAKES AND ENERGY.
   The Village of Pinckney shall notify the Department of Environment, Great
Lakes and Energy of the State of Michigan of the adoption of this section. The
village will require applicants to obtain applicable state permits during the
site plan approval process prior to the issuance of a final site plan approval.
(Ord. 34, passed 7-24-1989; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 151.23 PROPERTY INSPECTION.
   The Village of Pinckney, its officials, agents and employees may make
reasonable entry upon any lands or water within the village for the purpose of
enforcement of this chapter or the conduct of any investigation, survey or
study contemplated by this chapter.
(Ord. 34, passed 7-24-1989)
§ 151.24 USE PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   The draining of any wetland is an activity expressly prohibited under
Act 203; any activity occurring within the wetlands will be done in accordance
with Public Act 203.
   (B)   Except for those activities expressly permitted by §
151.25, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any activity with a
wetlands area without first having obtained a use permit upon proper
application, including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Depositing or permitting the depositing of any material, including
but not limited to, hazardous chemicals, non-biodegradable aquatic pesticides
and herbicides and harmful fertilizers into, within or upon any watercourse or
wetland area;
      (2)   Dredging, removing or permitting the dredging or removal of
material or minerals from a watercourse or wetland area;
      (3)   Erecting or building any structure including, but not limited to,
buildings, roadways, bridges of any type, tennis courts, paving, utility or
private poles or towers within or upon any watercourse or wetland area;
      (4)   Constructing, operating or maintaining any land use or development
in a wetland or watercourse area;
      (5)   Enlarging, diminishing or altering any lake, stream or other
naturally occurring watercourse;
      (6)   Creating, enlarging or diminishing any natural or artificially
constructed canal, channel, ditch, lagoon, pond, lake or other waterway for
navigation or any other purpose, whether or not connected to an existing lake,
stream or watercourse;
      (7)   Constructing, placing, enlarging, extending or removing any
temporary, seasonal or permanent operation or structure upon bottomland or
wetlands, except seasonal docks, rafts, diving platforms and other water
recreational devices customarily owned and used by individual households;
      (8)   Constructing, extending, enlarging or connecting any conduit, pipe,
culvert or open or closed drainage facility carrying storm water runoff from
any site, or any other land use permitting discharge of silt, sediment, organic
or inorganic material, chemicals, fertilizers, flammable liquids or other
polluting substances except in accordance with requirements of county, state,
federal agencies and the Village of Pinckney;
      (9)   Constructing, enlarging, extending or connecting any private or
public sewage or waste treatment plant discharge to any lake, pond, stream,
watercourse or wetland, except in accordance with requirements of county,
state, federal agencies and the Village of Pinckney; and
      (10)   Developments that increase the use of human density upon a wetland
or watercourse that would threaten the natural character of the resource or
produce a recreational impact beyond the capacity of the lake and/or stream to
provide for the health and safety of existing users.
(Ord. 34, passed 7-24-1989) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.25 PERMITTED ACTIVITIES.
   Notwithstanding the prohibition of §
151.24, the following activities are permitted with wetland areas without a use
permit, unless otherwise prohibited by statute or ordinance:
   (A)   Fishing, trapping and hunting;
   (B)   Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, wildlife and other
natural resources;
   (C)   Swimming and boating;
   (D)   The operation and maintenance of existing dams and other water control
devices, if in compliance with all applicable state statutes and ordinances;
   (E)   Installation on lakes, for noncommercial use, of any type of dock,
boat hoist, ramp, raft or other recreational structure which is placed in a
lake and removed at the end of the boating season;
   (F)   Activities by a governmental entity relating to the construction,
maintenance or repair of a public highway, street, roadway, sewer system,
drainage system or watermain facility. If constructed within a wetland, would
fall under the jurisdiction of Public Act 203.
   (G)   Where a final subdivision plat or a final site development plan
containing work, as defined in this section, has been reviewed and approved by
the Council in conformance with the requirements of this section, the approval,
together with any additional terms and conditions attached hereto, shall be
considered to have completed the requirements for a permit under this section,
which shall then be issued by the Village of Pinckney.
(Ord. 34, passed 7-24-1989)
§ 151.26 NONCONFORMING ACTIVITIES.
   An activity that was lawful before October 12, 1988, but which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this section may be continued subject to the
following:
   (A)   No activity shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a way
that increases its nonconformity with this section;
   (B)   On a building or structure devoted in whole or in part to a
nonconforming use or activity, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive
months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls,
fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 50% of the assessed
value of the building or structure;
   (C)   If a nonconforming activity is discontinued for six consecutive
months, any resumption of the activity shall conform to this section;
   (D)   If any nonconforming use or activity is destroyed, it shall not be
resumed except in conformity with the provisions of this section; and
   (E)   Activities that are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to
continue as nonconforming activities.
(Ord. 34, passed 7-24-1989) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.27 USE PERMIT APPLICATION.
   A use permit applicant shall submit the following materials to the Village
Clerk:
   (A)   A completed use permit application which includes the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and of the
applicant's agent;
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
property;
      (3)   The project location, including as applicable, the street, road or
highway, section number, name of subdivision and name of any wetlands or
watercourses which will or may be impacted;
      (4)   A detailed description and statement of the purpose of the proposed
activity;
      (5)   The location and number of trees to be removed of three-inch
caliper or greater. (The caliper of a tree is its diameter at four and one-half
feet above the ground);
      (6)   Whenever the removal of material, placement of fill material or
grading is proposed; and
      (7)   The amount of type of material to be removed or deposited.
   (B)   A use permit application fee in an amount equal to the prevailing land
use permit fee;
   (C)   Where the applicant is not the owner of the property, a written
authorization from the owner permitting the proposed activity; and
   (D)   A site plan, including topographical survey, sealed by a registered
engineer or registered surveyor, which includes the following information:
      (1)   The shape and dimensions of the lot or parcel, together with the
existing and proposed locations of structure and improvements, if any;
      (2)   Specification of the extent of all areas to be disturbed, the
depths at which removal or deposition activities are proposed, the angle or
repose of all slopes of deposition material, and/or sides of channels or
excavation resulting from removal operations;
      (3)   Existing general soil conditions throughout the parcel;
      (4)   Location and dimensions of all setbacks, easements and existing and
proposed public and private utilities; and
      (5)   Statements as to grade changes proposed and proposed drainage
pattern changes for the lot or parcel and how the changes for the lot or parcel
and how the changes will affect these regulations. Existing contour data for
the entire property with a vertical contour interval of no more than two feet,
and vertical contour data at an interval of no more than one foot for all areas
to be disturbed by proposed operations, extending for a distance of at least 50
feet beyond the limits of the areas. Indicated elevations shall be based on
United States Geological Survey datum.
(Ord. 34, passed 7-24-1989; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 151.28 REVIEW OF USE PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the submitted use permit
application to insure that all required information has been provided. At the
request of the applicant or the Zoning Administrator, an administrative review
meeting may be held to review the proposed activity in light of the purpose and
review standards of this chapter. The Zoning Administrator, Village Engineer or
qualified Village Agent shall, after review of the proposed activity, submit a
report and recommendations as to the propriety of the proposed use under the
review standards of §
151.29.
   (B)   The granting or denying of all use permits shall be the responsibility
of the Village of Pinckney Zoning Administrator. The granting or denying of all
permits shall be governed by the standards contained in §
151.29.
   (C)   Prior to a determination by the Zoning Administrator on a use permit
application, notice of the application and the date, time and location for
public comment shall be mailed by regular first class mail to those persons to
whom real property adjacent to the proposed activity is assessed. Notice shall
include a date prior to which written comments regarding the application may be
submitted to the village for consideration by the Zoning Administrator.
   (D)   Whenever a use permit application is denied, the reasons for denial
shall be transmitted, in writing to the applicant.
   (E)   Whenever a use permit application is granted, the Zoning Administrator
shall:
      (1)   Impose the conditions on the manner and extent of the proposed
activity or use as are necessary to ensure that the intent of this chapter is
carried out and that the activity or use will be conducted in the manner as
will cause the least possible damage, encroachment or interference with natural
resources and natural processes within the watercourse and/or wetland area;
      (2)   The expiration date of which any wetland operation must be
completed shall be within one year from the date of issuance;
      (3)   Require the filing with the village administration of a cash bond
or irrevocable letter of credit, in the form and amount as determined necessary
by the village to ensure compliance with the approved use permit; and
      (4)   Send written notice of the granting of the permit to all persons
who have submitted written comments on the application to the Zoning
Administrator.
   (F)   A permit approved by the Zoning Administrator shall not be issued
until ten calendar days following the date of the approval. Any interested
person who is aggrieved by the granting or denying of a use permit may request
an appeal of the decision to the Village Council. A request for appeal must be
filed within ten calendar days following the grant or denial. If an appeal is
requested during the ten- day period, the issuance of any permit shall be
suspended pending the outcome of the appeal. The Village Council, upon review,
any reverse, affirm or modify the determination and/or permit issued by the
Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 34, passed 7-24-1989; Ord. 155, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 151.29 REVIEW STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall govern the grant or denial of use permit
applications:
   (A)   The proposed activity shall not threaten public health or safety by
increasing flooding, erosion, siltation, pollution or stormwater runoff
volumes;
   (B)   The proposed activity shall not interfere with the natural functions
of wetlands and watercourses, including the flow of waters and nutrients
between wetlands and adjacent watercourses;
   (C)   The proposed activity shall not unnecessarily alter the natural grade
or soils of any wetland or watercourse, or alter the flow of surface or
subsurface water to or from the wetland at any season of the year;
   (D)   The proposed activity shall not result in the destruction of critical
wildlife and waterfowl habitat, including habitat important for migratory
waterfowl;
   (E)   The proposed activity shall not interfere with public rights to the
enjoyment and use of public waters;
   (F)   The proposed activity shall not interfere with the scenic, aesthetic
recreational and educational benefits of wetlands and watercourses;
   (G)   There shall be no less harmful, feasible and prudent alternatives to
the proposed activities;
   (H)   The proposed activity must be consistent with the promotion of the
public health, safety and welfare in light of the paramount concern for the
protection of its natural resources from pollution, impairment or destruction;
   (I)   The proposed activity shall be in compliance with all other applicable
statutes and ordinances; and
   (J)   Proposed recreational activities shall not increase user density
beyond the ability of the resource to provide for a safe and healthy
environment.
(Ord. 34, passed 7-24-1989) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.30 DISPLAY PERMITS.
   The permit grantee shall prominently display on the site the permit was
issued. The display shall be continuous while work authorized under the permit
is being done, and for at least ten days after the completion thereof. Failure
to allow entry for inspection by village representatives pursuant to the
conditions attached to the permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 34, passed 7-24-1989)
§ 151.31 TAKING WITHOUT COMPENSATION.
   (A)   This chapter shall not be construed to abrogate rights or authority
otherwise protected by law.
   (B)   For the purposes of determining if there has been a taking of property
without just compensation under Michigan Law, an owner of property who has
sought and has been denied a permit or has been made subject to modifications
or conditions in the permit under this chapter may file an action in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   If the court determines that an action of the village pursuant to this
chapter constitutes a taking of the property of a person, then the court shall
order the village, at the village's option, to do one or more of the following:
      (1)   Compensate the property owner for the full amount of the lost
value;
      (2)   Purchase the property in the public interest as determined before
its value was affected by this chapter; and
      (3)   Modify its action with respect to the property so that the action
will not constitute a taking of the property.
(Ord. 34, passed 7-24-1989)
§ 151.32 INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION.
   In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public
health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare. It is not
intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or
interfere with any existing provisions of law or ordinance with any rules,
regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted
or issued pursuant to the law relating to activities within wetland areas;
provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than
is required by existing ordinance or by rules, regulations or permits, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.
(Ord. 34, passed 7-24-1989)
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
§ 151.45 AGENCY DESIGNATED.
   Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance
with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, being
M.C.L.A. § 125.1508b(6), the building officials of the county is hereby
designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the
village under Act 230, of Public Acts of 1972, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§
125.1501 et seq. The county assumes responsibility for the administration and
enforcement of said act throughout the corporate limits of the community
adopting this subchapter.
(Ord. 100, passed 4-11-2011; Am. Ord. 105, passed 6-13-2011)
§ 151.46 CODE APPENDIX ENFORCEMENT.
   Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance
with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, being ,
M.C.L.A. § 125.1508b(6) Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be
enforced by the enforcing agency within the county.
(Ord. 100, passed 4-11-2011; Am. Ord. 105, passed 6-13-2011)
§ 151.47 DESIGNATION OF REGULATED FLOOD PRONE HAZARD AREAS.
   The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
entitled “Livingston County, Michigan (All Jurisdictions)” and dated September
17, 2008, and the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) of
26993C, 0430D and 0433D and dated September 17, 2008, are adopted by reference
for the purposes of administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and
declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to
provide the content of the “Flood Hazards” section of Table R301.2(1) of the
Michigan Residential Code.
(Ord. 100, passed 4-11-2011; Am. Ord. 105, passed 6-13-2011)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefore shall be fined a maximum
of $1,000 for each conviction, or shall be punished by imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days for each offense, or by both the fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court, together with costs of the
prosecution. Each day upon which the violation shall occur shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (B)   Any use or activity in violation of the terms of this chapter is
hereby declared to be a nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any
court of competent jurisdiction. The Village Council, in addition to other
remedies, including those provided in division (C) below, may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, abate or restrain the violation.
All costs, fees and expenses in connection with the action shall be assessed as
damages against the violation.
   (C)   In the event of a violation, the Village of Pinckney shall have the
power to order complete restoration of the wetland area involved by the person
or agent responsible for the violation. If the responsible person or agent does
not complete the restoration within the time specified in the order (not to
exceed 18 months), the village shall have the authority to restore the affected
wetlands to the prior condition wherever possible and the person or agent
responsible for the original violation shall be held liable to the village for
the cost of restoration.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the village
by reason of the violation.
(Ord. 34, passed 7-24-1989)
CHAPTER 152: ZONING
Section
Purpose and Scope
   
152.001   Authority and title
   
152.002   Purpose
   
152.003   Scope
   
152.004   Vested right
   
152.005   Conflicting laws and regulations
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.020   Compliance required
   
152.021   Zoning administration
   
152.022   Duties of the Zoning Administrator
   
152.023   Land use permits
   
152.024   Consultants
   
152.025   Fees
   
152.026   Performance guarantee
Zoning Districts and Map
   
152.040   Establishment of districts
   
152.041   Zoning map
   
152.042   Interpretation
   
152.043   Application
   
152.044   Table of dimensions
   
152.045   Table of uses
Low Density Residential District
   
152.060   Purpose
   
152.061   Permitted uses
   
152.062   Special land uses
   
152.063   Site development standard
Medium Density Residential District
   
152.080   Purpose
   
152.081   Permitted uses
   
152.082   Special land uses
   
152.083   Site development standards
High Density Residential District
   
152.100   Purpose
   
152.101   Permitted uses
   
152.102   Special land uses
   
152.103   Site development standards
Multiple-Family Residential District
   
152.120   Purpose
   
152.121   Permitted uses
   
152.122   Special land uses
   
152.123   Site development standards
Residential-Office Business District
   
152.140   Purpose
   
152.141   Permitted uses
   
152.142   Special land uses
   
152.143   Site development standards
Central Business District
   
152.160   Purpose
   
152.161   Permitted uses
   
152.162   Special land uses
   
152.163   Site development standards
Secondary Business District
   
152.180   Purpose
   
152.181   Permitted uses
   
152.182   Special land uses
   
152.183   Site development standards
Research-Technology-Office District
   
152.200   Purpose
   
152.201   Permitted uses
   
152.202   Special land uses
   
152.203   Site development standards
Office District
   
152.210   Purpose
   
152.211   Permitted uses
   
152.212   Special land uses
   
152.213   Site development standards
Public Lands District
   
152.220   Purpose
   
152.221   Permitted uses
   
152.222   Special land uses
   
152.223   Site development standards
Planned Unit Development
   
152.230   Purpose
   
152.231   General requirements
   
152.232   Eligibility criteria
   
152.233   Density
   
152.234   Site development standards
   
152.235   PUD rezoning application and procedure
   
152.236   PUD conditions
   
152.237   Authority of Zoning Board of Appeals regarding variances
   
152.238   Phasing and commencement of construction
   
152.239   Violations
Special Land Uses
   
152.240   Purpose
   
152.241   Permit application and process
   
152.242   General approval criteria
   
152.243   Specific approval criteria
General Provisions
   
152.260   Purpose
   
152.261   Roads and access
   
152.262   Supplementary use regulations
   
152.263   Supplementary yard regulations
   
152.264   Supplementary height regulations
   
152.265   Sidewalks
   
152.266   Condominium developments
   
152.267   Definitions
   
152.268   Transient and seasonal sales
   
152.269   Accessory dwelling units (ADU)
   
152.270   Storage containers as storage buildings
   
152.271   Alternative energy systems
Off-Street Parking and Loading
   
152.280   Purpose
   
152.281   General requirements
   
152.282   Off-street parking
   
152.283   Minimum off-street parking spaces
   
152.284   Off-street loading
   
152.285   Drive-through facilities
Signs
   
152.300   Purpose
   
152.301   Permits
   
152.302   Permitted signs in all districts
   
152.303   Prohibited signs
   
152.304   General standards
   
152.305   Miscellaneous permitted signs
   
152.306   Permitted ground signs
   
152.307   Reserved
   
152.308   Permitted wall signs
   
152.309   Permitted projecting or suspended signs
   
152.310   Permitted temporary signs
   
152.311   Abandoned signs
   
152.312   Nonconforming signs
   
152.313   Regulation and enforcement
Landscaping and Screening
   
152.325   Purpose
   
152.326   Application
   
152.327   Landscape plans
   
152.328   General landscape standards
   
152.329   Landscaped buffer areas
   
152.330   Foundation plantings
   
152.331   Landscaping adjacent to roads
   
152.332   Landscaping off-street parking lots
   
152.333   Tree and shrub standards
   
152.334   Installation and maintenance
   
152.335   Waivers and modifications
   
152.336   Nonconforming sites
Residential Open Space Development
   
152.350   Purpose
   
152.351   General requirements
   
152.352   Permitted uses
   
152.353   Density
   
152.354   Site development standards
Environmental Performance Standards
   
152.370   Purpose
   
152.371   Environmental performance standards
Site Plan Review
   
152.385   Purpose
   
152.386   Plot plan approval
   
152.387   Site plan approval
   
152.388   General application standards
   
152.389   Preliminary site plan application
   
152.390   Preliminary site plan review
   
152.391   Final site plan application
   
152.392   Impact assessment report
   
152.393   Final site plan review
   
152.394   Amendment to approved plot plan or site plan
   
152.395   Modification during construction
   
152.396   Construction observation and inspections
   
152.397   As-built drawing
Nonconforming Lots, Uses and Structures
   
152.415   Purpose
   
152.416   General provisions
   
152.417   Nonconforming lots
   
152.418   Nonconforming uses
   
152.419   Nonconforming structures
   
152.420   Change of tenancy or ownership
   
152.421   Special land uses
   
152.422   Purchase or condemnation
   
152.423   Prior construction approval
Zoning Board of Appeals
   
152.440   Authority
   
152.441   Membership, removal, terms
   
152.442   Powers and duties
   
152.443   Procedures
   
152.444   Variances
   
152.445   Rules for granting variances
Amendment
   
152.460   Amendment procedure
   
152.461   Map amendment criteria
 
   
152.999   Penalty
PURPOSE AND SCOPE
§ 152.001 AUTHORITY AND TITLE.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the City and Village Zoning Act, Public
Act 207 of 1921, as amended (M.C.L.A §§ 125.581 et seq.) and subsequently
amended pursuant to the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006,
as amended (M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 et seq.). This chapter shall be known and may
be cited as the Village of Pinckney Zoning Ordinance and may hereinafter be
referred to as this chapter.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 87 ZBA, passed 3-23-2009)
§ 152.002 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance to promote public health, safety
and welfare, encourage the use of land and natural resources in accordance with
their character, adaptability and suitability for particular purposes, enhance
social and economic stability, prevent excessive concentration of population,
reduce natural and man-made hazards, lessen traffic congestion, promote the
development of adequate improvements, provide recreation opportunities and open
space, enhance the value of real property, allow for a variety of land uses and
to facilitate the expenditure of funds for public facilities and services by
establishing herein standards for physical development in accordance with the
goals, objectives and policies contained in the Village of Pinckney
Comprehensive Plan and Parks and Recreation Plan and to provide for the
administration and enforcement of the standards.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.003 SCOPE.
   No lot, land use or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be created,
established, developed, erected, constructed, reconstructed, expanded or
altered, except as permitted by the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.004 VESTED RIGHT.
   Nothing in this Zoning Ordinance shall be interpreted or construed to give
rise to any permanent vested right in the continuation of any particular use,
zoning district or permissible activity therein. Any such use, zoning district
or activity is hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or
modification by the village as may be necessary to protect public health,
safety and welfare.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.005 CONFLICTING LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is not intended by this Zoning Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul
or in any way impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or
ordinance, other than the Zoning Ordinance previously adopted by the village
and any amendments.
   (B)   The Village Planning Commission, Village Council or Zoning Board of
Appeals may withhold granting of approval of any use, site plan or other
approval required by this chapter pending approvals that may be required by
state, county or federal agencies or departments.
   (C)   Whenever this Zoning Ordinance imposes more stringent requirements
than are imposed by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, this Zoning
Ordinance shall govern. Whenever any other law or ordinance imposes more
stringent requirements than are imposed by the provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance, the provisions of the other laws or ordinances shall govern.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.020 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No permit shall be issued by the village, or any official thereof, for
the creation, establishment, development, erection, grading, clearing,
construction, reconstruction, movement, expansion or alteration of any lot,
land use or structure except as permitted by the provisions of this chapter. In
the event a permit is issued in violation of this chapter, it is “void ab
initio” (void from the beginning).
   (B)   The village may suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions
of this chapter whenever the permit is issued erroneously on the basis of
incorrect information supplied by the applicant or his or her agent and/or is
in violation of this chapter or any other village ordinances or regulations.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005) Penalty, §
152.999
§ 152.021 ZONING ADMINISTRATION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Zoning Administrator who shall be nominated by the Village President and
appointed by the Village Council.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.022 DUTIES OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Administrative duties.
      (1)   Land use applications. The Zoning Administrator shall receive and
review zoning and land use applications for compliance or noncompliance with
the provisions of this chapter, and then process the applications as follows:
         (a)   Land use permits. The Zoning Administrator shall review all land
use permit applications and approve the land use permit when there is full
compliance with this chapter.
         (b)   Preliminary site plans. The Zoning Administrator shall review
all applications for preliminary site plan approval, and other matters that the
Planning Commission is required to decide under this chapter, formulate
recommendations, refer applications with recommendations to the Planning
Commission for determination and notify the applicant, in writing, of any
decision of the Planning Commission.
         (c)   Final site plans, special land uses and re-zonings. The Zoning
Administrator shall review all applications for final site plan approval,
special land use permits, re-zonings and other matters that the Village Council
or Planning Commission is required to decide under this chapter, formulate
recommendations, report to the Planning Commission with recommendations, submit
to the Village Council the applications together with the recommendations of
the Planning Commission and notify the applicant, in writing, of any decision
of the Planning Commission or Village Council.
         (d)   Variances and appeals. The Zoning Administrator shall review all
applications for variances and appeals, and other matters that the Zoning Board
of Appeals is required to decide under this chapter, formulate recommendations,
refer applications with recommendations to the Zoning Board of Appeals for
determination and notify the applicant, in writing, of any decision of the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
      (2)   Public notice.  When the provisions of this chapter require a
public hearing, the Zoning Administrator shall inform the Village Clerk of the
date, time and substance of the public hearing and the Clerk shall provide
public notice of the hearing in accordance with the standards and procedures
established in division (C) below.
      (3)   Other administrative duties. The Zoning Administrator shall:
         (a)   Evaluate proposals for uses in all districts to assure
compliance with provisions of this chapter;
         (b)   Conduct field inspections, surveys and investigations, prepare
maps, charts and other materials when necessary or desirable for the
administration of this chapter;
         (c)   Maintain an updated copy of the official zoning map, consistent
with the original map to be maintained by the Village Clerk;
         (d)   Maintain a record of the legal nonconforming uses and structures
in the village for the purpose of implementing §§
152.415 et seq.;
         (e)   Maintain written records of all actions taken by the Zoning
Administrator and keep custody of all records of the Planning Commission and
Zoning Board of Appeals; and
         (f)   Provide the forms necessary for the various land use
applications to the village as required by this chapter.
   (B)   Enforcement duties. There is vested in the Zoning Administrator the
duty of enforcing this chapter and the power necessary for the enforcement. In
implementing this duty, the Zoning Administrator shall conduct investigations
to determine compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter,
and any conditional approvals of the Planning Commission, Village Council or
Zoning Board of Appeals and order correction, in writing, of all conditions
found to be in violation.
      (1)   The written orders shall be served personally or by certified mail
upon any person, firm or corporation deemed by the Zoning Administrator to be
violating the provisions of this chapter. If the person, firm or corporation is
not the owner of the land on, or the structure in which the violation is deemed
to exist, a copy of the order shall be sent by certified mail to the owner of
the land or structure. The date of mailing shall be deemed the date of service
of any order served by certified mail.
      (2)   The written orders shall include an order to immediately cease and
desist all regulated activities until the development site is brought into
compliance.
      (3)   All violations shall be corrected within three days after the order
to correct is issued or in the longer period of time, not to exceed six months,
as the Zoning Administrator shall deem necessary and appropriate. A violation
not corrected within this period shall be reported to the Village Attorney, who
is hereby authorized to and may initiate procedures to eliminate the violation
(see § 152.999). The Zoning Administrator may otherwise issue municipal civil
infraction citations for any violations.
   (C)   Public notice. When notice of a village action is required, such
notice shall comply with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of
2006, M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 et seq., the Open Meetings Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261
et seq. and the provisions of this section.
      (1)   Responsibility. When the provisions of this section or the Michigan
Zoning Enabling Act requires that public notice be provided, the Zoning
Administrator or other person specifically designated by the Village Council
shall be responsible for preparing the notice, having it published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village and mailed or delivered as
provided in this section.
      (2)   Content. All required mail, personal and newspaper notices shall
include the following information.
         (a)   Nature of the request.  The notice shall identify whether the
request is for a re-zoning, text amendment, special land use, planned unit
development, variance, appeal, ordinance interpretation or other purpose.
         (b)   Information regarding the subject property. The notice shall
provide the following information with regard to the property that is the
subject of the request, herein referred to as the “subject property.” The
notice shall list all existing street addresses relative to the subject
property(s). Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such
addresses currently exist relative to the subject property. If there are no
street addresses, other means of identification may be used such as a tax
parcel identification number, identifying the nearest cross streets and/or
including a map showing the location of the subject property. Street addresses
do not need to be listed when 11 or more adjacent properties are proposed for a
zoning amendment, or re-zoning, or when the request is for an ordinance
interpretation not involving a specific property.
         (c)   Time and place of hearing. The notice shall indicate the date,
time and place of any public hearing(s).
         (d)   Time and place where proposed text and maps are located.  The
notice shall indicate the time and place where any proposed zoning ordinance
text and any maps may be examined.
         (e)   Written comments. The notice shall include a statement
describing when and where written comments will be received concerning the
request, and that the public may appear at the public hearing in person or by
counsel.
         (f)   Handicap access.  The notice shall provide information
concerning how handicap access will be accommodated if the meeting facility is
not handicap accessible.
      (3)   Publication of notice in newspaper. When notice of a public hearing
is required, the Zoning Administrator shall cause such notice to be published
in a newspaper of general circulation within the village not less than 15 days
before the scheduled date of the public hearing.
      (4)   Notice by mail or personal delivery.
         (a)   General. When the provisions of this section or state law
require that notice be provided by mail or personal delivery, such notice shall
be provided as follows:
            1.   To the owner(s) of the subject property and to the applicant,
if the applicant is different than the owner(s) of the property;
            2.   If real property is the subject of the notice, to all persons
to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the subject property, and
to all occupants of structures within 300 feet of the subject property,
regardless of whether the property or occupant is located within the boundaries
of the village;
            3.   Notification to owners and occupants (but not applicants)
shall not be required for any zoning amendment requests involving 11 or more
adjacent properties, or an ordinance interpretation request or for appeals that
do not involve a specific property;
            4.   If the name of the occupant is not known, the term “occupant”
may be used in making notification required hereunder;
            5.   Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a
structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or
spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses
or organizations, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive
notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four dwelling
units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals,
partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the manager
or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the
primary entrance to the structure;
            6.   Each gas, electric and pipeline public utility company, each
telecommunication service provider, each railroad operating within the district
or zone affected, and the Airport Manager of each airport that registers its
name and mailing address with the Clerk of the Village for the purpose of
receiving notices of public hearing; and
            7.   To all other individuals, organizations, firms or corporations
which have registered in accordance with division (C)(4)(a)6. above.
         (b)   Procedures regarding notice. Notice shall be deemed mailed upon
its deposit with the United States Postal Service, properly addressed and
mailed first class with postage fully prepaid. The Zoning Administrator shall
prepare a list of property owners, registrants and others to whom notice was
mailed, as well as anyone else to whom notice was delivered otherwise than by
mail.
         (c)   Timing. Unless otherwise provided in the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 et seq., notice of a public hearing shall be
provided, whether via mail or in person, not less than 15 days before the
scheduled date of the public hearing.
      (5)   Conformance to court decree. Any amendment for the purpose of
conforming a provision of the Zoning Ordinance to a decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction as to any specific lands may be adopted by the Village
Council and the notice of the adopted amendment published without referring the
amendment to any board or agency provided for under the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act, M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 et seq.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 87 ZBA, passed 3-23-2009; Ord. 139, passed 9-
11-2017; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 152.023 LAND USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Compliance required.
      (1)   No lot shall be cleared, graded or changed in use, and no
structure, including sheds, shall be erected, altered or changed in use until
the Zoning Administrator has approved a land use permit waiver for the
activity.
      (2)   A land use permit shall be applied for at least 14 business days
prior to commencement of any activity regulated by this Zoning Ordinance and
prior to application for a building permit.
   (B)   Application information. An application for a land use permit shall
include the established processing fee, a village application form and any
other information required by this chapter, including a plot plan or approved
site plan in compliance with §§
152.385 et seq. The application shall also include proof of any other necessary
village approvals such as re-zonings, variances and special use permits.
   (C)   Review process. The Zoning Administrator shall confirm that the
application fully complies with the requirements of this chapter. Upon
approval, the Zoning Administrator shall keep a copy of the approved land use
permit, including accompanying plot plans or site plans in the Village Hall.
      (1)   Land use permit. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a land use
permit so as to allow the beginning of construction. Upon issuance of a land
use permit, the petitioner shall apply for all necessary building permits from
the Livingston County building official and all other relevant agencies.
      (2)   Certificate of compliance. Upon completion of construction, it
shall be the duty of the property owner or his or her designee to contact the
Zoning Administrator and request issuance of a certificate of compliance. The
certificate of compliance shall be approved if the development is in compliance
with this chapter, the Village Technical Standards and any conditions imposed
hereunder. Upon issuance of a certificate of compliance, the petitioner shall
apply for all necessary certificates of occupancy from the Livingston County
Building Official.
   (D)   Expiration. The land use permit shall become null and void if work for
which the permit was issued is not started within six months after the date of
the issuance.
   (E)   Revocation. If the property owner and/or developer deviates from the
approved land use permit, the Zoning Administrator shall provide written notice
of permit violation in accordance with §
152.022(B).
      (1)   The notice shall include an order to immediately cease and desist
all activity in violation of the approved land use permit, effective upon the
date of service.
      (2)   The notice shall also include written notification that the Zoning
Administrator will revoke the land use permit in ten business days and civil
infraction penalties may be imposed in accordance with legal procedures until
the project is brought into compliance.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 82, passed 5-12-2008; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-
2021) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.024 CONSULTANTS.
   From time to time, at the cost of the applicant, the village may employ
planning, engineering, legal, traffic or other special consultants to assist in
the review of site plans, special land use permits, re-zonings or other matters
related to the planning and development of the village.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.025 FEES.
   The Village Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses, and a collection procedure for all zoning applications, appeals and
other matters pertaining to this chapter. The village shall have the authority
to include fees for the use of engineering, planning, legal or other special
consultants. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the village offices and
may be altered, amended or waived only by the Village Council. No permit, site
plan or land use approval shall be issued until the costs, charges, fees or
expenses have been paid in full, nor shall any action be taken by the village
until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 152.026 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.
   (A)   Purpose. The Village Council or Qualified Village Agent may require
that a performance guarantee be deposited with the Village Clerk to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any conditions imposed
hereunder and full completion of necessary improvements [see definition under §
152.026 (B), below]. The performance guarantee shall be of an amount equal to
125% of the estimated construction costs associated with the project to cover
costs associated with the normal rate of inflation.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      IMPROVEMENTS. Those features and actions associated with a project that
are considered necessary by the Planning Commission or Village Council to
protect natural resources or the public health, safety and welfare, including
roads, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening, landscaping and drainage.
Improvements do not include the entire project that is the subject of zoning
approval.
      PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. A cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank
letter of credit, corporate surety bond or combination thereof, in the amount
of 125% of the estimated cost of the improvements for which the guarantee is
required.
   (C)   Estimated cost of improvements. The estimated cost of the improvements
for which a performance guarantee is required shall be determined by the
applicant and verified by the village. The village shall be authorized to
employ the Village Engineer and/or Department of Public Works and/or
consultants to review cost estimates and conduct periodic inspections of the
improvements. If the amount of the estimated cost is not reasonably
ascertainable by the village, the applicant may be required to submit:
      (1)   A certified estimate prepared by the applicant's licensed engineer
or architect; or
      (2)   Alternatively, a bona fide contract for the work to be performed,
including a provision authorizing enforcement of the contract by the village in
the event of a default by the applicant.
   (D)   Terms and provisions of performance guarantees.
      (1)   The performance guarantee shall be deposited with the Village Clerk
at the time of the issuance of a land use permit authorizing the development.
The village may not require the deposit of the performance guarantee before the
date on which the village is prepared to issue the land use permit.
      (2)   The land use permit shall prescribe the period of time within which
the improvements for which the performance guarantee has been required are to
be completed. This period shall begin from the date of issuance of the land use
permit and shall not exceed two years.
      (3)   A letter of credit and corporate surety bond shall cover a time
period equal to or longer than the time anticipated to complete improvements,
and shall require 30 days' advance written notice to the village prior to
termination.
      (4)   If the performance guarantee is in the form of cash or a certified
check, the Clerk shall deposit the funds in an interest-bearing account in a
financial institution with which the village regularly conducts business.
      (5)   The entire performance guarantee, including accrued interest, shall
be returned to the applicant upon satisfactory completion of the required
improvements, as determined by the village.
      (6)   In the event the performance guarantee posted is a cash deposit or
certified check, the village, upon written request by the applicant, shall
rebate to the applicant 50% of the deposited funds when 75% of the required
improvements are completed as confirmed by the village, and rebate the
remaining 50% of the deposited funds when 100% of the required improvements are
completed as confirmed by the village.
      (7)   In the event the applicant does not install or maintain the
required improvements within the time period established by the village,
following notice to the property owner and/or other responsible parties, the
village shall have the right to use the performance guarantee and any accrued
interest to complete the improvements through contract or otherwise, including
specifically the right to enter upon the subject property to make the
improvements. One or more of the following methods may be used to provide
notice to the property owner, regular mail to the address on the permit
application and/or by delivery of the notice to the property owner at the
address and/or by posting the property.
      (8)   If the performance guarantee is not sufficient to allow the village
to complete the improvements for which the guarantee was posted, the applicant
shall be required to pay the village the amount by which the cost of completing
the improvements exceeds the amount of the performance guarantee deposited.
Should the village use the performance guarantee, or a portion thereof to
complete the required improvements, any amounts remaining after the completion
shall be applied first to the village's administrative costs including, without
limitation, attorney fees, planning consultant fees, engineering consultant
fees and similar expenses, with any balance remaining being refunded to the
applicant.
      (9)   If the applicant has posted a performance guarantee or bond with
another governmental agency other than the village to insure completion of a
required improvement, the applicant shall not be required to deposit a
performance guarantee with the village for that same improvement.
      (10)   At the time the performance guarantee is deposited with the
village and prior to the issuance of a land use permit, the applicant may be
required to enter into a written agreement with the village incorporating the
terms and provisions applicable to the use of the performance guarantee,
provided, however, that in the absence of such an agreement, the terms and
provisions of this section shall govern.
      (11)   A performance guarantee in the form of a performance bond shall be
posted by the proprietor prior to the beginning of construction to insure
complete construction of structures and development of the land area as
proposed and approved. Such bond shall be posted in an amount equal to 125% of
the estimated cost of the site improvements as identified in the fee schedule
and may be reduced in proportion to the amount of work accomplished or the
amount of land left undisturbed upon recommendation of the Village Engineer or
Qualified Village Agent. A performance bond shall be returnable in full upon
the issuance of a certificate of compliance of the completion of all
construction phases, and approval from the Village Engineer or Qualified
Village Agent. The performance bond will meet the requirements set forth in §
152.026(E)(1) through (E)(4).
   (E)   Maintenance and guarantee bonds. The proprietor shall submit to the
village a two-year maintenance and guarantee bond, equal to the estimated cost
of the site improvements as established by the fee schedule. This shall be done
before the village accepts any improvements by the proprietor. An acceptable
surety bond shall be issued:
      (1)   By a company licensed to do business in the State of Michigan by
the Department of Labor and Economic Growth, Office of Financial and Insurance
Services;
      (2)   By a company with a rating of not less than "A" as determined by
A.M. Best Company or a similarly recognized rating agency;
      (3)   In a form that does not require the village to expend money to
complete the project bonded and thereafter seek reimbursement from the surety
company; and
      (4)   With a provision specifying that any dispute on whether and/or the
amount of payment to be made by the surety shall be resolved by binding
arbitration.
   (F)   Insurance.
      (1)   Prior to construction and/or project improvements, the contractor
shall procure and maintain during the term of the project, public liability and
property damage insurance with an insurance company rated A+ with Michigan Best
Rating System, in such amounts as will be adequate to protect the public, the
village, village employees and agents, Village Engineer, Livingston County
Drain Commission, Livingston County Road Commission, Livingston County Building
Department, and other parties of interest as required by the village and shall
not be less than the limits set forth in the fee schedule.
      (2)   Certificates of insurance will be furnished and the Village of
Pinckney will be the certificate holder. Underground construction, where
applicable, shall be specified in the coverage. Certificates of coverage signed
by the insurance carriers shall include a guarantee that 30 days written notice
shall be given by the insurance carrier to the village prior to cancellation of
or any changes in the respective policies. In the event that insurance is
canceled, operations shall cease prior to the cancellation date and shall not
resume until evidence is provided that proper insurance is again in effect.
Additional insured shall include the Village of Pinckney, the Village Council
and individual members thereof, village employees and agents for the village,
the Village Engineer and their employees, Livingston County Drain Commission,
Livingston County Road Commission, Livingston County Building Department and
other parties of interest as required by the village.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
§ 152.040 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the village is hereby divided into the
following ten zoning districts, which shall be known by the following symbols
and names:
   (A)   R1: Low Density Residential District;
   (B)   R2: Medium Density Residential District;
   (C)   R3: High Density Residential District;
   (D)   R4: Multiple-Family Residential District;
   (E)   ROB: Residential-Office-Business District;
   (F)   CBD: Central Business District;
   (G)   SBD: Secondary Business District;
   (H)   RTO:   Research-Technology-Office;
   (I)   O:   Office; and
   (J)   PL:   Public Lands Office.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 98, passed 3-28-2011)
§ 152.041 ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The boundaries of the districts listed in §
152.040 are defined and established as depicted on the official zoning map of
the Village of Pinckney. The zoning map along with all notations, references
and other explanatory information, shall accompany and be made a part of this
chapter.
   (B)   Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the zoning map that
may be published, a true and current copy of the zoning map available for
public inspection shall be located in and maintained by the Office of the
Village Clerk. The Clerk's copy shall be the final authority as to the current
status of any land, lot, district, use or structure in the village. The
official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the Village
President, attested to by the Village Clerk.
   (C)   Three copies of the official zoning map shall be maintained and kept
up-to-date by the Village of Pinckney. One in the Clerk's office, one in the
Zoning Administrator's office and one in the Pinckney Community Public Library.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.042 INTERPRETATION.
   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
districts indicated on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   A boundary that approximately follows the centerline of a road, alley
or easement shall be construed as following the centerline;
   (B)   A boundary that approximately follows a recorded lot line or the line
bounding a parcel shall be construed as following the line;
   (C)   A boundary that approximately follows a municipal boundary line shall
be construed as following the line;
   (D)   A boundary that follows a railroad line shall be construed as being
located midway in the right-of-way;
   (E)   The scale of the zoning map shall determine any distance not
specifically indicated on the map; and
   (F)   Where an existing physical feature is at variance with that shown on
the zoning map, or another circumstance (such as scale, lack of detail or
illegibility) prevents a clear interpretation of a zoning district boundary,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall interpret the location of the district
boundary upon written application or its own motion.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.043 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Compliance. All lots, uses and structures shall comply with the
standards set forth in the district in which they are located, except as
otherwise provided for in this chapter. Uses and structures in all districts
shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter, including §§
152.240 et seq. through §§
152.415 et seq., and all other applicable federal, state and local codes and
ordinances.
   (B)   Allowable uses. Allowable land uses are specifically listed within
each district and are classified as follows:
      (1)   Permitted use. A use allowed by right, if otherwise in compliance
with the standards set forth in the applicable zoning district.
      (2)   Special use. A use that may be compatible with permitted uses, if
approved by the village at its discretion, subject to a public hearing and
conditions.
      (3)   Accessory use. A use that is customarily incidental and subordinate
to the principal use and located on the same lot as the principal use.
   (C)   Unlisted uses. Any use of land not specifically permitted is
prohibited, except that the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to
classify a use that is not specifically listed along with a comparable
permitted or prohibited use for the purpose of clarifying the use regulations
in any district, if so petitioned in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter. If the Zoning Board of Appeals finds no comparable uses based on an
examination of the characteristics of the proposed use, it shall so state and
the Planning Commission may be petitioned to initiate an amendment to the text
of the ordinance to establish the appropriate district(s), type of use (by
right or special approval) and criteria that will apply for that use. Once the
ordinance has been amended to include the new regulations, then an application
to establish that use can be processed.
   (D)   Lots.
      (1)   No lot or setback area existing before the effective date of this
chapter shall be reduced below the minimum area or dimensions established
herein.
      (2)   All lots and setback areas created after the effective date of this
chapter shall comply with the minimum requirements established herein.
      (3)   No portion of any lot improved with a structure shall be used to
create another lot, unless each lot resulting from the lot division, lot line
adjustment or sale conforms to all of the requirements established herein.
   (E)   Zoning vacated areas. Whenever any road, alley or other public right-
of-way or portion thereof within the village is vacated, it shall automatically
be zoned the same district as the adjacent property to the centerline of the
right-of-way.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.044 TABLE OF DIMENSIONS.
                             Minimum   Minimum    Minimum
Zoning   Minimum  Minimum    Front     Side Yard/ Rear Yard/ Maximum  Maximum
District Lot Area Lot Width  Yard/     Setback    Setback    Lot      Building
                  (In Feet)  Setback   (In Feet)  (In Feet)  Coverage Height
                             (In Feet)
                            Minimum   Minimum    Minimum
Zoning   Minimum  Minimum   Front     Side Yard/ Rear Yard/ Maximum  Maximum
District Lot Area Lot Width Yard/     Setback    Setback    Lot      Building
                  (In Feet) Setback   (In Feet)  (In Feet)  Coverage Height
                            (In Feet)
         0.75                                                        2.5
R1       acres./  85        30        8          30         30%      stories/35
         0.5                                                         feet
         acres1
         12,000                                                      2.5
R2       square   66        30        6          30         30%      stories/35
         feet                                                        feet
         8,712                                                       2.5
R3       square   66        30        6          20         40%      stories/35
         feet                                                        feet
         8,712                                                       2.5
R4       square   66        20        6          20         40%      stories/35
         feet2                                                       feet
         8,712                                                       2.5
ROB      square   66        20        6          20         40%      stories/35
         feet                                                        feet
CBD      None     None      N/A3      None4      None5      None     3 stories/
                                                                     40 feet
         5,000                                                       2.5
SBD      square   66        25        None6      20         50%      stories/35
         feet                                                        feet
                                                                     2.5
RTO      1 acre   200       507       258        409        40%      stories/35
                                                                     feet
         8,712                                                       2.5
O        square   66        20        6          20         40%      stories/35
         feet                                                        feet
         11,000                                                      2.5
PL       square   66        30        N/A10      N/A10      35%      stories/35
         feet                                                        feet
10.75 acres without public sewer; 0.5 acres with public sewer.
2Single-family dwellings only. Lots occupied by two-family dwellings shall be
10,000 square feet. Lots occupied by multiple-family dwellings shall comply
with §
152.123(D).
3The front setback line shall be established by the existing building line
within 200 feet on both sides of the lot.
4When abutting a residential district, the side yard shall be the same as the
required side yard in the residential district.
5When abutting a residential district or use, the rear yard shall be at least
20 feet.
6The principal building may be constructed on the side lot line; however, the
total minimum side yard shall be 15 feet. When abutting a residential district
or use, the side yard shall be at least 20 feet.
7Where parking spaces are located in the front yard the front setback shall be
at least 75 feet.
8When abutting a residential district or use, the side yard shall be at least
50 feet.
9When abutting a residential district or use, the rear yard shall be at least
70 feet.
10Side and rear yards shall conform to the requirements of the abutting zoning
district.
 
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 82, passed 5-12-2008; Ord. 98, passed 3-28-
2011)
§ 152.045 TABLE OF USES.
   (A)   The following table lists permitted uses and special land uses by
zoning district.
   (B)   Uses marked with a “P” are a permitted use and do not require a public
hearing.
   (C)   Uses marked with an “S” are a special land use and do require a public
hearing.
   (D)   For definition of LAND USES see §
152.267.
LAND USE R1 R2 R3 R4 ROB CBD SBD RTO O PL
LAND USE                                   R1 R2 R3 R4 ROB CBD   SBD   RTO O PL
Adult foster care family home (1 to 6      P  P  P  P  P   S               S
adults)
Adult foster care small group home (7 to   S  S  S  S  S   S     P
12 adults)
Adult foster care large group home (13 to                        P
20 adults)
Adult foster care congregate facility (>20                       S
adults)
Artificial pond                            S
Bed and breakfast inn                      S  S  S  S  S   S     P         S
Book, magazine and newspaper printing                                  S
Business support service                               S   P     P     P   P
Cemetery                                                                     P
Central dry cleaning plant                                                 S
Changeable message sign                                          S
Commercial indoor recreation                               S1    S
Commercial kennel                                                S
Commercial outdoor display                                       S
Commercial outdoor recreation                                    S     P     S
Composting center                                                          S
Conference center                                                S     S
Construction contractor’s establishment                              S
Convenience store without gasoline sales                   P     P         S
Day Care: child care center                   S  S  S  S         P
Day Care: family day care home (1 to 6     P  P  P  P  P   S               S
children)
Day Care: group day care home (7 to 12     S  S  S  S  S
children)
Dwelling, multiple-family                           P  S   -
Dwelling, single-family                    P  P  P  P  P   S               P
Dwelling, two-family                                P      -
Dwelling, upper floor                                      P               P
Farmers market                                             P     S         P P
Financial institution with up to three                     S     P     P   S
drive-through windows
Financial institution without drive-                       P               S
through window
Funeral home and mortuary                           S      S     P         S
Health club                                                      P
Home for the elderly                       S  S  S  S  S         P
Home occupation                            S  S  S  S  S                   S
Hospital                                                         S
Hotel and motel                                            S     P2
Indoor self-storage facility                                     S     S
Landscape nursery                                                S
Laundromat and dry cleaner                                 P     P         S
Light manufacturing                                                    S
Limited warehousing and wholesale                                      S
establishments
Manufactured home park                     S
Marihuana grower facility - Class A or B                         S     S
Marihuana grower facility - Class C                                    S
Marihuana microbusiness                                          S     S
Marihuana processor facility                                           S
Marihuana retailer                                               S     S
Marihuana safety compliance facility                             S     S
Marihuana secure transporter facility                            S     S
Nursing home                                        S  S         P
Office: business, professional, medical                P6  P     P     P   P
and dental and non-profit
Outdoor recreational vehicle storage lot                         S
Parcel delivery service                                                S
Personal service                                       P6  P     P         P
Photography, art and craft studio and                  P6  P     P         P
gallery
Private club                                                     S
Produce stand                                                    S
Public and private riding stables                                            S
Public building                            S  S  S  S  S   P     P     P   P P
Public park                                P  P  P  P  P   S     P         P P
Public swimming pools and golf courses                                       S
Public utility facility                             S            S     P     P
Recreation equipment rental                                      S
Religious institution                      S  S  S  S  S   S     S           S
Research and development facility                                      P
Residential open space development         S  S  S
Restaurant, carry-out and open front                             S
Restaurant, fast food                                            S
Restaurant, standard                                       P     P         S
Retail store and retail food store                         P1/S3 P4/S5
Rooming house                                       P
School, elementary, middle and high        S  S  S  S      P     P         P P
School, personal improvement                           P6  P               P
School, vocational and higher education          S  S            S     S
institution
Shopping center                                                  S
Tavern and nightclub                                       P     P
Telecommunication tower                                                S     S
Theater                                                    S     P         S
Tool and die machinery shop                                            S
Vehicle service station                                    S     S         S
Vehicle repair service, vehicle dealership                       S
and car wash
Veterinary clinic                                          S     S         S
Video rental establishment                                       P
1Maximum 5,000 square feet of floor area.
2Maximum 20 guest rooms.
3More than 5,000 square feet of floor area.
4Maximum 15,000 square feet of floor area.
5More than 15,000 square feet of floor area.
6See restrictions in §
152.141(B)
P= Permitted Land Use (No public hearing required)
S= Special land use (Public hearing required)
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 98, passed 3-38-2011; Ord. 153, passed 12-14-
2020; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 152.060 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Low Density Residential District (R1) is to encourage
single-family residential uses on relatively large lots. The requirements of
this district are designed to protect the essential character of low density,
single-family residential areas and to encourage a high quality, suitable and
safe environment for family life.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.061 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   One single-family dwelling per lot.
   (B)   Public parks.
   (C)   Family day care homes (one to six children).
   (D)   Adult foster care family homes (one to six adults).
   (E)   Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to permitted
uses, including accessory dwelling units (ADUs).
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 161, passed 8-8-2022)
§ 152.062 SPECIAL LAND USES.
   The following special land uses are permitted in the R1 District, subject to
compliance with §§
152.240 et seq.
   (A)   Group day care homes (seven to 12 children);
   (B)   Adult foster care small group homes (seven to 12 adults);
   (C)   Homes for the elderly;
   (D)   Religious institutions;
   (E)   Public buildings;
   (F)   Elementary, middle and high schools;
   (G)   Bed and breakfast inns;
   (H)   Home occupations;
   (I)   Residential open space development;
   (J)   Artificial ponds; and
   (K)   Manufactured home park.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.063 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARD.
   The following standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the R1
District unless otherwise modified by the provisions of §§
152.240 et seq., §§
152.260 et seq., §§
152.415 et seq. or §§
152.440 et seq.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be as follows:
      (1)   Without public sewer: 32,670 square feet (three-quarters acre); and
      (2)   With public sewer: 21,780 square feet (one-half acre).
   (B)   Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 85 feet, measured along the
front lot line. For cul-de-sac and flag lots, the lot width may be measured
along the front setback line.
   (C)   Yards and setbacks. The minimum yards and setbacks shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Front yard. Structures shall be setback at least 30 feet from the
road right-of-way.
      (2)   Side yard. Structures shall be setback at least eight feet from a
side lot line, except for corner lots, the interior side yard shall be at least
eight feet in width, and the street side yard shall be at least 20 feet in
width.
      (3)   Rear yard. Structures shall be setback at least 30 feet from the
rear lot line.
      (4)   Shed setback. Sheds must be in the back or side yard and setbacks
will be at least five feet in the rear and sides.
      (5)   Outbuilding setback. Outbuildings must be in the back or side yard
and setbacks will abide by structure (not shed) restrictions.
   (D)   Lot coverage. Lot coverage shall not exceed 30%.
   (E)   Structure height. No building shall be erected or altered to a height
greater than two and one-half stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. No
structure shall be erected or altered to a height greater than 21 feet. (See §
152.267 for definitions of building height and structure height).
   (F)   Compliance required. Uses and structures shall comply with all other
provisions of this chapter, including §§
152.240 et seq. through §§
152.415 et seq. and all other applicable federal, state and local codes and
ordinances.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 82, passed 5-12-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 152.080 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the Medium Density Residential District (R2) is to
encourage a predominance of single-family residential uses, located on
individual parcels.
   (B)   The requirements for this district are intended to protect the
essential character of medium density, single-family residential areas and to
encourage a high quality, suitable and safe environment for family life.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.081 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   One single-family dwelling per lot.
   (B)   Public parks.
   (C)   Family day care homes (one to six children).
   (D)   Adult foster care family homes (one to six adults).
   (E)   Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to permitted
uses, including accessory dwelling units (ADUs).
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 161, passed 8-8-2022)
§ 152.082 SPECIAL LAND USES.
   The following special land uses are permitted in the R2 District, subject to
compliance with §§
152.240 et seq.
   (A)   Group day care homes (seven to 12 children);
   (B)   Adult foster care small group homes (seven to 12 adults);
   (C)   Homes for the elderly;
   (D)   Religious institutions;
   (E)   Public buildings;
   (F)   Elementary, middle and high schools;
   (G)   Bed and breakfast inns;
   (H)   Home occupations; and
   (I)   Residential open space development.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.083 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the R2
District unless otherwise modified by the provisions of §§
152.240 et seq., §§
152.260 et seq., §§
152.415 et seq. or §§
152.440 et seq.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 12,000 square feet.
   (B)   Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 66 feet, measured along the
front lot line. For cul-de-sac and flag lots, the lot width may be measured
along the front setback line.
   (C)   Yards and setbacks.  The minimum yards and setbacks shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Front yard. Structures shall be setback at least 30 feet from the
road right-of-way.
      (2)   Side yard. Structures shall be setback at least six feet from a
side lot line, except for corner lots, the interior side yard shall be at least
six feet in width, and the street side yard shall be at least 20 feet in width.
      (3)   Rear yard. Structures shall be setback at least 30 feet from the
rear lot line.
      (4)   Shed setback. Sheds must be in the back or side yard and setbacks
will be at least five feet in the rear and sides.
      (5)   Outbuilding setback. Outbuildings must be in the back or side yard
and setbacks will abide by structure (not shed) restrictions.
   (D)   Lot coverage. Lot coverage shall not exceed 30%.
   (E)   Structure height. No building shall be erected or altered to a height
greater than two and one-half stories or 35 feet; whichever is less. No
structure shall be erected or altered to a height greater than 21 feet. (See §
152.267 for definitions of building height and structure height)
   (F)   Compliance required. Uses and structures shall comply with all other
provisions of this chapter, including §§
152.240 et seq. through §§
152.415 et seq. and all other applicable federal, state and local codes and
ordinances.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 82, passed 5-12-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 152.100 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the High Density Residential District (R3) is to encourage a
predominance of single-family residential uses, located on relatively small
individual parcels. The requirements for this district are designed to protect
the essential character of high density, single-family residential areas and to
encourage a high quality, suitable and safe environment for family life.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.101 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   One single-family dwelling per lot.
   (B)   Public parks.
   (C)   Family day care homes (one to six children).
   (D)   Adult foster care family homes (one to six adults).
   (E)   Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to permitted
uses, including accessory dwelling units (ADUs).
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 161, passed 8-8-2022)
§ 152.102 SPECIAL LAND USES.
   The following special land uses are permitted in the R3 District, subject to
compliance with §§
152.240 et seq.:
   (A)   Child care centers;
   (B)   Group day care homes (seven to 12 children);
   (C)   Adult foster care small group homes (seven to 12 adults);
   (D)   Homes for the elderly;
   (E)   Religious institutions;
   (F)   Public buildings;
   (G)   Elementary, middle and high schools;
   (H)   Higher education institutions and vocational schools;
   (I)   Bed and breakfast inns;
   (J)   Home occupations; and
   (K)   Residential open space development.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.103 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the R3
District unless otherwise modified by the provisions of §§
152.240 et seq., §§
152.260 et seq., §§
152.415 et seq. or §§
152.440 et seq.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 8,712 square feet (one-fifth
acre).
   (B)   Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 66 feet, measured along the
front lot line. For cul-de-sac and flag lots, the lot width may be measured
along the front setback line.
   (C)   Yards and setbacks. The minimum yards and setbacks shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Front yard. Structures shall be setback at least 30 feet from the
road right-of-way.
      (2)   Side yard. Structures shall be setback at least six feet from a
side lot line, except for corner lots, the interior side yard shall be at least
six feet in width, and the street side yard shall be at least 20 feet in width.
      (3)   Rear yard. Structures shall be setback at least 20 feet from the
rear lot line.
      (4)   Shed setback. Sheds must be in the back or side yard and setbacks
will be at least five feet in the rear and sides.
      (5)   Outbuilding setback. Outbuildings must be in the back or side yard
and setbacks will abide by structure (not shed) restrictions.
   (D)   Lot coverage. Lot coverage shall not exceed 40%.
   (E)   Structure height. No building shall be erected or altered to a height
greater than two and one-half stories or 35 feet; whichever is less. No
structure shall be erected or altered to a height greater than 21 feet. (See §
152.267 for definitions of building height and structure height).
   (F)   Compliance required. Uses and structures shall comply with all other
provisions of this chapter, including §§
152.240 et seq. through §§
152.415 et seq. and all other applicable federal, state and local codes and
ordinances.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 82, passed 5-12-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 152.120 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the Multiple-Family Residential District (R4) is to
achieve the same high quality, stable, suitable and safe residential
environment as is intended for the single-family residential districts.
   (B)   The only essential difference between the R4 District and the Single-
Family Residential Districts is that multiple-family dwellings are permitted.
   (C)   This district is applied to those areas within the village that are
particularly suited for higher population density because of their central
location, existing high density development and availability of public services
and transportation facilities.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.121 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   One single-family dwelling per lot.
   (B)   Two-family dwellings.
   (C)   Multiple-family dwellings.
   (D)   Rooming houses.
   (E)   Public parks.
   (F)   Family day care homes (one to six children).
   (G)   Adult foster care family homes (one to six adults).
   (H)   Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to permitted
uses, including accessory dwelling units (ADUs).
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 161, passed 8-8-2022)
§ 152.122 SPECIAL LAND USES.
   The following special land uses are permitted in the R4 District, subject to
compliance with §§
152.240 et seq.
   (A)   Child care centers;
   (B)   Group day care homes (seven to 12 children);
   (C)   Adult foster care small group homes (seven to 12 adults);
   (D)   Nursing homes and homes for the elderly;
   (E)   Religious institutions;
   (F)   Public buildings and public utility facilities;
   (G)   Elementary, middle and high schools;
   (H)   Higher education institutions and vocational schools;
   (I)   Bed and breakfast inns;
   (J)   Funeral homes; and
   (K)   Home occupations.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.123 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the R4
District unless otherwise modified by the provisions of §§
152.240 et seq., §§
152.260 et seq., §§
152.415 et seq. or §§
152.440 et seq.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 8,712 square feet (one-fifth
acre) except:
      (1)   Lots occupied by two-family dwellings shall be at least 10,000
square feet; and
      (2)   Lots occupied by multiple-family dwellings shall comply with
division (D) below.
   (B)   Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 66 feet, measured along the
front lot line. For cul-de-sac and flag lots, the lot width may be measured
along the front setback line.
   (C)   Yards and setbacks. The minimum yards and setbacks shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Front yard. Structures shall be setback at least 20 feet from the
road right-of-way.
      (2)   Side yard. Structures shall be setback at least six feet from a
side lot line. Except for corner lots, the interior side yard shall be at least
six feet in width, and the street side yard shall be at least 20 feet in width.
      (3)   Rear yard. Structures shall be setback at least 20 feet from the
rear lot line.
      (4)   Shed setback. Sheds must be in the back or side yard and setbacks
will be at least five feet in the rear and sides.
      (5)   Outbuilding setback. Outbuildings must be in the back or side yard
and setbacks will abide by structure (not shed) restrictions.
   (D)   Multiple-family dwelling density. The number of multiple-family
dwelling units permitted on a site shall be determined as follows:
      (1)   The number of dwelling units allowed per acre shall be based upon
the net acreage of the site;
      (2)   All dwelling units shall have at least one living room and one
bedroom, except not more than 10% may be efficiency dwelling units;
      (3)   The room assignments below shall control the number of dwelling
units allowed per acre;
         (a)   Efficiency: one room;
         (b)   One bedroom: two rooms;
         (c)   Two bedroom: three rooms;
         (d)   Three bedroom: four rooms; and
         (e)   Four bedroom: five rooms.
      (4)   The total number of rooms shall not exceed the net acreage of the
site, in square feet, divided by 1,600.
   Density: Multiple-Family Dwellings
   Example: A site with five net acres proposed for multiple-family
development:
   STEP 1. Convert acres to square feet: five acres = 5 x 43,560 square feet =
217,800 square feet
   STEP 2. Convert square feet to total rooms: 217,800 square feet/1,600 = 136
rooms
   STEP 3. Convert total rooms to dwelling units/acre:
      136 rooms/2 rooms = 68 one-bedroom units/five acres = 13.6 dwelling
units/acre
      136 rooms/3 rooms = 45 two-bedroom units/five acres = 9.0 dwelling units/
acre
      136 rooms/4 rooms = 34 three-bedroom units/five acres = 6.8 dwelling
units/acre
      136 rooms/5 rooms = 27 four-bedroom units/five acres =.4 dwelling units/
acre
   (E)   Floor area per dwelling unit.  All dwelling units shall meet the
minimum floor area requirements set forth in §
152.262(C).
   (F)   Dwelling units per building. The maximum number of dwelling units
allowed within any multiple-family dwelling shall be eight.
   (G)   Building length. No multiple-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or
group of attached single-family dwellings shall be longer than 160 feet.
   (H)   Lot coverage. Lot coverage shall not exceed 40%.
   (I)   Structure height. No building shall be erected or altered to a height
greater than two and one-half stories or 35 feet; whichever is less. No
structure shall be erected or altered to a height greater than 21 feet. (See §
152.267 for definitions of building height and structure height).
   (J)   Landscaping. Landscaped buffer areas shall be required on all lots
used for multiple-family dwellings in accordance with §
152.329.
   (K)   Recreation. Exclusive of other yard and setback requirements herein,
all multiple-family dwellings on lots that are three or more acres shall
provide common open space equal to at least 25 square feet per dwelling unit
with a minimum of 1,200 square feet.
   (L)   Compliance required. Uses and structures shall comply with all other
provisions of this chapter, including §§
152.240 et seq., §§
152.260 et seq., §§
152.415 et seq. or §§
152.440 et seq. and all other applicable federal, state and local codes and
ordinances.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 82, passed 5-12-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
RESIDENTIAL-OFFICE BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 152.140 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Residential-Office-Business District (ROB) is to provide
for a mixture of residential and complementary commercial uses. The intent is
to allow low impact businesses that serve and are harmonious with adjacent
residential uses, while maintaining the quality and stability of residential
neighborhoods. Commercial activities that have an adverse effect upon the
value, use or enjoyment of surrounding residential properties shall be
prohibited in the ROB District.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.141 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   All permitted uses in the R3 District.
   (B)   Business uses within a single-family dwelling unit provided:
      (1)   Permitted business uses shall include only the following:
         (a)   Business offices, professional offices, medical or dental
offices and non-profit organization offices;
         (b)   Personal services and personal improvement schools; and
         (c)   Photography, art and craft studios and galleries.
      (2)   Not more than one business use shall be permitted within any
dwelling unit;
      (3)   The property owner or business owner shall permanently reside in
the dwelling unit;
      (4)   All business activity shall take place on the ground floor of the
dwelling unit;
      (5)   Not more than 50% of the ground floor area of the dwelling unit
shall be in business use and this area shall not include kitchens or bathrooms.
The remaining 50% of the ground floor area and 100% of all upper stories, if
any, shall be restricted to residential use only;
      (6)   The business shall not employ more than three people including the
business owner(s); and
      (7)   Parking shall comply with §§
152.280 et seq. Mixed uses shall comply with §
152.282(E)(1).
   (C)   Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted
use.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.142 SPECIAL LAND USES.
   The following special land uses are permitted in the ROB District, subject
to compliance with §
152.240 et seq.
   (A)   Multiple-family dwellings (subject to compliance with §
152.123(D));
   (B)   Child care centers;
   (C)   Group day care homes (seven to 12 children);
   (D)   Adult foster care small group homes (seven to 12 adults);
   (E)   Homes for the elderly and nursing homes;
   (F)   Religious institutions;
   (G)   Public buildings;
   (H)   Bed and breakfast inns;
   (I)   Business support services;
   (J)   Home occupations that do not meet the criteria for a permitted use;
and
   (K)   Businesses allowed under §
152.141(B), that employ more than three people or use more than 50% of the
ground floor area of the dwelling unit or where the property owner does not
reside in the residence.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 152.143 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the ROB
District unless otherwise modified by the provisions of §§
152.240 et seq., §§
152.260 et seq., §§
152.415 et seq. or §§
152.440 et seq.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 8,712 square feet (one-fifth
acre).
   (B)   Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 66 feet, measured along the
front lot line. For cul-de-sac and flag lots, the lot width may be measured
along the front setback line.
   (C)   Yards and setbacks. The minimum yards and setbacks shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Front yard. Structures shall be setback at least 20 feet from the
road right-of-way.
      (2)   Side yard. Structures shall be setback at least six feet from a
side lot line. Except for corner lots, the interior side yard shall be at least
six feet in width, and the street side yard shall be at least 20 feet in width.
      (3)   Rear yard. Structures shall be setback at least 20 feet from the
rear lot line.
      (4)   Shed setback. Sheds must be in the back or side yard and setbacks
will be at least five feet in the rear and sides.
      (5)   Outbuilding setback. Outbuildings must be in the back or side yard
and setbacks will abide by structure (not shed) restrictions.
   (D)   Lot coverage. Lot coverage shall not exceed 40%.
   (E)   Structure height. No building shall be erected or altered to a height
greater than two and one-half stories or 35 feet; whichever is less. No
structure shall be erected or altered to a height greater than 21 feet. (See §
152.267 for definitions of building height and structure height).
   (F)   Compliance required. Uses and structures shall comply with all other
provisions of this chapter, including §§
152.240 et seq. through §§
152.415 et seq. and all other applicable federal, state and local codes and
ordinances.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 82, passed 5-12-2008) Penalty, see §
152.999
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 152.160 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the Central Business District (CBD) is to encourage
shopping, business, civic and related activities along Main Street in the
village center.
   (B)   The district is designed to protect the existing character of this
area, and create a suitable and safe environment for compatible and sustainable
commercial uses.
   (C)   It is further intended to promote commercial establishments that
provide economic diversity and stability and prohibit conflicting uses that
detract from the CBDs intended function as a vibrant economic and social
village focal point.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.161 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Upper floor dwelling units, provided adjacent nonresidential uses,
have a separate entrance and sanitary facilities.
   (B)   Retail stores and retail food stores with not more than 5,000 square
feet of floor area.
   (C)   Laundromats and dry cleaners (does not include dry cleaning plants).
   (D)   Restaurants, standard.
   (E)   Financial institutions without drive-through facilities.
   (F)   Convenience stores.
   (G)   Business offices, professional offices, medical or dental offices and
non-profit organization offices.
   (H)   Business support services.
   (I)   Photography, art, and craft studios and galleries.
   (J)   Personal services.
   (K)   Personal improvement schools.
   (L)   Farmers markets.
   (M)   Public buildings.
   (N)   Elementary, middle and high schools.
   (O)   Taverns and nightclubs subject to the standards of §
152.243(I).
   (P)   Accessory uses, customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted
use.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 88, passed 7-13-2009; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-
2021)
§ 152.162 SPECIAL LAND USES.
   The following special land uses are permitted in the CBD District, subject
to compliance with §§
152.240 et seq.
   (A)   All permitted uses in the R3 District;
   (B)   Bed and breakfast inns;
   (C)   Veterinary clinics;
   (D)   Retail stores and retail food stores with more than 5,000 square feet
of floor area;
   (E)   Financial institutions with up to three drive through facilities;
   (F)   Religious institutions;
   (G)   Commercial indoor recreation with no more than 5,000 square feet of
floor area;
   (H)   Vehicle service stations;
   (I)   Theaters;
   (J)   Funeral homes;
   (K)   Hotels and motels;
   (L)   Childcare centers subject to the standards of §
152.243(F);
   (M)   Group day care homes subject to the standards of §
152.243(F);
   (N)   Adult foster care small group homes;
   (O)   Any new business in the CBD established after the effective date of
this section with normal hours of operation that extend later than 11:00 p.m.
or begin prior to 6:00 a.m. shall require a special land use permit. A request
to operate a business during the extended hours noted shall be submitted, in
writing, to the village for Planning Commission review and approval. The
Planning Commission shall, at minimum, consider the following factors:
      (1)   Nature of the goods or services being provided;
      (2)   Nature and character of the surrounding neighborhood;
      (3)   Availability of the goods or services throughout the village;
      (4)   Applicant's lighting plan;
      (5)   Amount of traffic that is generated by the use; and
      (6)   Overall effect that the extended hours will have on the character,
safety and general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood.
   (P)   All buildings over 20,000 square feet gross floor area require a
special land use permit.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 88, passed 7-13-2009; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-
2017; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 152.163 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the CBD
District unless otherwise modified by the provisions of §§
152.240 et seq., §§
152.260 et seq., §§
152.415 et seq. or §§
152.440 et seq.
   (A)   Lot area. There shall be no minimum lot area.
   (B)   Lot width.  There shall be no minimum lot width.
   (C)   Yards and setbacks. The minimum yards and setbacks shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Front yard. The front setback line shall be established by the
existing building line within 200 feet on both sides of the subject lot.
      (2)   Side yard. None, except where the side lot line abuts a residential
district the side yard shall be the same as the required side yard in the
residential district.
      (3)   Rear yard. None, except where the rear lot line abuts a residential
district or residential use, all structures shall be setback at least 20 feet
from the rear lot line.
   (D)   Lot coverage. There shall be no maximum lot coverage.
   (E)   Structure height. No building shall be erected or altered to a height
greater than three stories or 40 feet; whichever is less. No other structure
shall be erected or altered to a height greater than 40 feet. (See §
152.267 for definitions of building height and structure height.)
   (F)   Off-street parking and loading. To allow for design flexibility in the
CBD, the Village Council may waive or modify the requirements of §§
152.280 et seq. upon finding that all of the criteria in §
152.281(B) are met.
   (G)   Compliance required. Uses and structures shall comply with all other
provisions of this chapter, including §§
152.240 et seq. through §§
152.415 et seq. and all other applicable federal, state and local codes and
ordinances.
   (H)   Access. New curb cuts are prohibited and closure of existing curb cuts
is recommended. Exceptions will be considered if vehicle access is required and
not otherwise possible.
   (I)   Architectural standards. Architectural standards for approval include
the following items: rooflines and cornices, fenestration and brackets, shape
and style of windows, shape and style of lights within windows, colors and
finish materials. Exterior building materials shall employ a variety of
textures and colors and window and door details. Desirable materials include
brick, stone (natural and cast), wood siding and glass. Exterior materials that
should not be used in large applications, but can be used as detail material or
as a small application include EIFS (exterior insulation and finishing system),
vinyl siding, asphalt or metal siding, composite fiberglass and reflective
glass. Review of architectural concepts, colors and materials will be part of
the site plan review.
      (1)   Additions to buildings. New construction, additions and
modifications to buildings shall be harmonious with the historic scale and
nature of other structures in the vicinity. Additions may be made to building
facades not facing a street. Additions to a structure may be permitted except
that additions to a structure’s facade (the front side of the building facing
the street) may be made only when such addition adds to the historical or
architectural value and significance of the structure. Items to be considered
for site plan review include the following:
         (a)   Whether modifications are consistent with the existing
architectural motif;
         (b)   Whether new exterior additions are constructed to minimize the
loss of historical materials and so that character-defining features are not
obscured, damaged, destroyed or covered;
         (c)   Whether attached exterior additions are located at the rear or
on an inconspicuous side of a historic building and minimize, to the extent
possible, its size and scale relative to the historic building; and
         (d)   Whether new exterior additions are designed in a manner that
makes clear what is historic and what is new while maintaining consistent
design motifs from the historical building.
      (2)   Constancy.  General architecture, front facade and overall building
appointments should be consistent with the historical buildings of the downtown
Main Street area. As an example, a multistory, brick building with historically
formatted storefront windows and doors with upper and lower cornices.
      (3)   Surface covering. Existing and proposed buildings may be painted or
stained to be consistent with the majority of the established buildings in the
area or which are consistent with a documented earlier or original condition of
existing buildings. Surfaces which are currently covered by wood, vinyl or
aluminum siding may be repaired with the same material as currently exists.
Exterior color shall be consistent with the majority of the established
buildings in the Central Business District. “Non-traditional” or “Non-
historical” colors are not permitted. The use of paint to attract attention or
advertise using geometric shapes and color, or is in other ways inconsistent
with the surrounding architecture is prohibited.
   (J)   First floor. All new buildings shall have at least 70% of their first
floor facade on the street-facing sidewalk as non-reflective/non-tinted glass.
The use of reflective/tinted glass on the first floor side and rear windows is
discouraged. Use of reflective/tinted windows requires Planning Commission
approval.
   (K)   Pedestrian entrance. All new buildings shall have at least one
pedestrian entrance on the front. Rear or side entrances should be provided
where parking is on the side or rear of the building.
   (L)   Businesses to be retail and service establishments.  All business
establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with
customers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on
premises where produced.
   (M)   Where business conducted. All business, servicing or processing,
except for loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
   (N)   Exterior walls and hiding unsightly objects. Exterior walls facing
public rights-of-way, customer-parking areas and adjoining property that is
zoned or used for residential purposes shall have a finished appearance, using
the same materials as used on the front of the building. Wherever possible,
meter boxes, dumpsters and mechanical equipment should be screened on a side of
the building that faces residentially zoned or used property, or mounted and
screened on the roof.
   (O)   Site design. The site design shall be sensitive to pedestrian and
bicycle needs. Buildings over 6,000 square feet gross floor area must provide a
minimum of two bicycle hoops.
   (P)   Additional standards. The Planning Commission may determine that
additional standards are required to be harmonious with the historic scale and
nature of other structures in the vicinity. To achieve this objective the
Planning Commission may, at its discretion, add to or modify the required
standards above.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 88, passed 7-13-2009; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-
2017; Ord. 146, passed - -2020) Penalty, see §
152.999
SECONDARY BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 152.180 PURPOSE.
   The Secondary Business District (SBD) is intended to accommodate those
business activities that typically require large areas of land, may generate a
large volume of automobile traffic, may require large areas of off-street
parking and are potential obstacles to an efficient, convenient neighborhood
service or central business district.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.181 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Financial institutions with up to three drive-through facilities.
   (B)   Business offices, professional offices, medical or dental clinics and
non-profit organization offices.
   (C)   Business support services.
   (D)   Photography, art and craft studios and galleries.
   (E)   Personal services.
   (F)   Adult foster small group homes (seven to 12 adults) and adult foster
care large group homes (13 to 20 adults).
   (G)   Homes for the elderly and nursing homes.
   (H)   Public buildings and public parks.
   (I)   Elementary, middle and high schools.
   (J)   Child care centers.
   (K)   Bed and breakfast inns.
   (L)   Hotels and motels with no more than 20 guest rooms.
   (M)   Health clubs.
   (N)   Theaters.
   (O)   Taverns and nightclubs.
   (P)   Restaurants, standard.
   (Q)   Retail stores and retail food stores with not more than 15,000 square
feet of floor area.
   (R)   Video rental establishments.
   (S)   Convenience stores without gasoline sales.
   (T)   Funeral homes.
   (U)   Laundromats and dry cleaners (does not include dry cleaning plants).
   (V)   Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted
use.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.182 SPECIAL LAND USES.
   The following special land uses are permitted in the SBD District, subject
to compliance with §§
152.240 et seq.
   (A)   Adult foster care congregate facility (more than 20 adults);
   (B)   Retail stores with more than 15,000 square feet of floor area;
   (C)   Religious institutions;
   (D)   Vocational schools and higher education institutions;
   (E)   Private clubs;
   (F)   Restaurants, carry-out with open front service and walk-up windows;
   (G)   Restaurants, fast food;
   (H)   Farmers markets and produce stands;
   (I)   Landscape nurseries;
   (J)   Commercial indoor recreation;
   (K)   Commercial outdoor recreation, including golf courses;
   (L)   Recreation equipment rental;
   (M)   Vehicle service stations, vehicle repair services, vehicle dealerships
and car washes;
   (N)   Commercial outdoor displays;
   (O)   Hospitals;
   (P)   Veterinary clinics;
   (Q)   Commercial kennels;
   (R)   Indoor self-storage facilities;
   (S)   Conference centers;
   (T)   Shopping centers;
   (U)   Public utility facilities;
   (V)   Changeable message signs;
   (W)   Buildings and other structures with a height exceeding the maximum
allowed under §
152.183; and
   (X)   Outdoor storage lot for recreational vehicles.
   (Y)   Adult use marihuana establishments including: marihuana grower
facility - Class A or B, marihuana microbusiness, marihuana retailer, marihuana
safety compliance facility, and marihuana secure transporter facility, subject
to the provision of
Chapter 113, Miscellaneous Businesses Requiring a License; Title XI, Business
Regulations, of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 134, passed 11-14-2016; Ord. 153, passed 12-
14-2020)
§ 152.183 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the SBD
District unless otherwise modified by the provisions of §§
152.240 et seq., §§
152.260 et seq., §§
152.415 et seq. or §§
152.440 et seq.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 5,000 square feet.
   (B)   Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 66 feet, measured
along the front lot line. For cul-de-sac and flag lots, the lot width may be
measured along the front setback line.
   (C)   Yards and setbacks. The minimum yards and setbacks shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Front yard. Structures shall be setback at least 25 feet from the
front lot line.
      (2)   Side yard. The principal building may be constructed on the side
lot line; however, the entire side yard shall total at least 15 feet in width.
Where the side lot line abuts a residential district or residential use, the
side yard shall be at least 20 feet in width.
      (3)   Rear yard. Structures shall be setback at least 20 feet from the
rear lot line.
   (D)   Lot coverage. Lot coverage shall not exceed 50%.
   (E)   Structure height. No building shall be erected or altered to a height
greater than two and one-half stories or 35 feet; whichever is less. No other
structure shall be erected or altered to a height greater than 35 feet. (See §
152.267 for definitions of building height and structure height)
   (F)   Compliance required. Uses and structures shall comply with all other
provisions of this chapter, including §§
152.240 et seq. through §§
152.415 et seq. and all other applicable federal, state and local codes and
ordinances.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005) Penalty, see §
152.999
RESEARCH-TECHNOLOGY-OFFICE DISTRICT
§ 152.200 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of the Research-Technology-Office District (RTO) to
provide for a community of research and development, light industrial and
office park uses in a campus setting, rather than separate individual
facilities isolated among other unrelated land uses. The district is designed
to limit the type and scope of uses and their location, to ensure compatibility
with the existing village character and prevent negative impacts on roads,
surrounding land uses and the environment. The RTO District is further intended
to expand the tax base and employment opportunities within the village without
compromising the health, welfare and quality of life of village residents.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.201 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Research and development facilities located within a completely
enclosed building, including scientific, medical, chemical, mechanical,
electronic, computer and automobile research, product development and testing
facilities.
   (B)   Business offices, professional offices, medical or dental clinics and
non-profit organization offices.
   (C)   Business support services.
   (D)   Financial institutions, with up to three drive-through facilities.
   (E)   Commercial outdoor recreation.
   (F)   Public buildings and public utility facilities.
   (G)   Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted
use, including, but not limited to, laboratories, child care centers, employee
health clubs and dining facilities.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.202 SPECIAL LAND USES.
   The following special land uses are permitted in the RTO District, subject
to compliance with §§
152.240 et seq.
   (A)   Construction contractor's establishments with related offices;
   (B)   Conference centers;
   (C)   Composting centers;
   (D)   Indoor self-storage facilities;
   (E)   Central dry cleaning plants or laundries provided that the plants
shall not deal directly with retail consumers;
   (F)   Limited warehousing and wholesale establishments;
   (G)   Parcel delivery service;
   (H)   Vocational schools and higher education institutions;
   (I)   Book, magazine and newspaper printing, publishing and related
facilities;
   (J)   Light manufacturing;
   (K)   Tool and die machinery shops; and
   (L)   Radio and television studios and wireless telecommunications
facilities, including transmission towers.
   (M)   Adult use marihuana establishments including marihuana grower Class A,
B or C, marihuana microbusiness, marihuana retailer, marihuana processor
facility, marihuana safety compliance facility, and marihuana secure
transporter facility, subject to the provision of
Chapter 113, Miscellaneous Businesses Requiring a License, of this Code of
Ordinances.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 153, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 152.203 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the RTO
District unless otherwise modified by the provisions of §§
152.240 et seq., §§
152.260 et seq., §§
152.415 et seq. or §§
152.440 et seq.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be one acre.
   (B)   Lot width.  The minimum lot width shall be 200 feet measured along the
front lot line. For cul-de-sac and flag lots, the lot width may be measured
along the front setback line.
   (C)   Yards and setbacks. The minimum yards and setbacks shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Front yard. Structures shall be setback at least 50 feet from the
front lot line, except where parking spaces are located in the front yard the
minimum setback shall be 75 feet.
      (2)   Side yard. Structures shall be setback at least 25 feet from side
lot lines, except where the side lot line abuts a residential district or use
the setback shall be 50 feet.
      (3)   Rear yard. Structures shall be setback at least 40 feet from the
rear lot line, except where the rear lot line abuts a residential district or
use the setback shall be 70 feet.
   (D)   Lot coverage. Lot coverage shall not exceed 40%.
   (E)   Structure height. No building shall be erected or altered to a height
greater than two and one-half stories or 35 feet; whichever is less. No other
structure shall be erected or altered to a height greater than 35 feet. (See §
152.267 for definitions of building height and structure height)
   (F)   Outdoor storage areas. All storage outside of a building shall be
located within a designated area that is fully enclosed on all sides by a six-
foot wall or fence and landscaping sufficient to completely obscure the storage
area from surrounding roads and properties.
   (G)   Environmental performance. No use shall result in the emission of
glare, noise, vibration, dust, pollution or any other negative impact, as
regulated by §§
152.370 et seq.
   (H)   Enclosure and screening. Enclosure and screening shall comply with §§
152.325 et seq. Furthermore, where a planned development on a site with a gross
acreage of five acres or more is proposed:
      (1)   The development site shall be surrounded along all exterior
property boundaries by a continuous landscaped buffer area of at least 100 feet
in width. This landscaped buffer area shall be sufficiently planted with trees
and shrubs so as to completely obscure the planned development from surrounding
roads and properties. Furthermore, the landscaped buffer area shall be
perpetually maintained as approved by the village; and
      (2)   Curb cuts shall be reduced to the degree possible by the use of
combined drives and common parking areas.
   (I)   Compliance required. Uses and structures shall comply with all other
provisions of this chapter including §§
152.240 et seq. through §§
152.415 et seq. and all other applicable federal, state and local codes and
ordinances.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005) Penalty, see §
152.999
OFFICE DISTRICT
§ 152.210 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the Office District (O) is to provide a transitional
land use between residential and more intensive commercial uses.
   (B)   The district is designed to protect the existing character of this
area, and create a suitable and safe environment for compatible and sustainable
commercial uses.
   (C)   Uses in this district are intended to have less of an impact on
surrounding uses than auto-related commercial uses.
(Ord. 98, passed 3-28-2011)
§ 152.211 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Upper floor dwelling units, provided adjacent nonresidential uses,
have a separate entrance and sanitary facilities;
   (B)   Dwelling, single-family;
   (C)   Business offices, professional offices, medical or dental offices and
non-profit organization offices;
   (D)   Business support services;
   (E)   Photography, art, and craft studios and galleries;
   (F)   Personal services;
   (G)   Personal improvement schools;
   (H)   Farmers markets;
   (I)   Public buildings;
   (J)   Public Park;
   (K)   Elementary, middle, and high schools; and
   (L)   Accessory uses, customarily incidental and subordinate to a permitted
use.
(Ord. 98, passed 3-28-2011)
§ 152.212 SPECIAL LAND USES.
   The following special land uses are permitted in the Office District,
subject to compliance with §§
152.240 et seq.
   (A)   Adult foster care family home (one to six adults), subject to
standards;
   (B)   Bed and breakfast inns;
   (C)   Convenience stores without gasoline sales;
   (D)   Daycare: family child care home (one to six children), subject to
standards;
   (E)   Financial institution with up to three drive-through windows;
   (F)   Financial institution without drive-through facilities;
   (G)   Funeral home or mortuary;
   (H)   Home occupation;
   (I)   Laundromats and dry cleaners (does not include dry cleaning plants);
   (J)   Restaurants, standard;
   (K)   Theaters;
   (L)   Vehicle service stations;
   (M)   Veterinary clinics.
(Ord. 98, passed 3-28-2011)
§ 152.213 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the Office
District unless otherwise modified by the provisions of §§
152.240 et seq., §§
152.260 et seq., §§
152.415 et seq. or §§
152.440 et seq.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 8,712 square feet (one-fifth
acre).
   (B)   Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 66 feet, measured along the
front lot line. For cul-de-sac and flag lots, the lot width may be measured
along the front setback line.
   (C)   Yards and setbacks. The minimum yards and setbacks shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Front yard. Structures shall be setback at least 20 feet from the
road;
      (2)   Side yard. Structures shall be setback at least six feet from a
side lot line. Except for corner lots, the interior side yard shall be at least
six feet in width, and the street side yard shall be at least 20 feet in width;
and
      (3)   Rear yard. Structures shall be setback at least 20 feet from the
rear lot line.
   (D)   Lot coverage. Lot coverage shall not exceed 40%.
   (E)   Structure height. No building shall be erected or altered to a height
greater than two and a half stories or 35 feet; whichever is less. No other
structure shall be erected or altered to a height greater than 35 feet. (See §
152.267 for definitions of BUILDING HEIGHT and STRUCTURE HEIGHT).
   (F)   Off-street parking and loading. To allow for design flexibility in the
office, the Planning Commission may waive or modify the requirements of §§
152.280 et seq. upon finding that all of the criteria in §
152.281(B) are met.
   (G)   Compliance required. Uses and structures shall comply with all other
provisions of this chapter, including §§
152.240 et seq. through §§
152.415 et seq. and all other applicable federal, state, and local codes and
ordinances.
   (H)   Access. New curb cuts are prohibited and closure of existing curb cuts
is recommended. Exceptions will be considered if vehicle access is required and
not otherwise possible.
   (I)   Architectural standards. Architectural standards for approval include
the following items: rooflines and cornices, fenestration and brackets, shape
and style of windows, shape, and style of lights within windows, colors, and
finish materials. Exterior building materials shall employ a variety of
textures and colors and window and door details. Desirable materials include
brick, stone (natural and cast), wood siding, and glass. Exterior materials
that should not be used n large applications, but can be used as detail
material or as a small application include EIFS (exterior insulation and
finishing system), vinyl siding, asphalt or metal siding, composite fiberglass
and reflective glass. Review of architectural concepts, colors, and materials
will be part of the site plan review.
   (J)   All new buildings shall have at least one pedestrian entrance on the
front. Rear or side entrances should be provided where parking is on the side
or rear of the building.
   (K)   All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments
dealing directly with customers. All goods produced on the premises shall be
sold at retail on premises where produced.
   (L)   All business, servicing, or processing, except for loading, shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building.
   (M)   Exterior walls facing public rights-of-way, customer-parking areas,
and adjoining property that is zoned or used for residential purposes shall
have a finished appearance, using the same materials as used on the front of
the building. Wherever possible, meter boxes, dumpsters, and mechanical
equipment should be screened on a side of the building that faces residentially
zoned or used property, or mounted and screened on the roof.
(Ord. 98, passed 3-28-2011; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-2017)
PUBLIC LANDS DISTRICT
§ 152.220 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of the Public Lands (PL) District to provide sufficient
land for public buildings and uses and to encourage the development of
attractive public spaces that are conducive to community interaction,
recreation and services.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.221 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Public parks.
   (B)   Public buildings and public utility facilities.
   (C)   Elementary, middle and high schools.
   (D)   Cemeteries.
   (E)   Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to permitted
uses.
   (F)   Farmers markets and produce stands.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 118, passed 6-10-2013)
§ 152.222 SPECIAL LAND USES.
   The following special land uses are permitted in the PL District, subject to
compliance with §§
152.240 et seq.:
   (A)   Religious institutions;
   (B)   Public swimming pools and golf courses;
   (C)   Commercial outdoor recreation;
   (D)   Public or private riding stables; and
   (E)   Telecommunication towers.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.223 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall apply to all uses and structures in the PL
District unless otherwise modified by the provisions of §§
152.240 et seq., §§
152.260 et seq., §§
152.415 et seq. or §§
152.440 et seq.
   (A)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 11,000 square feet.
   (B)   Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 66 feet measured along the
front lot line. For cul-de-sac and flag lots, the lot width may be measured
along the front setback line.
   (C)   Yards and setbacks. The minimum yards and setbacks shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Front yard. Structures shall be setback at least 30 feet from the
road right-of-way.
      (2)   Side yards. Side yards shall conform to the side yard requirements
of the abutting zoning district.
      (3)   Rear yards. Rear yards shall conform to the rear yard requirements
of the abutting zoning district.
   (D)   Lot coverage. Lot coverage shall not exceed 35%.
   (E)   Structure height. No building shall be erected or altered to a height
greater than two and one-half stories or 35 feet; whichever is less. No other
structure shall be erected or altered to a height greater than 35 feet. (See §
152.267 for definitions of building height and structure height)
   (F)   Compliance required. Uses and structures shall comply with all other
provisions of this chapter, including §§
152.240 et seq. through §§
152.415 et seq. and all other applicable federal, state and local codes and
ordinances.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005) Penalty, see §
152.999
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
§ 152.230 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to allow flexibility in
development which either includes a mix of land uses or is proposed for a site
containing unique natural features which the developer and the village desire
to preserve. The standards of this subchapter are intended to encourage
innovative design and to create opportunities which may not be obtainable
through the more rigid standards of the other zoning districts.
   (B)   The Planned Unit Development (hereinafter referred to in this
subchapter as the “PUD”) standards are not intended to be used as a technique
to circumvent the intent of this chapter, to avoid imposition of specific
zoning ordinance standards, or the planning upon which this chapter is based.
Thus, the provisions of this subchapter are designed to promote land use
substantially consistent with recommendations of the village's master plan and
the character of the surrounding area, with modifications and departures from
generally applicable requirements made to provide the developer with
flexibility in design on the basis of the total PUD plan approved by the
village.
(Ord. 150, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 152.231 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A PUD may be applied for in any zoning district. The approval of a PUD
application shall require a rezoning by way of amendment of this chapter upon
the recommendation of the Village Planning Commission and approval of the
Village Council. The process for PUD approval shall be in accordance with §
152.235. Notification and public hearing requirements shall be in accordance
with §
152.460.
   (B)   Generally, proposed uses shall be consistent with the underlying
zoning designation before application for PUD and the future land use map in
the village master plan. However, it is recognized that the PUD option may
allow mixed uses and flexibility in use. In this regard, mixed or different
uses may be allowed as part of flexibility in use. In this regard, mixed or
different uses may be allowed as part of a PUD application, provided that uses
are consistent with the goals and objectives of the master plan and subject to
adequate public health, safety, and welfare protection mechanisms, which are
designed into the development to ensure the compatibility of varied land uses
both inside and outside the development.
(Ord. 150, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 152.232 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA.
   The applicant for a PUD must demonstrate each of the following criteria:
   (A)   The subject site is under the control of one owner or group of owners
and shall be capable of being planned and developed as one integral unit.
   (B)   Granting the PUD will result in at least one of the following:
      (1)   A recognizable and material benefit to the ultimate users of the
project and to the community, where such benefit would otherwise be unfeasible
or unlikely to be achieved without application of the PUD regulations,
including special sensitivity to adjacent land uses, well-designed access and
circulation systems, and/or integration of various site features into a unified
development;
      (2)   Long-term protection and preservation of natural resources and
natural features of a significant quantity, where such benefit would otherwise
be unfeasible or unlikely to be achieved without application of the PUD
regulations.
      (3)   Long-term protection of historic structures or significant
architecture worthy of historic preservation.
      (4)   The PUD will provide a complementary mixture of uses or a variety
of housing types within a unique, high-quality design that could not occur
without the use of the PUD option; or
      (5)   Redevelopment of a nonconforming site where creative design can
address unique site constraints.
   (C)   There is a finding that the proposed type and density of use shall not
result in an unreasonable increase in the need for or burden upon public
services, facilities, roads, and utilities.
   (D)   The proposed PUD shall not result in an unreasonable negative
environmental impact or loss of a historic structure on the subject site or
surrounding land.
   (E)   The proposed PUD shall not result in an unreasonable negative economic
impact upon surrounding properties.
   (F)   The proposed use or uses shall be of such location, size, density, and
character as to be in harmony with the zoning district in which they are
situated and shall not be detrimental to the adjoining zoning districts.
   (G)   The proposed development shall be consistent with the master plan.
   (H)   The proposed PUD shall be harmonious with the public health, safety,
and welfare of the village.
   (I)   The proposed PUD is not an attempt by the applicant to circumvent the
strict application of zoning standards.
(Ord. 150, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 152.233 DENSITY.
   (A)   Residential uses.
      (1)   All residential uses may be permitted with the following minimum
lot sizes per unit, based upon a discretionary 25% density credit from the
zoning district in which the property is situated immediately prior to
classification under this subchapter. In the event that the property is already
zoned PUD, density shall be allowed at the discretion of the Village Planning
Commission and Village Council, based on the master plan and surrounding land
use densities and character. Land area under water, public road rights-of-way,
and private road easements shall not be included in the gross density
calculation.
 
Minimum Residential Lot Sizes  Minimum Lot Size
PUD District                   per Unit
Rl                             16,335 square feet
R2                             9,000 square feet
R3                             6,534 square feet
R4                             6,534 square feet
 
      (2)   Additional density greater than specified above may be allowed
depending on the type and character of the development at the discretion of the
Planning Commission and Village Council based upon a demonstration by the
applicant of design excellence and conformance to the standards listed in §
152.232, Eligibility Criteria, as well as conformance to the master plan.
   (B)   The Planning Commission and Village Council may allow a residential
PUD in areas having a nonresidential base zoning subject to compliance with the
master plan or a determination by the Planning Commission and Village Council
that the proposed development meets the general intent of §
152.232, Eligibility Criteria.
   (C)   A planned unit development incorporating nonresidential uses, such as
commercial, institutional or a mix of nonresidential and residential uses, may
also be allowed subject to compliance with the master plan or a determination
by the Planning Commission and Village Council that the proposed development
meets the general intent of §
152.232, Eligibility Criteria.
(Ord. 150, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 152.234 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Any planned unit development shall comply with the following project design
standards:
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   The proposed PUD shall meet the eligibility criteria of §
152.232.
      (2)   Uses permitted. Any residential, office or commercial use is
permitted, upon a determination that the uses would meet the intent of this
subchapter.
      (3)   Harmony with surrounding uses. The uses and design of the PUD shall
be harmonious with the character of the surrounding area in terms of density,
intensity of use, size and height of buildings, architecture and other impacts.
   (B)   Setbacks, general provisions, and other applicable zoning requirements
shall be met in relation to each respective land use in the PUD based upon the
zoning districts in which the use is listed. In all cases, the strictest
provisions shall apply.
   (C)   Vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
      (1)   Thoroughfare, drainage, and utility designs shall meet or exceed
the standards otherwise applicable in connection with each of the respective
types of uses served.
      (2)   The pedestrian circulation system, and its related sidewalks and
pathways, shall be separated from vehicular thoroughfares.
      (3)   The number and dimensions of off-street parking shall be sufficient
to meet the minimum required of §§
152.280 et seq. However, when warranted by overlapping or shared parking
arrangements or based upon specific findings, the Village Council may approve a
reduction of the required number of parking spaces as recommended by the
Planning Commission.
   (D)   Utilities.
      (1)   There shall be underground installation of utilities, including
electricity and telephone, unless otherwise permitted by the village.
      (2)   The uses and design shall be consistent with the available capacity
of the existing street network and utility systems or the applicant shall
upgrade the infrastructure as required to accommodate the PUD. All streets and
parking areas within the proposed PUD shall meet the minimum construction and
other requirements of village ordinances and Technical Specifications.
      (3)   Mechanical equipment shall be placed on the roof or in a side yard
or rear yard and shall be screened from the street. Mechanical equipment on the
roof shall be screened from abutting streets with parapets or other types of
visual screening materials.
   (E)   Design features. The PUD shall use design features that foster
attractiveness and usability throughout the project and that create
compatibility with adjoining properties.
      (1)   Signage, lighting, landscaping, architecture and building materials
for the exterior of all structures, and other features of the project, shall be
designed and completed with the objective of achieving a quality, integrated
development, consistent with the character of the community, surrounding
development or developments, and natural features of the area.
      (2)   Where nonresidential uses adjoin residentially zoned or used
property outside the proposed PUD, noise reduction and visual landscape buffer
areas such as landscape berms and/or decorative walls, shall be employed in
accordance with §
152.329.
      (3)   The proposed PUD shall provide a minimum of 20% of the gross site
acreage as open space. Gross site area for the purposes of computing required
open space does not include private and public rights-of-way or detention/
retention basins. Such open space will remain undisturbed and reserved for
passive enjoyment of the users of the development and shall not include
retention ponds or other bodies of water, required yards around residential
building lots, or other similar features. This open space requirement may be
waived by the Planning Commission and Village Council, if determined to be not
applicable due to the type and character of development.
      (4)   Natural and historic features. The development shall be designed to
promote the preservation of any significant natural or historic features on the
site. Vegetation shall be preserved and/or new landscaping generously provided
to ensure that proposed use will be adequately buffered from one another and
from surrounding public and private property.
   (F)   Additional considerations. Deviations with respect to ordinance
regulations may be granted as part of the overall approval of the PUD. The
deviations may be considered, provided that there are features or elements
demonstrated by the applicant and deemed adequate by the Planning Commission
and Village Council and designed into the project plan for the purpose of
achieving the objectives of this subchapter.
(Ord. 150, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 152.235 PUD REZONING APPLICATION AND PROCEDURE.
   Application for PUD rezoning and approval shall be processed as follows:
   (A)   Pre-application conference. Prior to formal submission of an
application for PUD approval, a meeting between the applicant and village staff
shall be held to obtain guidance that will assist the applicant in preparation
of the application and plan. The village shall charge a fee for the conference
to cover administrative costs.
   (B)   PUD application submittal. The applicant shall prepare and submit a
preliminary site plan of the proposed PUD to the village. A narrative report
shall accompany the site plan providing a description of the project,
discussion of the market concept of the project, and explanation of the manner
in which the criteria set forth in the preceding design standards have been
met. The preliminary site plan for the PUD shall contain at a minimum the
following information:
      (1)   A completed PUD rezoning application and processing fee as
established by Village Council.
      (2)   The plans and narrative shall provide all information required
according to §
152.389, Preliminary Site Plan Application.
      (3)   The applicant shall also provide a project narrative which
indicates the following information:
         (a)   An explanation of how the project meets the criteria set forth
in §
152.232, Eligibility Criteria.
         (b)   An explanation of why the submitted PUD plan is superior to a
plan that could have been prepared under strict adherence to related sections
of this subchapter.
         (c)   A list of anticipated deviations from this chapter which would
otherwise be applicable.
   (C)   Review process.
      (1)   Review for completeness. The Zoning Administrator shall review the
preliminary PUD plan application submittal and determine if all the necessary
information has been provided. A complete application must be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator at least 15 business days prior to the Planning Commission
meeting at which the proposal will first be considered.
      (2)   Distribution. The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the PUD
application submittal and the Village Planner's report to the Planning
Commission for review. The Zoning Administrator shall provide notice of the
public hearing in accordance with the requirements of §
152.022(C).
      (3)   Public hearing and Planning Commission action. Upon conclusion of
the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the
Village Council to deny or approve, with or without conditions, the preliminary
PUD plan. If no decision or recommendation is made at the advertised hearing,
disposition of the case must be set to a date certain at that time, and this
date must be clearly stated in the meeting minutes. If no certain date is set
and duly noted in the public record, notice of the next meeting at which the
case will be considered shall be provided. The Planning Commission shall make a
decision or recommendation upon each case within 60 days of the public hearing,
unless additional time is granted by the applicant.
      (4)   Village Council action. A summary of the Planning Commission
recommendation and comments submitted at the public hearing shall be
transmitted with the preliminary PUD application submittal and the Village
Planner's report to the Village Council. The Village Council may hold
additional public hearings if it considers it necessary. The Village Council
shall make a decision upon each case within 60 days of the Planning
Commission's recommendation or refer the proposal back to the Planning
Commission for further consideration, unless additional time is granted by the
applicant. The Village Council shall take one of the following actions:
         (a)   Approval. Upon finding that the preliminary PUD plan meets the
criteria and standards set forth in §
152.230 et seq., the Village Council shall grant preliminary PUD approval.
Approval shall constitute approval of the uses and design concept as shown on
the preliminary PUD plan and shall confer upon the applicant the right to
proceed through the subsequent PUD plan review phases.
         (b)   Approval with changes or conditions. The Village Council may
recommend conditional approval subject to modifications as performed by the
applicant as long as the PUD plan meets the criteria established in §
152.234.
         (c)   Denial. Upon finding that the preliminary PUD plan does not and
cannot meet the criteria and standards set forth in §
152.234, the Village Council shall deny preliminary approval.
      (5)   Effective period of approval. The PUD plan approval shall remain
valid for a period of two years. If a final plan is not submitted during that
time frame, the PUD request becomes void. If a final plan is submitted during
that time frame and is approved, the rezoning to PUD shall remain in effect
until such time as the owner of the property involved requests a change to the
zoning. The Village Council may approve extensions to the PUD rezoning of up to
one year.
      (6)   Submittal of final PUD plan to the Planning Commission. If the
preliminary PUD plan is approved by the Village Council, the applicant shall
submit a final PUD plan for final PUD review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission in accordance with §
152.391, Final Site Plan Application. This must be done during the validity
period for the rezoning to a PUD as set forth in division (5) above. The
Planning Commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or
denial of the project. If no action is taken because more information is
required from the applicant, the Planning Commission shall table the agenda
item to a date certain, which shall be specified in the meeting minutes. The
applicant shall submit a revised plan to the Planning Commission addressing its
concerns.
      (7)   Submittal of final PUD plan to Village Council. A summary of the
Planning Commission recommendation shall be transmitted with the final PUD Plan
submittal and the Village Planner's report to the Village Council. The Village
Council shall take one of the following actions:
         (a)   Approval. Upon finding that the final plan meets the criteria
and standards set forth in §
152.234, the Village Council shall grant final approval.
         (b)   Tabling. Upon finding that the final plan does not meet the
criteria and standards set forth in §
152.234 but could meet such criteria if revised, the Village Council may table
action until a revised final plan is resubmitted.
         (c)   Denial. Upon finding that the final plan does not and cannot
meet the criteria and standards set forth in §
152.234, the Village Council shall deny final approval.
      (8)   All actions on the preliminary PUD plan or final PUD plan by the
Planning Commission and the Village Council shall state the reasons for
approval, conditional approval, postponement or denial within the body of the
motion. Approval of the final PUD by the Village Council shall constitute
amendment of the official zoning map. The applicant shall then be authorized to
proceed with any necessary permits, such as final platting or construction
submittals.
      (9)   Amendments. If the Planning Commission and/or Village Council
determines that a proposed use or site plan is not consistent with the approved
PUD, the applicant shall be directed to submit a request to amend the PUD
following the same procedures outlined above.
      (10)    Change in ownership. An approve d PUD plan runs with the land,
not with the lando wner. If the land is sold or other wise excha nged, the
approve d PUD plan shall remai n in effect unless the applicant submi ts a
request to amend or terminate the PUD plan.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/00fead6ace167be79da9f0b0063628416dc97c1e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1524.png]
 
(Ord. 150, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 152.236 PUD CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Reasonable conditions may be required before the approval of a PUD, to
the extent authorized by law, for the purpose of ensuring that existing public
services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be
capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the
land use or activity, protecting the natural environment and conserving natural
resources and energy, ensuring compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and
promoting the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner.
   (B)   Permit conditions may be drafted in writing specifying conditions of
approval and:
      (1)   Conditions may stipulate that the PUD may only be used for
selective land uses, provided that the restraint(s):
         (a)   Advances, rather than injures, the interests of adjacent
landowners;
         (b)   Is a means of harmonizing private interests in land, thus
benefiting the public interest;
         (c)   Is for the purpose of ensuring that the PUD fulfills the
purposes and intent of this subchapter and thus benefits the public interest;
and/or
         (d)   Possesses a reasonable relationship to the promotion of the
public health, safety, and welfare.
      (2)   A change of land use from that which was previously approved will
render the PUD null and void or will require application for a revised PUD.
   (C)   Conditions imposed shall be designed to protect natural resources and
the public health, safety, and welfare of individuals in the project and those
immediately adjacent, and the community as a whole, and shall be reasonably
related to the purposes affected by the PUD and necessary to meet the intent
and purpose of this chapter, and related to the objective of ensuring
compliance with the standards of this chapter. All conditions imposed shall be
made a part of the written record of the approved planned unit development,
which shall include a site plan and written PUD permit conditions signed by the
village and the applicant.
   (D)   In the event that conditions set forth herein are not complied with,
the Zoning Administrator shall have the right to follow enforcement procedures
pursuant to § 152.020 et seq. Additional conditions may be imposed by the
Village Council, or the applicant may be required to submit a new PUD
application.
(Ord. 150, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 152.237 AUTHORITY OF ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS REGARDING VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to hear and
decide appeal requests by property owners for variances from this chapter.
However, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to change
conditions or make interpretations to the PUD plan or written agreement.
   (B)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have authority to grant
variances from the approved PUD plan pertaining to uses, perimeter setbacks,
perimeter landscaping or setbacks. Such changes shall require an amendment to
the PUD plan.
(Ord. 150, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 152.238 PHASING AND COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Phasing. Where a project is proposed for construction in phases, the
planning and designing shall be such that, upon completion, each phase shall be
capable of standing on its own in terms of the presence of services,
facilities, and open space and shall contain the necessary components to ensure
protection of natural resources and the health, safety, and welfare of the
users of the planned unit development and the residents of the surrounding
area. In addition, in developments which include residential and nonresidential
uses, the relative mix of uses and the scheduled completion of construction for
each phase shall be disclosed and determined to be reasonable by the Village
Council after recommendation from the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Commencement and completion of construction. Construction shall be
commenced within one year following final approval of a PUD and shall proceed
in conformance with the schedule set forth by the applicant. If construction
has not commenced within such time, any approval of a site plan on the project
shall expire and be null and void; however, an extension for a specified period
may be granted by the Planning Commission upon good cause shown if such request
is made to the Planning Commission prior to the expiration of the initial
period. Moreover, in the event that a site plan has expired, the Village
Council shall take action to reclassify the property to its previous zoning
designation, by adopting an amendment to this chapter, after Planning
Commission review and public hearing(s) as required by §
152.235.
(Ord. 150, passed 10-12-2020)
§ 152.239 VIOLATIONS.
   A violation of the PUD plan or agreement shall be considered a violation of
this chapter.
(Ord. 150, passed 10-12-2020)
SPECIAL LAND USES
§ 152.240 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide a means for the Village
of Pinckney to authorize, subject to minimum standards and appropriate
conditions, certain specified uses that may be compatible with permitted uses
in a district, but that may also have a greater impact on surrounding
properties. This subchapter is intended to provide an opportunity for the
public, and the Planning Commission to review each proposed special land use,
and identify potential impacts with regard to the individual circumstances of
the site and use.
   (B)   It is further intended to provide an opportunity for the Planning
Commission to impose the conditions as are necessary to ensure that the special
land use will be compatible with surrounding uses and consistent with the
purpose of the district in which it will be located. If it is determined that
one or more negative impacts will be generated by the special land use and that
these impacts cannot be reasonably mitigated, the Planning Commission may deny
the special land use in order to protect the health, safety, welfare and
quality of life of village residents.
   (C)   Sections
152.241 and
152.242 contain general procedures and standards that apply to all special land
uses. Section
152.243 contains specific standards that apply only to the specific special
land uses listed in §
152.243.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 91, passed 10-12-2009; Ord. 134, passed 11-14-
2016; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-2017)
§ 152.241 PERMIT APPLICATION AND PROCESS.
   Applications for a special land use permit shall be submitted and processed
as follows:
   (A)   Application submittal. No application shall be considered by the
village unless it is accompanied by the following:
      (1)   A village application form completed in full by the applicant and
signed by all persons, firms or corporations having an ownership interest in
the property. For the purposes of this section, OWNERSHIP INTEREST shall mean
the titled owner(s) and land contract holder(s);
      (2)   A preliminary site plan containing all of the information required
by §
152.389;
      (3)   A written statement by the applicant and any supporting evidence
explaining how the special land use will comply with the following:
         (a)   The general criteria in §
152.242; and
         (b)   The specific criteria in §
152.243 as applicable.
      (4)   A processing fee as established by the Village Council; and
      (5)   An application for a residential open space development shall also
include a parallel site plan prepared in compliance with §
152.353(A).
   (B)   Process.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall transmit the full special land use
permit application to the Planning Commission for review. The Planning
Commission shall fix a reasonable time for a public hearing. The Zoning
Administrator shall provide notice of the public hearing in accordance with the
requirements of §
152.022(C).
      (2)   Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning Commission
shall deny or approve, with or without conditions, or table for further
consideration the special land use permit; or in the case of special land use
permit applications for a marihuana establishment, residential open space
development, condominium project, or other planned development, shall make a
recommendation to the Village Council to deny or approve, with or without
conditions, the special land use permit. If no decision or recommendation is
made at the advertised hearing, disposition of the case must be set to a date
certain at that time, and this date must be clearly stated in the meeting
minutes. If no certain date is set and duly noted in the public record, notice
of the next meeting at which the case will be considered shall be provided as
required in division (B)(1) above. The Planning Commission shall make a
decision or recommendation upon each case within 60 days of the public hearing,
unless additional time is granted by the applicant.
      (3)   For special land use permit applications for a marihuana
establishment, residential open space development, condominium project, or
other planned development, a summary of the Planning Commission recommendation
and comments submitted at the public hearing shall be transmitted with the
special land use permit application and staff report to the Village Council.
The Village Council may hold additional public hearings if it considers it
necessary. The Village Council shall make a decision upon each case within 60
days of the Planning Commission's recommendation or refer the proposal back to
the Planning Commission for further consideration, unless additional time is
granted by the applicant.
   (C)   Permit expiration. A special land use permit issued pursuant to this
subchapter shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. If
construction has not commenced and proceeded meaningfully toward completion by
the end of this one-year period, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the
applicant in writing, no more than 30 days before the expiration date, that
upon expiration, the permit will become null and void.
   (D)   Permit amendment. Changes to an approved site plan shall comply with §
152.394. Changes to other condition(s) of approval, including but not limited
to performance standards, shall be processed in compliance with division (B)
above.
   (E)   Permit renewal. Upon written request by the applicant, a one-year
extension may be granted by the Planning Commission if it finds that the
approved special land use permit and site plan still comply with the
requirements of this chapter. A written request for permit renewal must be
received by the village prior to the expiration date, or a new application for
a special land use permit will be required. Upon expiration of the initial one-
year extension on a special use permit. Planning Commission may grant, upon
written request by the applicant, subsequent one-year extensions of the special
land use permit, upon showing of good cause.
   (F)   Revocation. Based upon a recommendation by the Zoning Administrator,
the Planning Commission shall have the authority to revoke any special land use
permit after it has been proved that the holder of the permit has failed to
comply with any of the applicable requirements of this chapter and/or permit
approval. The Zoning Administrator shall give written notice of the violation
to the holder of the permit, and correction must be made within 30 days. After
a 30-day period, the Zoning Administrator shall give a second notice, and the
use for which the permit was granted must cease within 60 days from the date of
second notice.
   (G)   Re-application. No application for a special land use permit that has
been denied wholly or in part by the Planning Commission shall be resubmitted
until the expiration of one year or more from the date of denial, except on the
grounds of newly discovered evidence or proof of change of conditions.
   (H)   For special land use permit applications for a residential open space
development, condominium project, or other planned development, special land
use permit amendments, renewals, and revocations shall also require the Village
Council's approval.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 83, passed 10-27-2008; Ord. 91, passed 10-12-
2009; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-2017; Ord. 153, passed 12-14-2020) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.242 GENERAL APPROVAL CRITERIA.
   (A)   Before approving or denying a special land use permit application, the
Planning Commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances of the
application and establish a preponderance of the evidence.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall approve the application only if all
proposed uses and structures on the subject site comply with the general
standards set forth in this section.
   (C)   These general standards apply to all uses authorized by a special land
use permit.
   (D)   The specific and detailed standards set forth in §
152.243 apply to particular uses, as indicated, and must be met in addition to
the general standards below, where applicable.
      (1)   Compliance with Comprehensive Plan. The special land use shall be
consistent with the general goals, objectives and policies of the adopted
Village of Pinckney Comprehensive Plan.
      (2)   Compliance with Zoning District.
         (a)   Special land uses permitted within any district shall be only
those listed within the district.
         (b)   The special land use shall be consistent with the purpose of the
zoning district in which it will be located.
         (c)   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the special land use
shall comply with the lot, access, yard, setback and other site design
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
      (3)   Compatibility. The special land use shall be designed, constructed,
operated and maintained in a manner that is compatible with the essential
character, permitted use, enjoyment and value of surrounding property and shall
enhance the community as a whole.
      (4)   Infrastructure and services. The special land use shall be
adequately served by essential public services and other infrastructures such
as roads, emergency services, drainage structures and water and sewage
facilities. The proposed use shall not create a need for additional public
facilities or services at public cost.
      (5)   Traffic. The special land use shall minimize traffic impacts. In
determining whether this requirement is met, consideration shall be given to
anticipated traffic generation, automobile circulation, access to public roads,
relationship to intersections, sight distances, access to off-street parking
and pedestrian traffic. Access drives connected to roads under state and county
jurisdiction shall comply with applicable road agency standards.
      (5)   Environmental performance. The special land use shall not involve
uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment or conditions of operation
that may be detrimental to any person or property, or to public health, safety
and welfare. In determining whether this requirement is met, consideration
shall be given to the production of runoff, traffic, noise, vibration, smoke,
fumes, odors, dust, glare and light.
      (6)   Natural resources. The special land use shall minimize impacts on
the natural environment. In determining whether this requirement is met,
consideration shall be given to scenic views, floodplains, surface waters,
wetlands, groundwater recharge areas, woodlands, wildlife habitat and steep
slopes.
      (7)   Architecture. The architectural design of all structures, including
buildings and signs, shall be compatible with the design and character of
structures in the surrounding area. As part of the application, the Planning
Commission may require detailed drawings of proposed signs and architectural
facades, including full construction elevations and information on exterior
materials, colors and detailing.
      (8)   Compliance required. Uses and structures shall comply with all
other provisions of this chapter, including §§
152.240 et seq. through §§
152.415 et seq. and all other applicable federal, state and local codes and
ordinances.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-2017)
§ 152.243 SPECIFIC APPROVAL CRITERIA.
   (A)   Home occupations. Home occupations are permitted as a special land use
in all residential districts (R1, R2, R3, R4 and ROB) provided the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   A home occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
primary use of the dwelling unit for dwelling purposes and shall not change the
character of the residential nature of the premises, both in terms of use and
appearance. Such home occupation shall be carried on within the dwelling that
is occupied by the owner of the home occupation.
      (2)   A home occupation use shall not create a nuisance or endanger the
health, safety, welfare, or enjoyment of any other person in the area by reason
of noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odor, unsanitary or unsightly conditions,
fire hazards, or the like, involved in or resulting from such home occupation.
      (3)   No employees shall be permitted, either gratuitously or for
compensation of any kind, other than members of the resident family.
      (4)   There shall be limited additional vehicular traffic permitted for
the home occupation/category one, such as is normally generated for a dwelling
unit in a residential area, both as to volume and type of vehicles.
      (5)   The village may impose additional conditions and regulations, as it
deems necessary, to adequately protect adjoining residents and property owners.
It may require that the particular business be operated only for a specified
period of months or years unless an additional permit is granted. A home
occupation shall operate within the hours and days as set in the special land
use permit.
      (6)   The area of the identification sign shall not exceed one foot by
two feet; and the height of the identification sign shall not be more than four
feet above grade.
      (7)   Customers, clients, students or patients. No more than two
customers, clients, students or patients shall be on the premises where a valid
home occupation special use permit has been secured.
      (8)   Exterior alterations. Home occupations shall not require exterior
alterations or involve construction features not customary in dwellings, or
required use of mechanical or electrical equipment which shall create a
nuisance to the adjacent neighborhood.
      (9)   Interior alterations. Any permanent structural alterations to the
interior of the dwelling unit for purposes of conducting the home occupation
which would render it unsuitable for residential use shall be prohibited.
      (10)   Outdoor storage. There shall be no outdoor storage of items
supportive of the home occupation.
      (11)   Medical marihuana. A registered primary caregiver, in compliance
with the General Rules of the state Department of Community Health, the state
Medical Marihuana Act, P.A. 2008, Initiated Law, being M.C.L.A. § 333.26423(d),
and the requirements of this chapter, shall be allowed as a home occupation
special use. Nothing in this chapter, or in any companion regulatory provision
adopted in any other provision of this code, is intended to grant, nor shall
they be construed as granting, immunity from criminal prosecution for growing,
sale, consumption, use, distribution, or possession of marihuana not in strict
compliance with that Act and the General Rules. Also, since federal law is not
affected by that Act or the General Rules, nothing in this chapter, or in any
companion regulatory provision adopted in any other provision of this code, is
intended to grant, nor shall they be construed as granting, immunity from
criminal prosecution under federal law. The state Medical Marihuana Act does
not protect users, caregivers or the owners of properties on which the medical
use of marihuana is occurring from federal prosecution, or from having their
property seized by federal authorities under the federal Controlled Substances
Act. The following requirements for a registered primary caregiver shall apply:
         (a)   The medical use of marihuana shall comply at all times and in
all circumstances with the state Medical Marihuana Act and the General Rules of
the Michigan Department of Community Health, as they may be amended from time
to time;
         (b)   A registered primary caregiver must be located outside of a
1,000-foot radius from any school, including child care or day care facility,
to insure community compliance with federal “Drug- Free School Zone”
requirements;
         (c)   A registered primary caregiver must be located outside of a
1,000-foot radius from any other registered primary caregiver;
         (d)   Not more than one primary caregiver shall be permitted to
service qualifying patients on a parcel;
         (e)   Not more than five qualifying patients shall be assisted with
the medical use of marihuana within any given calendar week;
         (f)   All medical marihuana shall be contained within the main
building in an enclosed, locked facility inaccessible on all sides and equipped
with locks or other security devices that permit access only by the registered
primary caregiver or qualifying patient, as reviewed and approved by the
village Police Department;
         (g)   All necessary building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical
permits shall be obtained for any portion of the residential structure in which
electrical wiring, lighting and/or watering devices that support the
cultivation, growing or harvesting of marihuana are located;
         (h)   If a room with windows is utilized as a growing location, any
lighting methods that exceed usual residential periods between the hours of 11
p.m. to 7 a.m. shall employ shielding methods, without alteration to the
exterior of the residence, to prevent ambient light spillage that may create a
distraction for adjacent residential properties;
         (i)   That portion of the residential structure where energy usage and
heat exceeds typical residential use, such as a grow room, and the storage of
any chemicals such as herbicides, pesticides, and fertilizers shall be subject
to inspection and approval by the Pinckney Area Fire Department to insure
compliance with the state Fire Protection Code.
   (B)   Educational institutions.
      (1)   Principal uses. Elementary, middle and high schools, vocational
schools and higher education institutions.
      (2)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be one acre.
      (3)   Road frontage and access.
         (a)   At least one lot line shall abut an arterial road or collector
road.
         (b)   All vehicular access shall be directly from an arterial road or
collector road.
      (4)   Accessory use. Support uses offered solely to students may be
permitted provided they are strictly an accessory use to the principal use. The
uses may include, but are not limited to: latch key child care programs, child
care centers, congregate student dining and social and recreational facilities
such as playgrounds and play fields.
   (C)   Nursing homes and homes for the aged.
      (1)   Road frontage and access.
         (a)   At least one lot line shall abut an arterial road or collector
road.
         (b)   All vehicular access shall be directly from an arterial road or
collector road.
      (2)   Setbacks. The following setbacks shall apply to structures,
excluding signs, walls and fences:
         (a)   No structure less than two stories in height shall be closer
than 50 feet to any street line or to any lot line abutting a residential
district or use;
         (b)   No structure two or more stories in height shall be closer than
100 feet to any street line or to any lot line abutting a residential district
or use; and
         (c)   Structures shall be setback from any lot line abutting a
nonresidential district and use as specified for permitted uses on the subject
site.
      (3)   Enclosure and screening. Ambulance and delivery areas shall be
obscured from all residential districts and uses by a solid fence or masonry
wall no less than four feet and no more than six feet in height.
      (4)   Accessory use. Support uses offered solely to residents may be
permitted provided they are strictly accessory uses to the principal use. The
uses may include congregate dining, health care, personal services and social,
recreational and educational facilities.
   (D)   Recreation.
      (1)   Principal uses. Commercial outdoor recreation and commercial indoor
recreation. (Public indoor recreation is included within the definition of
public building, see §
152.267)
      (2)   Road frontage and access. If the site and proposed uses are
intended to serve areas beyond the immediate neighborhood, at least one lot
line shall abut a paved public road. All vehicular access shall be directly
from the road.
      (3)   Setbacks. The following setbacks shall apply to parking and
structures, including spectator seating, but excluding signs, walls and fences.
Where unique site conditions apply, the Planning Commission may modify these
setback requirements.
         (a)   All parking and structures shall be setback at least 50 feet
from any street line or lot line abutting a nonresidential district and use.
         (b)   All parking and structures shall be setback at least 100 feet
from any lot line abutting a residential district or use.
      (4)   Enclosure and screening. Swimming pools shall comply with the
enclosure and access requirements in §
152.262(H).
      (5)   Modifications. The Planning Commission may modify off-street
parking requirements in those instances wherein it is demonstrated that a
significant number of the site's users will be pedestrians.
   (E)   Indoor self-storage facility.
      (1)   Principal use. Indoor storage of personal goods within a completely
enclosed building.
      (2)   Accessory use. The only permitted accessory use shall be limited
retail sales to tenants of locks, packing materials and similar goods
incidental to the principal use.
      (3)   Prohibited uses.
         (a)   Commercial activity other than the principal use and accessory
use permitted above.
         (b)   Storage of any goods or materials outside of a completely
enclosed building.
         (c)   Storage of combustible, flammable, explosive or toxic liquids or
materials within storage units or elsewhere upon the premises.
      (4)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be two acres and the maximum
lot area shall be five acres.
      (5)   Road frontage and access.
         (a)   At least one lot line shall abut an arterial road or collector
road.
         (b)   All vehicular access shall be directly from an arterial road or
collector road.
         (c)   Access to the site shall be restricted to employees, tenants and
emergency response vehicles only, by means of locked gates and/or other access-
control devices.
      (6)   Setbacks. The following setbacks shall apply to structures,
excluding signs, walls and fences:
         (a)   Structures shall be setback at least 50 feet from any lot line
abutting a residential district or use; and
         (b)   Structures shall be setback from any lot line abutting a
nonresidential district and use as specified for permitted uses on the subject
site.
      (7)   Lot coverage. Lot coverage shall not exceed 40%.
      (8)   Enclosure and screening.
         (a)   The perimeter of the site shall be completely surrounded by a
wall or fence no less than four feet and no more than six feet in height. The
use of barbed wire or electrical fencing shall not be permitted.
         (b)   The wall or fence shall be setback at least 30 feet from all
street lines and from any lot line abutting a residential district or use.
         (c)   The setback area between the wall or fence and street line or
residential lot line shall be landscaped with appropriate plant materials.
         (d)   The design and materials used for the wall or fence and for
landscaping within the setback area shall be approved by the Planning
Commission.
      (9)   Internal circulation and off-street parking.
         (a)   All storage units shall be accessible via an interior drive
clearly marked to distinguish vehicle direction and parking areas.
         (b)   The applicant shall demonstrate that emergency response vehicles
can both fully access the premises and safely circulate through the site.
Sufficient area and turning radii shall be provided at the end of all storage
units to accommodate emergency response vehicles. The distance between storage
unit buildings shall be no less than 35 feet. Where no parking is provided
between storage unit buildings, the building separation may be a reduced to no
less than 25 feet.
         (c)   Interior drives and off-street parking areas shall be paved with
a permanent surface of concrete or asphalt and shall be graded and drained to
dispose of all storm water without negatively impacting surrounding property.
      (10)   Facility management office. If a management office for the
facility is provided, the office shall be located within the walled or fenced
area required by division (E)(8) above, and calculated as part of the maximum
40% lot coverage. Parking for the office shall not be less than one parking
space for every 25 storage units on the site.
   (F)   Child care facilities.
      (1)   Family day care homes. Family day care homes serving six or fewer
children shall be considered a residential use of property and a permitted use
in all residential districts.
      (2)   Group child care homes. Group child care homes serving seven to 12
children shall comply with the following:
         (a)   Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be
maintained;
         (b)   There shall be no more than one dwelling unit on the subject
lot. Child care activities shall not be permitted within any structure other
than the dwelling unit;
         (c)   No structure on the subject lot shall be constructed or altered
for nonresidential use;
         (d)   There shall be a minimum of 35 square feet of indoor play area
for every licensed child care slot. The play area shall not exceed 25% of the
floor area of the dwelling unit. Indoor play areas shall not include bathrooms,
kitchens, closets or storage areas, utility rooms, enclosed porches or similar
spaces;
         (e)   There shall be a useable outdoor playground on the premises:
            1.   The playground shall not be located within the front yard,
unless the Planning Commission specifically finds that it is the most
appropriate location;
            2.   The minimum size of the playground shall be no less than 100
square feet for every licensed child care slot. The Planning Commission may
reduce or waive this requirement if a public park is located within 500 feet of
the subject lot;
            3.   All playgrounds shall be enclosed by a wall or fence at least
four feet but no more than six feet in height and designed for child safety;
and
            4.   The Planning Commission may require the playground to be
obscured from abutting residential districts and uses by plant material.
         (f)   The hours of operation shall not exceed 16 hours within a 24-
hour period. Activity between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall be
limited so that the drop-off and pick-up of children is not disruptive to
neighboring residents.
      (3)   Child care centers. Child care centers shall comply with divisions
(F)(2)(a) through (f) above.
   (G)   Funeral homes, not including crematoriums.
      (1)   Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be
maintained.
      (2)   Road frontage and access:
         (a)   At least one lot line shall abut an arterial road or collector
road; and
         (b)   All vehicular access shall be directly from an arterial road or
collector road.
      (3)   The following setbacks shall apply to structures, excluding signs,
walls and fences:
         (a)   All structures shall be setback at least 40 feet from any lot
line abutting a residential district or use; and
         (b)   All structures shall be setback at least 20 feet from any lot
line abutting a nonresidential district and use.
      (4)   Loading areas used by ambulances, hearses or other service vehicles
shall be completely obscured from all surrounding properties as shown on the
site plan and approved by the Planning Commission.
      (5)   Sufficient off-street parking and vehicle assembly area shall be
provided for the purpose of conducting funeral processions. The assembly area
shall be provided in addition to the requirements of §§
152.280 et seq. A circulation plan identifying the arrangement of the vehicle
assembly area shall be provided as part of the required preliminary site plan.
   (H)   Vehicle service stations, repair services and washes.
      (1)   Principal uses. Vehicle service stations, vehicle repair services
and car washes.
      (2)   Prohibited uses.
         (a)   Vehicle sales, including vehicle dealerships;
         (b)   Equipment or activity related to vehicle repair services outside
of a completely enclosed building;
         (c)   Outdoor commercial display or storage of vehicle parts, supplies
or repair equipment, except within an area defined on the site plan, approved
by the Planning Commission and located no more than ten feet beyond the
principal building;
         (d)   Storage of inoperative or unlicensed vehicles for more than 14
days. The storage shall not occur in the front yard, side yard, or road; and
         (e)   Storage of discarded or salvaged materials.
      (3)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 17,424 square feet.
      (4)   Road frontage and access.
         (a)   The subject lot shall have at least 132 feet of frontage on an
arterial road or collector road.
         (b)   All vehicular access shall be directly from an arterial road or
collector road.
      (5)   Driveway and parking. All driveways and parking lots must comply
with the requirements set forth in the Village Technical Standards (approach,
sight distance, curb, etc.)
      (6)   Setbacks. The following setbacks shall apply to structures
including fuel pumps, but excluding signs, walls and fences:
         (a)   Street line:
            1.   Buildings shall be setback at least 50 feet from the edge of
any road right-of-way; and
            2.   All other structures shall be setback at least 15 feet from
the edge of any road right-of-way.
         (b)   Structures shall be setback at least 50 feet from any lot line
abutting a residential district or use.
         (c)   Structures shall be setback from any lot line abutting a
nonresidential district and use as specified for permitted uses on the subject
site.
      (7)   Enclosure and screening.
         (a)   If the subject lot is adjacent to a residential district or use,
all commercial activity shall be completely obscured from the residential
district or use by means of a continuous solid wall or fence six feet in height
and a landscaped buffer area in compliance with §
152.329.
         (b)   Outside dumpsters shall be completely enclosed and obscured by
an opaque fence or wall and gate and in compliance with § 152.262(M).
      (8)   Drainage of storm water. The entire service area shall be paved
with a permanent surface of concrete or asphalt and shall be graded and drained
to dispose of all storm water without negatively impacting adjacent property.
      (9)   Car washes. All vehicles waiting to enter the facility shall be
provided with adequate off-street stacking spaces. No vehicle stacking area
shall cross any maneuvering lane, drive, sidewalk or public right-of-way. A
bypass lane or other suitable means of direct access to a public road shall be
provided for vehicles that do not use the car wash.
   (I)    Restaurants, taverns and nightclubs.
      (1)   Principal uses. Standard restaurants, fast food restaurants,
taverns and nightclubs.
      (2)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet.
      (3)   Road frontage and access. All vehicular access shall be directly
from an arterial road or collector road.
      (4)   Setbacks. The following setbacks shall apply to structures,
excluding signs, walls and fences:
         (a)   Structures shall be setback at least 15 feet from the edge of
any road right-of-way;
         (b)   Structures shall be setback at least 50 feet from any lot line
abutting a residential district or use; and
         (c)   Structures shall be setback from any lot line abutting a
nonresidential district and use as specified for permitted uses on the subject
site.
      (5)   Enclosure and screening.
         (a)   If the subject lot is adjacent to a residential district or use,
all commercial activity shall be completely obscured from the residential
district or use by means of a continuous solid wall or fence six feet in height
and a landscaped buffer area in compliance with §
152.329.
         (b)   Outside dumpsters shall be completely enclosed and obscured by
an opaque fence or wall and gate, in compliance with §
152.262(M).
      (6)   Fast food restaurants.
         (a)   All patrons served in their vehicles via a drive-through
facility shall be provided with adequate off-street standing spaces. No vehicle
stacking areas shall cross any maneuvering lane, drive, sidewalk or public
right-of-way. A bypass lane or other suitable means of access to a public road
shall be provided for automobiles that do not use the drive-through facility.
         (b)   One illuminated menu board sign shall be allowed in addition to
all other signs permitted by §§
152.300 et seq. The surface area of the menu board sign shall not exceed 32
square feet and the height shall not exceed six feet above grade.
      (7)   Fast food restaurants, open front restaurants and outdoor cafés.
The Village Planning Commission may restrict outdoor loudspeakers or hours of
operation to control noise.
      (8)   Serving alcohol. All restaurants, taverns and nightclubs permitted
by the Planning Commission to serve alcohol shall comply in every respect with
the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, as amended.
   (J)   Veterinary clinics.
      (1)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet.
      (2)   Road frontage and access. All vehicular access shall be directly
from an arterial road or collector road.
      (3)   Setbacks. The following setbacks shall apply to structures,
excluding signs, walls and fences:
         (a)   All structures shall be setback from the edge of any road right-
of-way as required by the zoning district in which they are located;
         (b)   All structures shall be setback at least 50 feet from any lot
line abutting a residential district or use; and
         (c)   Structures shall be setback from any lot line abutting a
nonresidential district and use as specified for permitted uses on the subject
site.
      (4)   Odors and sounds. All facilities shall be completely enclosed
within a building in such a manner as to produce no odor or sound at the lot
line. No outdoor exercise runs, pens or kennels shall be allowed.
   (K)   Commercial outdoor display.
      (1)   Principal uses. Outdoor sale of vehicles, recreational equipment,
manufactured homes, farm equipment, building supplies, contractor's yards,
construction equipment, garden and/or landscape supplies and similar goods.
      (2)   Accessory uses. Car washes, vehicle service stations and minor
vehicle repair may be permitted only as incidental accessory uses, and shall be
conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building.
      (3)   Prohibited uses.
         (a)   Major vehicle repair;
         (b)   Storage of inoperative or unlicensed vehicles;
         (c)   Storage of discarded or salvaged materials; and
         (d)   Loudspeakers or other devices for broadcasting music and/or
announcements.
      (4)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 35,000 square feet.
      (5)   Road frontage and access.
         (a)   At least one lot line shall abut an arterial road or collector
road.
         (b)   All vehicular access shall be directly from an arterial road or
collector road.
      (6)   Setbacks. The following setbacks apply to structures, excluding
signs, walls and fences:
         (a)   Structures shall be setback at least 50 feet from any lot line
abutting a residential district or use; and
         (b)   Structures shall be setback from any lot line abutting a
nonresidential district and use as specified for permitted uses on the subject
site.
      (7)   Enclosure and screening. If the subject lot is adjacent to or
across a road or alley from a residential district or use, all outdoor
commercial displays shall be obscured from the residential district or use by
means of a continuous solid wall or fence six feet in height and a landscaped
buffer area in compliance with §
152.329.
      (8)   Outdoor commercial display area. The entire outdoor commercial
display area shall be graded and drained to dispose of all storm water without
negatively impacting adjacent property.
      (9)   Stockpiles. Any stockpiles of soil, fertilizer or similarly loose
material shall be sufficiently covered and contained to prevent dust, blowing
or draining of the material off-site.
   (L)   Supermarkets and department stores.
      (1)   Principal uses. Supermarkets, department stores and retail stores
with more than 5,000 square feet of floor area.
      (2)   Lot size.  The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet.
      (3)   Road frontage and access:
         (a)   The subject lot shall have at least 66 feet of frontage on an
arterial road or collector road; and
         (b)   All vehicular access shall be directly from an arterial road or
collector road.
      (4)   Setbacks. The following setbacks shall apply to structures,
excluding signs, walls and fences:
         (a)   Street line:
            1.   Buildings shall be setback at least 50 feet from the edge of
any road right-of-way; and
            2.   All other structures shall be setback at least 15 feet from
the edge of any road right-of-way.
         (b)   Structures shall be setback at least 50 feet from any lot line
abutting a residential district or use; and
         (c)   Structures shall be setback from any lot line abutting a
nonresidential district or use as specified for permitted uses on the subject
site.
      (5)   Enclosure and screening.
         (a)   If the subject lot is adjacent to a residential district or use,
all commercial activity shall be completely obscured from the residential
district or use by means of a continuous solid wall or fence no less than four
feet and no more than six feet in height and a landscaped buffer area in
compliance with §
152.329.
         (b)   Outside dumpsters shall be completely enclosed and obscured by
an opaque fence or wall and gate, in compliance with §
152.262(M).
      (6)   Parking and loading areas. Parking and loading areas shall be paved
with a permanent surface of concrete or asphalt and shall be graded and drained
in accordance with the Village Technical Standards.
      (7)   Building height. No building shall be erected or altered to a
height greater than one story.
   (M)   Hotels and motels.
      (1)   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be one acre.
      (2)   Road frontage and access.
         (a)   The subject lot shall have at least 66 feet of frontage on an
arterial road or collector road.
         (b)   All vehicular access shall be directly from an arterial road or
collector road.
      (3)   Setbacks. The following setbacks shall apply to structures,
excluding signs, walls and fences:
         (a)   Street line:
            1.   All buildings shall be setback at least 50 feet from the edge
of any road right-of-way;
            2.   All other structures shall be setback at least 15 feet from
the edge of any road right of-way; and
            3.   Within developed neighborhoods, the Village Planning
Commission may allow the front setback line to be established by at least 50%
of the buildings within 300 feet of either side of the subject lot.
         (b)   Structures shall be setback at least 50 feet from any lot line
abutting a residential district or use; and
         (c)   Structures shall be setback from any lot line abutting a
nonresidential district and use as specified for permitted uses on the subject
site.
      (4)   Enclosure and screening.
         (a)   If the subject lot is adjacent to a residential district or use,
all commercial activity shall be completely obscured from the residential
district or use by means of a continuous solid wall or fence no less than four
feet and no more than six feet in height and a landscaped buffer area in
compliance with §
152.329.
         (b)   Outside dumpsters shall be completely enclosed and obscured by
an opaque fence or wall and gate, in compliance with §
152.262(M).
      (5)   Parking and loading areas shall be paved with a permanent surface
of concrete or asphalt and shall be graded and drained in accordance with the
Village Technical Standards.
   (N)   Changeable message signs.
      (1)   Purpose. To promote traffic safety, enhance environmental
aesthetics and ensure greater public participation in decisions about the
placement of changeable message signs in the Village of Pinckney, changeable
message signs shall comply with the requirements of §§
152.242 and
152.300 et seq. and the following design standards:
         (a)   The placement of the sign on the lot shall not impair the
traffic safety of motorists or pedestrians. Compliance with this standard shall
be verified by all applicable road authorities including:
            1.   Michigan Department of Transportation for signs visible from
M-36;
            2.   Livingston County Road Commission for signs visible from D-19
or Dexter-Pinckney Road; and/or
            3.   Village Department of Public Works Director, Village Engineer
or Qualified Village Agent for signs visible from all other village roads.
         (b)   The placement of the sign on the lot shall not be detrimental to
environmental aesthetics by creating visual clutter or obstructing views of
significant architectural or natural features;
         (c)   The message change cycle of a changeable message sign shall not
be less than one minute per message, except in a combined time and temperature
sign where the change cycle shall be not less than 30 seconds;
         (d)   The changeable message shall have no more than two lines and no
more than 18 characters per line, exclusive of a combined time and temperature
indication; and
         (e)   Flashing, blinking, moving and/or scrolling lights are
prohibited.
   (O)   Artificial ponds.
      (1)   Uses. Ponds constructed on private property for the purpose of
aesthetic value, recreation, wildlife habitat, irrigation and fire protection,
and ponds created as a result of excavation, including mining operations but
not including:
         (a)   Naturally occurring wetlands;
         (b)   Storm water detention or retention ponds regulated by the
Livingston County Drain Commissioner; and
         (c)   Swimming pools as defined in §
152.267. Swimming pools are distinguished from artificial ponds because of
their:
            1.   Impervious manufactured liners;
            2.   Source of water that is not directly dependent upon natural
drainage, a watercourse or groundwater aquifer; and
            3.   Complete seasonal drainage by the property owner.
      (2)   Prohibited uses. Any pond created by impounding a watercourse by
means of an embankment, dam or other obstruction is prohibited.
      (3)   Federal, state and county compliance. The requirements of federal,
state and county agencies that regulate floodplains, wetlands, land clearing or
grading and drainage, including detention and retention ponds, supersede
village special land use permit requirements. Soil erosion control during
construction shall comply with Livingston County Drain Commissioner permitting
requirements.
      (4)   Site development standards. Large and small artificial ponds.
         (a)   The minimum lot area shall be as follows:
            1.   Artificial ponds one acre or more in surface area: four acres;
and
            2.   Artificial ponds less than one acre in surface area: one acre.
         (b)   Artificial ponds shall cover less than 25% of the lot area.
         (c)   The minimum depth shall be 18 inches and the maximum depth shall
be ten feet.
         (d)   No excavation shall occur within 100 feet of a wetland, lake,
river, stream or mapped floodplain boundary.
         (e)   No excavation shall occur within 50 feet of any road right-of-
way or lot line in order to ensure sublateral support to surrounding property.
         (f)   Artificial ponds shall be located to minimize the chance of
pollution from septic tanks, industries and similar sources.
         (g)   Location under power lines shall be avoided.
         (h)   The location and design of artificial ponds shall not adversely
impact existing drainage, wetlands, floodplains, lakes, rivers, streams,
groundwater levels, wildlife habitat, neighboring properties or public health,
safety or welfare. Evidence of compliance with this standard shall be submitted
and sealed by an engineer licensed in the State of Michigan.
         (i)   Erosion control during construction shall comply with the
Livingston County Drain Commissioner's permitting requirements.
         (j)   Permanent erosion control shall be provided for disturbed
surface areas and the margins of the artificial pond as approved by the
Planning Commission.
         (k)   Where the artificial pond is determined by the Planning
Commission to be a public hazard, it shall be completely enclosed by a fence no
less than four feet and no more than six feet in height. Fences shall be
adequate to allow maintenance access and prevent trespass and shall be placed
no closer than 50 feet to the top or bottom of any slope.
         (l)   Artificial ponds shall be adequately maintained and not create a
nuisance in regards to mosquitoes, stagnant algae or accumulated trash or
debris.
         (m)   No building shall be erected on the premises except as may be a
permitted use in the zoning district.
   (P)   Residential open space development. Residential open space development
shall be permitted as a special land use in the Low Density Residential (R1),
Medium Density Residential (R2) and High Density Residential (R3) Districts,
subject to the following:
      (1)   The provisions of this subchapter;
      (2)   Residential Open-Space Development and §
152.266; and
      (3)   The Condominium Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101
through 559.272, Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§
560.101 through 560. 293 and Village of Pinckney Ordinance No. 31, as amended.
   (Q)   Bed and breakfast establishments.
      (1)   Intent. It is the intent of this section is to permit the operation
of bed and breakfast establishments as a vehicle for preserving historical
resources within the village. Historical preservation is recognized as a public
purpose by statute and local ordinance as a means to safeguard local heritage,
preserve cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history, to
stabilize and improve property values, to foster civic beauty, to strengthen
local economies and to promote the education, pleasure and welfare of the
citizenry. The purpose of this section is to advance those goals by enhancing
the viability of historical preservation.
      (2)   Satisfactory conditions. Bed and breakfast establishments shall be
required to satisfy all of the following conditions.
         (a)   Each premises must be occupied and operated by its owner.
         (b)   The proposed use shall not cause a nuisance to adjoining
residences due to noise, odor, lighting or traffic.
         (c)   No bed and breakfast sleeping room shall be permitted that does
not comply with the Michigan Building Code.
         (d)   No kitchen or other food preparation area or facilities shall be
provided in or available to the rooms in a bed and breakfast operation. Cooking
facilities in a dwelling containing a bed and breakfast operation shall be
limited to the residential kitchen.
         (e)   Bed and breakfast bedrooms shall be a minimum of 120 square feet
for the first two occupants and an additional 30 square feet for each
additional occupant.
         (f)   The stay of bed and breakfast occupants shall be no more than 14
consecutive days and not more than 30 days in any one calendar year.
         (g)   The operator of each facility shall keep a list of the names of
all persons staying at the bed and breakfast, which list shall be available for
inspection by the Building Inspector or village designee.
         (h)   One bathroom for every three sleeping rooms shall be provided,
with a minimum of two bathrooms.
         (i)   Every bed and breakfast bedroom shall contain a functional smoke
detector, and an approved fire extinguisher shall be located on each floor on
which such sleeping room is located.
         (j)   One parking space shall be provided off-street in the side or
rear yard area for each bed and breakfast bedroom. The Planning Commission may
increase or decrease required parking in order to meet the purposes of this
section and protect the public health and safety.
         (k)   Meals or other services provided on the premises shall only be
available to residents, employees and overnight guests of the inn.
         (l)   Maximum sign size shall be five square feet with a maximum
height of six feet. Sign materials are to be compatible with the architecture
of the building. Signs must meet setback standards for the district in which
they are located. Internal illumination is prohibited.
         (m)   No exterior alterations to the structure shall be made which
would change the residential appearance of the structure.
         (n)   The applicant shall comply with any fire and life safety
requirements imposed by the Livingston County Building Department according to
the Building or Fire Code.
   (R)   Outdoor storage lot for recreational vehicles.
      (1)   Principal use. Outdoor storage of unoccupied recreational vehicles,
as defined in §
152.267, which would include boats, jet skis, snowmobiles and temporary
dwellings such as motor homes.
      (2)   Accessory use. The only permitted accessory uses shall be:
         (a)    Village approved facilities for emptying and flushing holding
tanks, filling or emptying water tanks, inflating tires, minor recreational
vehicles repairs, and similar operations that could be required.
         (b)    Accessory retail sales limited to the tenants of items
incidental to the recreational vehicles storage and could include packing
materials and goods to assist in "mothballing" vehicles.
      (3)   Prohibited uses.
         (a)    Commercial activity other than the principal use and accessory
use permitted above.
         (b)    Sales of bottled gas, special gasoline for stoves and lanterns,
fuel oil, and similar specialized convenience goods.
         (c)    Storage of materials or equipment, inoperative or unlicensed
recreational vehicles, and commercial activities other than what may be
reasonable as an accessory use.
         (d)   Storage of combustible, flammable, explosive or toxic liquids or
materials.
         (e)   Storage of unoccupied mobile homes that are designed and
normally used for year-round living in a permanent location is prohibited in a
recreational storage area.
         (f)   The outdoor storage of wrecked vehicles, junk or supplies shall
be strictly prohibited.
         (g)   Recreational vehicles in storage shall not be connected to
electricity, water, gas, or sanitary sewer services while in storage.
         (h)   Recreational vehicles in storage shall not be used for living or
housekeeping purposes, or habitation of any kind.
      (4)    Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be two acres and the maximum
lot area shall be five acres.
      (5)   Road frontage and access.
         (a)   At least one lot line shall abut an arterial road or collector
road.
         (b)   All vehicular access shall be directly from an arterial road or
collector road.
         (c)   Access to the site shall be restricted to employees, tenants and
emergency response vehicles only, by means of locked gates and/or other access-
control devices.
      (6)   Setbacks. The following setbacks shall apply to structures,
excluding signs, walls and fences:
         (a)   Structures shall be setback at least 50 feet from any lot line
abutting a residential district or use. Structures should comply with setbacks
of the underlying zoning district when not abutting a residential district or
use.
         (b)   Structures shall be setback at least 25 feet from any lot line
abutting a nonresidential district.
         (c)   Recreational vehicles storage shall be setback at least 15 feet
from any lot line when not abutting a residential district or use, and 50 feet
from a lot line when abutting a residential district or use.
      (7)   Impervious Surface Ratio. Because of the nature of the outdoor
storage lot use, the requirement for lot coverage shall be based upon a lot
impervious surface ratio that takes into consideration not only buildings, but
also paved areas including parking, internal roadways, and sidewalks.
         (a)   IMPERVIOUS SURFACES for the purposes of this special use shall
be defined as a hard surface area that prevents or substantially impedes the
natural infiltration of water into the underlying soil, resulting in an
increased volume and velocity of surface water runoff. Impervious surfaces
include, but are not limited to, buildings, roadways, driveways, parking,
sidewalks, patios, and paved recreational facilities.
         (b)   The IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO (ISR) for the purposes of this
special use shall be defined as the total area of impervious surfaces divided
by the net area of the lot, excluding any road right-of-way.
         (c)   The allowable IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO (ISR) for the purposes of
this special use shall be a maximum of 65%.
      (8)   Height.
         (a)   All buildings on the property must comply with the maximum
height for buildings allowed in the SBD District, being 2 1/2 stories or 35
feet, whichever is less.
         (b)   All vehicles or units stored on the outdoor recreational vehicle
storage lot must be limited to a maximum of 14 feet in height.
      (9)   Enclosure and screening.
         (a)   The perimeter of the site shall be completely surrounded by a
wall or fence of six feet in height. The use of barbed wire or electrical
fencing shall not be permitted.
         (b)   The wall or fence shall be setback at least 30 feet from any lot
line abutting a residential district or use.
         (c)   The wall or fence shall be setback at least 20 feet from any
street lines.
         (d)   The setback area between the wall or fence and street line or
residential lot line shall be landscaped with appropriate plant materials.
         (e)   The design and materials used for the wall or fence and for
landscaping within the setback area shall be approved by the Planning
Commission.
      (10)   Internal circulation and off-street parking.
         (a)   All storage spaces/units shall be accessible via an interior
drive clearly marked to distinguish vehicle direction and parking areas. All
traffic aisles, whether primary or secondary, shall be no less than 31 feet.
         (b)   The applicant shall demonstrate that emergency response vehicles
can both fully access the premises and safely circulate through the site.
Sufficient area and turning radii shall be provided at the end of all storage
spaces/units to accommodate emergency response vehicles.
         (c)   The outside storage spaces/units should be clearly marked (with
striping, staking, or another approved method).
         (d)   Interior drives and off-street parking areas shall be paved with
a permanent surface of concrete or asphalt and shall be graded and drained to
dispose of all storm water without negatively impacting surrounding property.
      (11)   Facility management office. If a management office for the
facility is provided, the office shall be located within the walled or fenced
area required by division (R)(9) above, and calculated as part of the maximum
lot coverage. Parking for the office shall not be less than one parking space
for every 25 storage spaces/units on the site.
   (S)   Adult use marihuana establishments. A marihuana establishment, in
compliance with the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, P.A.
2018, Initiated Law, being M.C.L.A. § 333.27951 et. seq.,
Chapter 113, Miscellaneous Businesses Requiring a License; Title XI, Business
Regulations, of the Village of Pinckney Code of Ordinances, and the provisions
of this division, shall be permitted as a special land use, in the SBD and/or
RTO Districts as specified in §§
152.045,
152.182, and
152.202. Nothing in this chapter, or in any companion regulatory provision
adopted in any other provision of this code, is intended to grant, nor shall
they be construed as granting, immunity from criminal prosecution for growing,
sale, consumption, use, distribution, or possession of marihuana not in strict
compliance with that Act. Also, since federal law is not affected by that Act,
nothing in this chapter, or in any companion regulatory provision adopted in
any other provision of this code, is intended to grant, nor shall they be
construed as granting, immunity from criminal prosecution under federal law.
The state Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act does not protect users,
caregivers or the owners of properties on which the recreational or medical use
of marihuana is occurring from federal prosecution, or from having their
property seized by federal authorities under the federal Controlled Substances
Act. The following standards shall apply:
      (1)   Intent. The purpose of this division is to regulate marihuana
establishments and enforce safety, security, health, and sanitation practices
related to such establishments.
      (2)   Prohibited uses. Any marihuana establishment or marihuana event not
specifically listed as a permitted business or event in §§
152.045,
152.182, and
152.202 shall be prohibited within the village.
      (3)   State license. An application for a marihuana establishment special
use permit and site plan approval shall not be accepted by the village unless
the applicant has received prequalification approval from the Michigan
Regulatory Agency. The appropriate state license to conduct the business shall
be provided to the village prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued.
      (4)   Co-location and stacked licenses. Co-location of marihuana
establishments and/or licenses on one property is permitted subject to all
applicable state laws, rules, and regulations concerning co-location and
provided all uses are permitted within the property.
      (5)   Hours of operations. Business hours for marihuana retailers shall
be no earlier than 9:00
a.m. to no later than 9:00 p.m.
      (6)   Security. All marihuana or marihuana infused products shall be
contained within an enclosed, secure area. The establishment shall be open to
any representative of the village to inspect and examine all premises of the
establishment. A security plan shall be submitted to the village for review.
      (7)   Road frontage and access. All vehicular access for marihuana
establishments located in the SBD District shall be directly from M-36/Main
Street.
      (8)   Separation distances. The following separation distances from
sensitive land uses shall apply to properties where the proposed marihuana
establishment is to be located. Distance measurements shall be made between the
closest property lines of the sensitive land use to the improved portion of the
proposed land use.
         (a)   At least 1000 feet from a pre-existing public or private school,
including preschools.
         (b)   At least 500 feet from a religious institution, licensed day-
care facility, public parks, and trails.
      (9)   Enclosure and screening. All uses shall be completely enclosed
within a building and comply with §§
152.385 et seq. for landscaping and screening.
      (10)   Environmental performance. No activities or uses shall result in
the emission of glare, noise, vibration, odor, dust, pollution or any other
negative impact, as regulated by §
152.370 et seq. an odor control plan shall be submitted to the village for
review.
      (11)   Water supply and sanitary sewerage facilities. Waste disposal and
water supply and disposal for the facility shall not produce contamination or
create other hazards that may negatively impact the structure and/or
surrounding properties and/or sanitary sewer system.
      (12)   Off-street parking and loading. The requirements for off-street
parking and loading shall comply with the provisions of §
152.280 et. seq.
      (13)   Signs. Signs may not depict or reference marihuana or marihuana-
related paraphernalia and shall comply with the provisions of §
152.300 et seq.
      (14)   All other site development standards related to lot area, minimum
lot width, yards and setbacks, lot coverage, and structure height shall comply
with the zoning district in which the marihuana establishment is located.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 88, passed 7-13-2009; Ord. 91, passed 10-12-
2009; Ord. 104, passed 5-9-2011; Ord. 134, passed 11-14-2016; Ord. 153, passed
12-14-2020; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021) Penalty, see §
152.999
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.260 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for those regulations that
generally apply to all uses regardless of zoning district.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.261 ROADS AND ACCESS.
   (A)   Access to a public road. Any lot or parcel created after the effective
date of this chapter shall have vehicular access to a public road, either
directly or via a village approved private road.
   (B)   Compliance required. Lot frontage, vehicular access and curb cuts
shall comply with applicable state and county road agency standards and the
Village of Pinckney Technical Standards which supersede this chapter.
   (C)   Curb cuts. In the absence of other state, county or village
regulation, the Village Technical Standards shall apply.
   (D)   Street trees for landscaping adjacent to roads. All uses requiring
site plan review in accordance with §§
152.385 et seq. shall comply with the following: all lots shall be landscaped
along the right-of- way of any road frontage.
   (E)   Visibility at road intersections. No fence, wall, sign, structure,
hedge or other visual obstruction more than 30 inches in height from the
finished road grade shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the
intersection of any road right-of-way lines by drawing a straight line between
the road right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their
point of intersection. Street trees within a sight triangle shall have all
branches trimmed to provide clear vision for a vertical height of nine feet
above the road grade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/00fead6ace167be79da9f0b0063628416dc97c1e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1191.jpg]
 
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.262 SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Lot depth to width ratio. Lot depth shall not exceed four times the
lot width.
   (B)   Accessory structures. No accessory structure shall be erected or
altered unless it is subservient to an existing principal building on the same
lot.
   (C)   Residential floor area.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings. Each dwelling unit shall have at least 950
square feet of habitable floor area on the ground floor, exclusive of any
attached garage. Dwelling units of more than one story may have a minimum of
720 square feet of habitable floor area on the ground floor, exclusive of any
attached garage.
      (2)   Two-family and multiple-family dwellings. All two-family and
multiple-family dwelling units shall have a minimum floor area in accordance
with the applicable building code requirements set forth by Livingston County
and the State of Michigan. These standards shall ensure safe and adequate
living space without the need for redundant local specifications.
   (D)   Temporary structures.  Temporary structures for uses associated with
construction shall be removed within 30 days of completion or abandonment of
work.
   (E)   Relocating structures. No structure larger than 120 square feet shall
be moved on a lot or from one lot to another unless the structure is made to
conform to all the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility
of the person(s) requesting a land use permit and county building permit for
the relocation to show that the structure will fully conform to all applicable
codes and ordinances. To assure compliance with these provisions, no land use
permit shall be issued until the applicant has posted a cash bond in an amount
of no less than $500, the proceeds of which shall accrue to the village if the
total work is not accomplished within six months of the issuance of the permit.
   (F)   Essential public services. Essential public services shall be
permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances, it being the
intention hereof to exempt the essential services from the application of this
chapter.
   (G)   Water supply and sanitary sewerage facilities.   After the effective
date of this chapter, no structure shall be erected, altered or moved upon a
lot and used in whole or in part for a residential, commercial or industrial
purpose unless it shall be provided with a safe, sanitary and potable water
supply and with a safe and effective means of collection, treatment and
disposal of human waste and domestic, commercial and industrial waste. All the
installations and facilities shall conform to the minimum requirements of the
Livingston County Health Department and village ordinances and technical
standards.
   (H)   Swimming pools.
      (1)   No swimming pool shall be constructed without a land use permit.
Application for a land use permit shall include a plot plan showing the
location of the swimming pool and any proposed decks, bathhouses and/or
cabanas. The site plan shall also show the location, height and type of all
existing and proposed fences or walls and access gates.
      (2)   Private swimming pools shall be permitted only in the rear yard.
Setbacks from side lot lines and rear lot lines shall comply with the zoning
district in which the pool will be located. No swimming pool shall be located
within an easement.
      (3)   For the protection of the general public, swimming pool enclosure,
gating and access control and overhead clearance shall comply with State of
Michigan Construction Code and the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
requirements, as implemented by the Livingston County building official.
      (4)   On-ground and above-ground pools greater then 30 inches in height
up to 48 inches must have a code approved barrier around them and meet the
requirements of the Livingston County Building Department.
      (5)   All other on-ground and above-ground pools which are 48 inches or
greater in height have alternative methods for complying with the barrier
requirements as implemented by the Livingston County Building Department.
   (I)   Garage, yard, rummage and estate sales. Garage, yard, rummage and
estate sales shall be considered temporary accessory uses provided the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The sales activity shall not exceed four consecutive days;
      (2)   No more than two sales events shall be held at the same location
within a 12-month period;
      (3)   The sales activity shall not create a traffic hazard or nuisance to
neighboring properties;
      (4)   No sales activity shall be conducted within a sidewalk or road
right-of-way; and
      (5)   Advertising signs shall comply with the requirements of §
152.302(E)(5).
   (J)   Keeping of animals.
      (1)   No more than four dogs or cats six months of age or older shall be
kept or housed in or at one dwelling unit, unless permitted as a commercial
kennel.
      (2)   Livestock and poultry raising and similar uses shall not take place
within the village limits unless permitted by §
90.01.
   (K)   Adult foster care family homes. State-licensed adult foster care
family homes shall not be excluded by zoning from the benefits of normal
residential surroundings, shall be considered a residential use of property for
the purposes of zoning, shall be a permitted use in all residential districts,
including those zoned for single-family dwellings and shall not be subject to
special land use permit standards, or other standards or procedures different
from those required for other dwellings in the same district.
      (1)   At least 45 days before licensing an adult foster care family home
within the Village of Pinckney, the state-licensing agency shall notify the
Village Council.
      (2)   Upon notice by the state, the village shall notify property owners
within a 1,500-foot radius of the lot upon which the facility is proposed. The
cost of the required public notice shall be born by the licensee.
      (3)   The state shall not license a proposed adult foster care family
home if another state licensed adult foster care family home exists within a
1,500-foot radius of the lot upon which the facility is proposed.
   (L)   Outdoor storage and community blight.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle which has remained on private property
for a period of 48 continuous hours or more, without the consent of the owner
or occupant of the property or a period of 48 continuous hours or more after
the consent of the owner or occupant of the property has been revoked.
         BLIGHTED STRUCTURE. Any dwelling unit, accessory structure, building
or any other structure or part of a structure which, because of fire, wind or
other natural or technological disaster, or physical deterioration, is no
longer habitable or useful for the purpose for which it may have been intended.
         BUILDING MATERIALS. Lumber, brick, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing
materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment,
shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws or any other materials used
in constructing any structure.
         CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT. Forklifts, backhoes, graders, trenchers,
loaders, excavating, compacting, paving and pipe laying equipment, dozers,
hoists, temporary trailers, temporary toilets or any other equipment used in
constructing infrastructure or structures.
         JUNK. Parts of machines or vehicles, broken and unusable furniture,
stoves, refrigerators or other appliances, remnants of wood, metal or any other
cast-off material of any kind whether or not the same could be put to any
reasonable use.
         JUNK VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle or recreational vehicle that is not
fully licensed for use by the State of Michigan for more than 30 consecutive
days and/or is inoperable for more than 30 consecutive days whether licensed or
not except operative vehicles that are kept as the stock in trade of a
regularly licensed and established vehicle dealership.
         
         PERSON. All natural persons, firms, co-partnerships, corporations and
all associations of natural persons, incorporated or unincorporated, whether
acting by their self or by a servant, agent or employee. All persons who
violate any of the provisions of this chapter, whether as owner, occupant,
lessee, agent, servant or employee shall, except as herein otherwise provided,
be equally liable as principals.
         TRASH and RUBBISH. Any and all forms of debris not otherwise
classified herein.
      (2)   Storage. It is hereby determined that the storage or accumulation
of trash, junk, junk vehicles, abandoned vehicles, building materials,
construction equipment and the maintenance of blighted structures upon any
private property within the Village of Pinckney tends to result in blighted and
deteriorated neighborhoods, the spread of vermin and disease, the increase in
nuisance complaints and therefore is contrary to the public health, safety and
general welfare of the community.
      (3)   Unlawful storage. It shall be unlawful for any person to store, or
to permit the storage or accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk, junk vehicles or
abandoned vehicles on any private property in the village except within a
completely enclosed building or upon the premises of a legally operating,
licensed or approved junk dealer, junk buyer, dealer in used auto parts, dealer
in second-hand goods or junk, or operator of an vehicle repair service and/or
automobile wrecker business.
      (4)   Unlawful maintenance. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep
or maintain any vacant or blighted structure, unless the same is kept securely
locked, the windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up and otherwise protected to
prevent entrance thereto by unauthorized persons or unless the structure is in
the course of construction in accordance with a valid building permit issued by
the county for the Village of Pinckney and unless the construction is completed
with one year.
      (5)   Accumulation of building materials and construction equipment. It
shall be unlawful for any person to store or permit the storage or accumulation
of building materials or construction equipment on any private property, except
in a completely enclosed building or except where the building materials and/or
construction equipment are part of the stock in trade or business located on
the property, or except when the materials are being used in the construction
of a structure on the property in accordance with a valid building permit
issued by Livingston County for the Village of Pinckney.
      (6)   Unlawful storage of commercial purposes. It shall be unlawful for
any person to store any item, material or substance used for commercial
purposes on a lot in the R1, R2, R3, R4 or ROB District, except in a completely
enclosed building and when the materials are being lawfully used in conjunction
with an approved home occupation or otherwise permitted use.
      (7)   Unlawful storage of vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person
to store more than a combined total of three licensed or unlicensed, operable
recreational vehicles outdoors on a lot in a residential district, 24 hours per
day for more than 30 consecutive days.
      (8)   Inspection. If upon inspection, the Building Inspector, Zoning
Administrator, any village police officer, Fire Inspector, health officer,
elected official or County Health Department shall find that any property
within the village is being used in violation of the above sections of this
chapter, the owner and/or occupant shall be notified of the violation which may
be given by certified letter to the owner as he or she appears on the tax rolls
of the village or by service upon the occupant personally by any official of
the Village of Pinckney or the Livingston County Health Department.
      (9)   Appeals. The owner and/or occupant may appeal to the Village
Council for a public hearing, which shall be held at the next regular Council
meeting providing he or she files a request in writing with the Village Clerk
within ten days of the receipt of the notice above specified. Following the
hearing, the decision of the Village Council as to the violation shall be
final.
      (10)   Costs eliminated. If the owner and/or occupant of the premises
shall not cause the material in violation of this chapter, as described above,
to be eliminated or removed within ten days after notice or within ten days
after the decision of the Village Council is rendered in case of an appeal, the
Village President shall direct some person or persons to remove and/or
eliminate the same at the cost and expense of the owner and/or occupant of the
premises. After causing the materials to be eliminated or removed, the Village
President may obtain a judgment against the owner and/or occupant in the amount
of the total expense incurred by the village which shall be a lien upon the
property and the same may be collected in any manner authorized by statute and,
if not paid, may be placed on the Tax Roll and collected the same as other
taxes.
   (M)   Screening dumpsters.
      (1)   Design. Outside dumpsters serving a multiple-family residential or
commercial use shall be:
         (a)   Located on concrete pads of sufficient size and construction to
prevent containers from leaking directly onto the ground and to fully support
the containers without cracking;
         (b)   Completely surrounded with a fence or wall and gate at least six
feet in height, so as not to be visible from adjacent lots or roads; and
         (c)   The design and materials of the surrounding fence or wall and
gate shall be compatible with the architectural style of the buildings on the
site, as determined by the Planning Commission. Acceptable materials may
include treated wood, brick and vinyl.
      (2)   Landscaping. The Planning Commission, at its discretion, may
require planting around dumpsters if deemed necessary due to the proximity of
public and/or conflicting uses.
      (3)   Location. Dumpsters shall be consolidated to minimize the number of
collection sites. Dumpsters and enclosures shall be located:
         (a)   Away from public view insofar as possible, and on that side
which is opposite or the maximum distance possible from adjacent residential
uses; and
         (b)   So that they do not cause excessive nuisance or offense to the
occupants of nearby buildings.
      (4)   Maintenance. Dumpsters, enclosures and the immediately surrounding
area shall be continuously maintained to be fully functioning, aesthetically
pleasing and free of litter and debris.
   (N)   Conditional re-zoning of land. It is recognized that there are certain
instances where it would be in the best interest of the village, as well as
advantageous to property owners seeking a change in zoning boundaries, if
certain conditions could be offered by property owners as part of a request for
a re-zoning. It is the intent of this section to provide a process consistent
with the provisions of § 405 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act
110 of 2006) as amended by which an owner seeking a re-zoning may voluntarily
propose conditions regarding the use and/or development of land as part of the
re-zoning request. Therefore, as an alternative to a re-zoning amendment as
described in §
152.460, the Village of Pinckney may allow conditional re-zoning to help ensure
the proper use of land and natural resources and to allow for a more flexible
approach to the re-zoning process in accordance with the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006), as amended. If a property owner submits
an offer for conditional re-zoning as provided within this section, then the
procedure for the proposed conditional re-zoning of land shall follow the
standards and procedures as noted below.
      (1)   Procedure. The amendment procedure for a conditional re-zoning
shall follow the same procedure as a traditional re-zoning amendment pursuant
to §
152.460, except as modified by this section.
      (2)   Application and offer of conditions. An owner of land may
voluntarily offer in writing conditions relating to the use and/or development
of land for which a re-zoning is requested. This offer may be made either at
the time the application for re-zoning is filed or may be made at a later time
during the re-zoning process. In addition to the procedures as noted in §
152.460, the following procedures, standards and requirements apply to all
proposed conditional re-zoning requests:
         (a)   A conditional re-zoning request must be voluntarily offered by
the owner of land within the village. All offers must be made in writing and
must provide the specific conditions to be considered by the village as part of
the re-zoning request. The offer may be made either at the time the application
for re-zoning is filed or may be made at a later time during the re-zoning
process. All offers shall be in the form of a written agreement approved by the
village and property owner, incorporating the conditional re-zoning site plan
when required below and setting forth any conditions and terms mutually agreed
upon by the parties relative to the land for which the conditional re-zoning is
sought.
         (b)   Conditional re-zoning shall not allow a use or activity that
would not otherwise be allowed in the proposed zoning district.
         (c)   Conditional re-zoning shall not alter any of the various zoning
requirements for the use(s) in question, i.e. parking, landscaping, lot area,
lot width, building height, setbacks, lot area coverage and the like.
Conditional re-zonings shall not grant zoning variances of any kind. Any zoning
variance must follow the provisions of §§
152.440 et seq.
         (d)   The owner’s offer of conditions shall bear a reasonable and
rational relationship to the property and the surrounding area for which re-
zoning is requested.
         (e)   Conditional re-zoning shall not grant, nor be considered as a
grant of special land use approval. The process for review and approval of
special land uses must follow the provisions of
         (f)   All conditions offered by a land owner in relation to a re-
zoning request must have a direct relationship to the re-zoning itself. The
provisions to allow conditional re-zoning shall not be construed to allow re-
zoning by exaction.
         (g)   In addition to the informational requirements provided for in §
152.460, the applicant may be required by the village to provide a conditional
re-zoning site plan prepared by a licensed professional allowed to prepare the
plans under this chapter that may show the location, size, height or other
measures for and/or of buildings, structures, improvements and features on, and
in some cases adjacent to the property that is the subject of the conditional
re-zoning of land. The details to be offered for inclusion in the conditional
re-zoning site plan shall be determined by the applicant, subject to approval
of the village. A conditional re-zoning site plan shall not replace the
requirement under this chapter for site plan review and approval, or
subdivision or site condominium approval, as the case may be.
         (h)   The offer of conditions may be amended during the process of re-
zoning consideration provided that any amended or additional conditions are
entered voluntarily by the owner. If the amendment occurs subsequent to the
Planning Commission’s public hearing on the original re-zoning request, then
the re-zoning application shall be referred to the Planning Commission for a
new public hearing with appropriate notice and a new recommendation.
         (i)   An owner may withdraw all or part of his or her offer of
conditions any time prior to final re-zoning action of the Village Council
provided that, if the withdrawal occurs subsequent to the Planning Commission’s
public hearing on the original re-zoning request, then the re-zoning
application shall be referred to the Planning Commission for a new public
hearing with appropriate notice and a new recommendation.
      (3)   Planning Commission review.  The Planning Commission, after public
hearing and consideration of the factors for re-zoning set forth in § 152.461,
may recommend approval, approval with recommended changes or denial of the re-
zoning; provided, however, that any recommended changes to the offer of
conditions are acceptable to and thereafter offered by the owner.
      (4)   Village Council review. After receipt of the Planning Commission’s
recommendation, the Village Council shall deliberate upon the requested re-
zoning and may approve or deny the conditional re-zoning request. The Village
Council deliberation shall include, but not be limited to, a consideration of
the factors for re-zoning set forth in § 152.461. Should the Village Council
consider amendments to the proposed conditional re-zoning advisable and is such
contemplated amendments to the offer of conditions are acceptable to and
thereafter offered by the owner, then the Village Council shall, in accordance
with § 401 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006), as
amended, refer the amendments to the Planning Commission for a report thereon
within a time specified by the Village Council and proceed thereafter in
accordance with the statute to deny or approve the conditional re- zoning with
or without amendments.
      (5)   Approval.
         (a)   If the Village Council finds the re-zoning request and offer of
conditions acceptable, the offered conditions shall be incorporated into a
formal written Statement of Conditions acceptable to the owner and conforming
in form to the provisions of this section. The Statement of Conditions shall be
incorporated by attachment or otherwise as an inseparable part of this chapter
adopted by the Village Council to accomplish the requested re-zoning.
         (b)   The Statement of Conditions shall:
            1.   Be in a form recordable with the Livingston County Register of
Deeds and in a manner acceptable to the Village Council;
            2.   Contain a legal description of the land to which it pertains;
            3.   Contain a statement acknowledging that the statement of
conditions runs with the land and is binding upon successor owners of the land;
            4.   Incorporate by attachment or reference any diagram, plans or
other documents submitted or approved by the owner that are necessary to
illustrate the implementation of the Statement of Conditions. If any documents
are incorporated by reference, the reference shall specify the date of the
document and where the document may be examined;
            5.   Contain a statement acknowledging that the Statement of
Conditions shall be recorded by the village with the Livingston County Register
of Deeds; and
            6.   Contain the notarized signatures of all of the owners of the
subject land preceded by a statement attesting to the fact that they
voluntarily offer and consent to the provisions contained within the Statement
of Conditions.
         (c)   Upon the re-zoning taking effect, the zoning map shall be
amended to reflect the new zoning classification along with a designation that
the land was re-zoned with a Statement of Conditions. The Village Clerk shall
maintain a listing of all lands re-zoned with a Statement of Conditions.
         (d)   The approved Statement of Conditions shall be filed by the
village with the Livingston County Register of Deeds. The Village Council shall
have the authority to waive this requirement if it determines that, given the
nature of the conditions and/or the time frame within which the conditions are
to be satisfied, the recording of such a document would be of no material
benefit to the village or to any subsequent owner of the land.
         (e)   Upon the re-zoning taking effect, the use of the land so re-
zoned shall conform thereafter to all of the requirements regulating the use
and development within the new zoning district as modified by any more
restrictive provisions contained in the Statement of Conditions.
      (6)   Compliance with conditions.
         (a)   Any person who establishes a development or commences a use upon
land that has been re-zoned with conditions shall continuously operate and
maintain the development or use in compliance with all of the conditions set
forth in the Statement of Conditions. Any failure to comply with a condition
contained within the Statement of Conditions shall constitute a violation of
this Zoning Ordinance and be punishable accordingly. Additionally, any such
violation shall be deemed a nuisance per se and subject to judicial abatement
as provided by law.
         (b)   No permit or approval shall be granted under this chapter for
any use or development that is contrary to an applicable Statement of
Conditions.
      (7)   Time period for establishing development or use. Unless another
time period is specified in the ordinance re-zoning the subject land, the
approved development and/or use of the land pursuant to building and other
required permits must be commenced upon the land within 18 months after the re-
zoning took effect and thereafter proceed diligently to completion. This time
limitation may, upon written request, be extended by the Village Council if:
         (a)   It is demonstrated to the Village Council’s reasonable
satisfaction that there is a strong likelihood that the development and/or use
will commence within the period of extension and proceed diligently thereafter
to completion; and
         (b)   The Village Council finds that there has not been a change in
circumstances that would render the current zoning with Statement of Conditions
incompatible with other zones and uses in the surrounding area or otherwise
inconsistent with sound zoning policy.
      (8)   Reversion of zoning. If approved development and/or use of the re-
zoned land does not occur within the time frame specified under division (7)
above, then the land shall revert to its former zoning classification as set
forth in § 405 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006) as
amended. The reversion process shall be initiated by the Village Council
requesting that the Planning Commission proceed with consideration of re-zoning
of the land to its former zoning classification. The procedure for considering
and making this reversionary re-zoning shall thereafter be the same as applies
to all other rezoning requests.
      (9)   Subsequent re-zoning of land. When land that is re-zoned with a
Statement of Conditions is thereafter re-zoned to a different zoning
classification, or to the same zoning classification but with a different or no
Statement of Conditions, whether as a result of a reversion of zoning pursuant
to division (8) above or otherwise, the Statement of Conditions imposed under
the former zoning classification shall cease to be in effect. Upon the owner’s
written request, the Village Clerk shall record with the Livingston County
Register of Deeds a notice that the Statement of Conditions is no longer in
effect.
      (10)   Amendment of conditions.
         (a)   During the time period for commencement of an approved
development or use specified pursuant to division (7) above or during any
extension thereof granted by the Village Council, the village shall not add to
or alter the conditions in the Statement of Conditions.
         (b)   The Statement of Conditions may be amended thereafter in the
same manner as was prescribed for the original re-zoning and Statement of
Conditions.
      (11)   Village right to re-zone. Nothing in the Statement of Conditions
nor in the provisions of this section shall be deemed to prohibit the village
from re-zoning all or any portion of land that is subject to a Statement of
Conditions to another zoning classification. Any re-zoning shall be conducted
in compliance with this chapter and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public
Act 110 of 2006), as amended.
      (12)   Failure to offer conditions. The village shall not require an
owner to offer conditions as a requirement for re-zoning. The lack of an offer
of conditions shall not affect an owner’s rights under this chapter.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 82, passed 5-12-2008; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-
2021; Ord. 177, passed 8-11-2025) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.263 SUPPLEMENTARY YARD REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Building setback. In cases where less than the full, required road
right-of-way width has been deeded or dedicated, the building setback on any
lot abutting thereon shall be measured from the required right-of-way line.
   (B)   Permitted yard encroachment.
      (1)   Enclosed porches shall be considered an integral part of the
building to which they are attached and shall be subject to the same yard,
setback and dimensional requirements.
      (2)   Unenclosed porches may project into any yard, provided:
         (a)   The height shall not exceed one story, measured from grade to
the highest point; and
         (b)   The porch shall not be closer than five feet to any lot line.
      (3)   Decks, patios and terraces shall be exempt from yard requirements,
provided:
         (a)   The area is unroofed and without walls or other forms of solid
continuous enclosure that connect to the principal building;
         (b)   No portion shall be within the front yard;
         (c)   No portion shall be closer than five feet to any side lot line
or rear lot line; and
         (d)   The highest finished elevation is not more than three feet above
the average grade.
      (4)   Signs may encroach into yards but no sign or portion thereof, shall
be closer than five feet to any lot line or road right-of-way.
      (5)   Structural elements such as cornices, sills, chimneys and gutters
may project into any required yard up to a maximum of two and one-half feet.
      (6)   Fire escapes, outside stairways and balconies, if of open
construction, may project into any required yard up to a maximum of five feet.
   (C)   Walls and fences.
      (1)   Height. Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, walls and
fences shall comply with the following:
         (a)   Wall and fence height shall be measured from the average grade
to the highest point not including posts;
         (b)   The maximum height of a wall or fence within a front yard shall
be three and one-half feet;
         (c)   The maximum height of a wall or fence within a side yard or rear
yard shall be six feet; and
         (d)   Walls and fences on corner lots shall comply with the vision
clearance requirements of §
152.261(E).
      (2)   Setbacks. Fences and walls shall be permitted on any lot line
except:
         (a)   As required for landscaped buffer areas per §
152.329(D); and
         (b)   Fences and walls along a lot line that abuts a road right-of-way
shall be setback at least five feet from the road right-of-way and landscaped
on the road side.
      (3)   Landscaped buffer area fences. Landscaped buffer area fences shall
be in compliance with §
152.329.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 124, passed 5-12-2014) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.264 SUPPLEMENTARY HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No building or other structure shall be erected or altered to a height
greater than the maximum allowed in the district in which it is located, except
as permitted in divisions (B)(1) and (2) below.
   (B)   No ground shall be filled that will have the effect of exceeding the
maximum allowed height. (See §
152.267 for definitions of building height and structure height).
      (1)   Ornamental and mechanical appurtenances may be added to rooftops,
such as: steeples, belfries, cupolas, domes, chimneys, elevator and stairwell
penthouses and ventilation systems provided:
         (a)   The appurtenance shall not exceed 25% of the total roof area;
and
         (b)   The structure shall be setback from lot lines an additional one
foot for each foot above the permitted height.
      (2)   Principal buildings in a commercial district, provided:
         (a)   The total building height shall not exceed 125% of the permitted
height; and
         (b)   The building shall be setback from lot lines an additional one
foot for each foot above the permitted height.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.265 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Any residential subdivision, site condominium, multiple-family
residential development, residential open space development, shopping center or
commercial or industrial planned development shall provide and maintain
sidewalks in compliance with the Village of Pinckney Technical Standards, §§
152.100 et seq. and §§
92.55 et seq.
   (B)   The following standards shall also apply:
      (1)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required by the Planning Commission
on one or both sides of the road in consideration of factors such as the
density of development, age characteristics of the expected residents, and
expected traffic volumes along the street, proximity to other sidewalk systems
and proximity to schools, public parks and public institutions. They must be
built in accordance with the Village Technical Standards.
         (a)   The Planning Commission may eliminate the sidewalk requirement
for special situations and where another type of pedestrian trail system will
be provided by the developer.
         (b)   Public walkways may be required in the middle of any block over
1,350 feet in length to obtain satisfactory pedestrian circulation within the
subdivision, to provide access to parks or common open space, to provide links
with an adjacent subdivision or to provide access to an activity center. Where
the walkways are required, an easement at least ten-foot wide shall be
provided.
         (c)   Required sidewalks may be installed along the road frontage of a
residential lot following construction of the dwelling unit. Where an approved
subdivision plat or site plan contains sidewalks, a certificate of occupancy
shall not be issued until the required sidewalk is installed along the road
frontage of that individual lot.
      (2)   Construction standards. The following construction standards apply
to pedestrian facilities within a residential project:
         (a)   The Planning Commission may permit six-foot wide stone or wood
chip paths or wooded boardwalks in common open space areas or areas with
sensitive environmental features instead of paved sidewalks. The unpaved path
shall provide direct access to all lots where the Planning Commission waives
the requirement for paved sidewalks;
         (b)   Sidewalks and bike paths shall be located within the road right-
of-way, or another dedicated easement where grade or other factors prevent
placement within the road right-of-way; and
         (c)   Crosswalk pavement markings and signs may be required.
((Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-2017; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-
2021)
§ 152.266 CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENTS.
   All site condominiums shall fully comply with the State of Michigan
Condominium Act, Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 through
559.272, as amended. Concurrent with notice to the village required pursuant to
§ 71 of the Condominium Act (M.C.L.A. § 559.171) a person, firm or corporation
intending to develop a condominium project shall provide the following
information:
   (A)   Application information.
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the following:
         (a)   All persons, firms or corporations having an ownership interest
in the property. For the purposes of this section, OWNERSHIP INTEREST shall
mean the titled owner(s) and land contract holder(s);
         (b)   All engineers, attorneys, architects or registered land
surveyors associated with the project; and
         (c)   The developer or proprietor of the condominium project.
      (2)   The legal description and tax identification number(s) of the
subject lot(s).
      (3)   The total gross site area (acreage to be dedicated as public right-
of-way shall be noted).
      (4)   A detailed description of all proposed land uses.
      (5)   The approximate number of condominium units to be developed.
      (6)   Building elevation and floor plans where applicable.
      (7)   A description of the proposed water system.
      (8)   A description of proposed wastewater treatment system.
      (9)   The location of floodplains, when appropriate.
      (10)   A site plan showing the location, area and dimensions of all
building envelopes, building sites (limited commons area and general commons
areas) and other requirements listed in § 66 of the Condominium Act (M.C.L.A. §
559.166) and §§
152.385 et seq.
      (11)   A storm water management plan, including all conduits, swales,
county drains, detention basins and other related facilities.
      (12)   Unrecorded, draft copies of the master deed bylaws and other
restrictive covenants.
   (B)   Compliance required. All the requirements of Administrative Rules 401
(R559.401) and 402 (R559.402) promulgated by the Condominium Act shall be met.
   (C)   Roads.
      (1)   All building sites shall have direct access to a public or private
road right-of-way. All roads shall be constructed to standards approved by the
Village Council.
      (2)   Street layout. Street layout shall provide for the continuation of
existing major road collector streets in surrounding areas, or conform to a
plan for neighborhood development approved by the Planning Commission.
      (3)   Future connections. Certain proposed streets, as designated by the
Planning Commission shall be extended to the boundary line of the parcel to
provide future connection with adjoining land.
      (4)   Private streets. Private streets and roads shall generally be
prohibited. If private streets or roads are approved, sufficient area shall be
left undeveloped along the private street or road to allow for possible future
right-of-way dedication per Livingston County Road Commission Standards.
   (D)   Street trees. Trees shall be provided along both sides of all streets,
public or private, and shall be uniformly spaced to create a tree lined street
at the minimum rate of one tree per lot or at a maximum distance of 50 feet on
center within a ten-foot planting strip immediately adjacent to the road right-
of-way. Street trees shall not interfere with any overhead or underground
utility lines. Consideration should be given to the mature size and height of
the tree when evaluating placement and species selection.
   (E)   Street lighting. Streetlights shall be provided in all residential
developments. They shall have underground wiring. Light standards shall meet
the minimum specifications of the electric utility company serving that area of
the proposed development.
   (F)   Amendments or changes in project. Amendments or changes in a
condominium project, as described in § 67 of the Condominium Act (M.C.L.A. §
559.167), shall conform to all design standards for the zoning district where
the project is located, shall be approved by the village and this requirement
shall be made part of the bylaws and recorded as part of the master deed.
   (G)   Delineation of condominium units. All individual condominium units
shall conform to the design standards for minimum lot width, lot area, yard and
setback requirements. The units shall be approved by the Village Council, and
those requirements shall be made part of the bylaws and recorded as part of the
master deed.
   (H)   Monumentation required. All condominium projects that consist in whole
or in part of condominium units that are building sites, manufactured home
sites or common open space or recreational sites, shall be marked with
monuments as provided herein. With respect to the minimum requirements for the
survey of a proposed condominium project, monuments shall be located in the
ground according to the following requirements:
      (1)   Monuments consisting of iron, steel bars or pipes not less than
one-half inch in diameter and 36 inches in length shall be placed at all major
boundary corners of project area;
      (2)   Monuments shall be located in the ground at all angles in the
boundaries of the condominium project boundary; at all points of curvature,
points of tangency, points of compound curvature, points of reverse curvature
and angle points in the side lines of streets and alleys and at all angles of
an intermediate traverse line;
      (3)   If a location of a monument is clearly impractical, it is
sufficient to place a reference monument nearby and the precise location
thereof shall be clearly indicated on the survey plan of the condominium
subdivision plan and referenced to the true point;
      (4)   If a point required to be monumented is on a bedrock outcropping or
other hard surface, a steel rod, not less than one-half inch in diameter shall
be drilled and grouted into solid material to a minimum depth of eight inches
and clearly labeled on the survey plan;
      (5)   All required monuments shall be placed flush with the ground, where
practicable, in accordance with the final grade;
      (6)   All building areas shall be monumented in the field by iron or
steel bars or pipes at least 18 inches long and one-half inch in diameter or
other markers approved by the Village Council; and
      (7)   The Village Council may waive the placing of any of the required
monuments and markers for a reasonable time, not to exceed one year, on the
condition that the proprietor deposits with the Village Clerk cash or a
certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit running to the Village of
Pinckney, whichever the proprietor selects, in an amount not less than $25 per
monument and not less than $500 in total. The cash, certified check or
irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be returned to the proprietor upon
receipt of a certificate by a surveyor that the monuments and markers have been
placed as required within the time specified.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 146, passed - -2020; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-
2021)
§ 152.267 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Construction of language. For the purposes of this chapter, certain
words and terms used herein shall be defined and interpreted as follows:
      (1)   Words used in the present tense include the future;
      (2)   The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the
singular;
      (3)   The word BUILDING includes the word STRUCTURE;
      (4)   The word LOT includes the word PLOT or PARCEL;
      (5)   The word PERSON shall include any individual, firm, co-partnership,
corporation, company, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust or any
other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals consisting of
the group or unit and the plural as well as the singular number, the singular
masculine pronoun shall include the feminine, neuter and plural unless the
intention to give a more limited meaning is disclosed by the context;
      (6)   The word USED or OCCUPIED as applied to any land or building shall
be construed to include the words INTENDED, ARRANGED or DESIGNED TO BE USED or
OCCUPIED;
      (7)   The words SHALL, IS or ARE are always mandatory, not directory; and
      (8)   Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of
common or standard utilization.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). A second dwelling unit on the same lot as
an existing single-family dwelling, where the physical character of such second
dwelling unit is clearly subordinate to the existing single-family dwelling and
the second dwelling unit functions in an accessory manner to the existing
single-family dwelling. The existing dwelling on the lot is commonly referred
to as the principal dwelling.
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. An attached or detached structure on the same lot as
the principal building and used exclusively for an accessory use.
      ACCESSORY USE. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use, and located on the same lot as the principal building.
Residential accessory uses include common open space and residential recreation
centers.
      ADULT CABARET. An establishment where sexually explicit materials or
entertainment is presented, displayed, permitted or provided to patrons,
excluding minors by reason of age pursuant to state or local law.
      ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY. An establishment that provides foster care to
adults, including adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled
or physically disabled who require supervision and care on an on-going basis,
but who do not require continuous nursing care. An ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY
is further defined and regulated by the state Adult Foster Care Facility
Licensing Act, Public Act 218 of 1979, being M.C.L.A. §§ 400.701 through
400.737, as amended. An ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY does not include a facility
licensed by a state agency for care and treatment of persons released from or
assigned to adult correctional institutions or substance abuse rehabilitation
facilities, a home for the aged or a nursing home as defined herein. See also
definition of FOSTER CARE.
         ADULT FOSTER CARE CONGREGATE FACILITY. An adult foster care facility
with the approved capacity to receive and provide foster care for more than 20
adults.
         ADULT FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME. A private residence with the approved
capacity to receive and provide foster care for six or fewer adults. The adult
foster care family home licensee shall be a member of the household and an
occupant of the residence.
         ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOME. An adult foster care facility with
the approved capacity to receive and provide foster care for at least 13 but
not more than 20 adults.
         ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOME. An adult foster care facility with
the approved capacity to receive and provide foster care for 12 or fewer
adults.
      ADULT USE MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS.
         MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENT. A marihuana grower facility, marihuana
microbusiness, marihuana processor facility, marihuana retailer, marihuana
safety compliance facility,  marihuana secure transporter facility, or any
other type of marihuana-related business licensed by the Marihuana Regulatory
Agency.
         MARIHUANA GROWER. A person licensed to cultivate marihuana and sell or
otherwise transfer marihuana to marihuana establishments (Class A , maximum of
100 plants; Class B, maximum of 500 plants; Class C, maximum of 2000 plants).
         MARIHUANA-INFUSED PRODUCT. A topical formulation, tincture, beverage,
edible substance, or similar product containing marihuana and other ingredients
and that is intended for human consumption.
         MARIHUANA MICROBUSINESS. A person licensed to cultivate not more than
150 marihuana plants; process and package marihuana; and sell or otherwise
transfer marihuana to individuals who are 21 years of age or older or to a
marihuana safety compliance facility, but not to other marihuana
establishments.
         MARIHUANA PROCESSOR. A person licensed to obtain marihuana from
marihuana establishments; process and package marihuana; and sell or otherwise
transfer marihuana to marihuana establishments.
         MARIHUANA RETAILER. A person licensed to obtain marihuana from
marihuana establishments and to sell or otherwise transfer marihuana to
marihuana establishments and to individuals who are 21 years of age or older.
         MARIHUANA SECURE TRANSPORTER. A person licensed to obtain marihuana
from marihuana establishments in order to transport marihuana to marihuana
establishments.
         MARIHUANA SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITY. A person licensed to test
marihuana, including certification for potency and the presence of
contaminants.
      ALLEY. A public or private right-of-way that is permanently reserved as a
secondary means of access to an abutting property and is not intended for
primary traffic circulation.
      AMENITIES.  A feature of real property that enhances its attractiveness
and increases the occupant's or user's satisfaction, although the feature is
not essential to the property's use. AMENITIES include a desirable location
near water or scenic views, swimming pools, tennis courts, community buildings,
common open space and other recreational facilities.
      ARTIFICIAL POND. A still body of water that is smaller than a lake and
larger than a pool and is not naturally occurring. This definition does not
include storm water detention or retention ponds, small ornamental garden pools
or swimming pools, as defined herein.
      ASSISTED LIVING. See ADULT FOSTER CARE, NURSING HOME or HOME FOR THE
ELDERLY. A comparison of these three uses is provided below:
 
Table 2-1
Types Of Assisted Living Facilities
Land Use             Age Limitation Nursing Care Provided
Adult foster care    None           No
Home for the elderly 60+ years      No
Nursing home         None           Yes
 
      ATTACHED. The sharing of a common wall between an ADU and the principal
dwelling for a minimum length of ten feet, or a fully enclosed corridor between
an ADU and principal dwelling that does not exceed ten feet in length.
      ATTIC. The space between the underside of the roof and the uppermost
ceiling of a building. For the purposes of this chapter, an attic shall be
unheated and unfinished. An attic shall not be counted as a story for height
measurement or be counted in floor area measurement.
      AUDITORIUM. A large, fully enclosed space within a nonresidential
building that is used for the gathering of an audience.
      BASEMENT. An underground story having at least one-half of its height
below the average level of the adjoining grade. A basement shall not be counted
as a story for height measurement, or be counted in floor area measurement.
      BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A subordinate use within a single-family dwelling,
in which:
         (a)   The innkeeper owns and resides in the dwelling;
         (b)   No more than eight guest rooms are rented to travelers for
overnight lodging; and
         (c)   One meal or more is provided to overnight guests only in return
for payment. The use is distinguished from a rooming house, hotel or motel as
defined herein.
      BERM. An earthen ridge, usually artificial, designed to provide visual
interest, obstruct views, reduce noise and screen roads and incompatible land
uses. Berms shall be fully protected from erosion with sod, seed or another
form of vegetative ground cover.
      BLOCK. An area of land bounded by roads or by a combination of roads and
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, waterways or another barrier
to the continuity of development.
      BREAST HEIGHT.  The vertical height on the main stem of a tree at four
and one-half feet above grade.
      BUILDING.  A structure, either temporary or permanent with a roof
supported by columns or walls and used or built for the shelter or
accommodation of persons, animals or property of any kind. This shall include
tents or awnings that are situated on a lot and so used.
      BUILDING FRONTAGE. That portion of a building that is parallel to, or
nearly parallel to, a public or approved private road.
      BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the grade at the front of the building to the highest point of a
flat or slanted roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof and to the mean height
level between eaves and ridge of a gabled, hip or gambrel roof.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/00fead6ace167be79da9f0b0063628416dc97c1e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1194.jpg]
 
      BUILDING LINE. A line formed by the face of a building and extending to
the lot lines. For purposes of this chapter, a minimum building line is the
same as the front setback line.
      BUSINESS OFFICE. See OFFICE.
      BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICE. A commercial establishment engaged in providing
one or more services to other businesses. Typical uses include: business
consulting, employment services, stenographic, secretarial and other clerical
services, mailing, copying and printing, security, telephone message services
and the sale, rental or repair of computers and other office equipment. Does
not include parcel delivery service as defined herein.
      CAR WASH. A structure, premises or portion thereof, used for washing and
cleaning of vehicles.
         AUTOMATIC CAR WASH. A car wash using automated equipment, such as a
conveyor belt, operated by one or more attendants.
         SELF SERVICE CAR WASH. A car wash using customer-operated equipment
activated by a coin, token, card or similar means.
      CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY is a permit that
allows a building to be occupied after its construction or improvement. It
certifies that the construction conforms to the building code and is
satisfactory for occupancy.
      CHILD DAY CARE. A child care center, family day care home or group day
care home, as defined and regulated by the State of Michigan Child Care
Organizations Act, Public Act 116 of 1973, being M.C.L.A. §§ 722.111 through
722.128, as amended.
         CHILD CARE CENTER. A facility other than a private residence, licensed
by the State of Michigan to care for one or more children, for periods of less
than 24 hours a day.
         FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. A private residence, licensed by the State of
Michigan to care for one but fewer than seven children, for periods of less
than 24 hours a day.
         GROUP DAY CARE HOME. A private residence licensed by the State of
Michigan to care for more than six but not more than 12 children, less than 24
hours a day.
      COMMERCIAL. A use that is a privately owned business, having to do with
commerce or trade and concerned with making a profit.
      COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. See DISTRICT.
      COMMERCIAL GARAGE. Any garage other than a private garage or community
garage available to the public, and which is used for the storage, repair,
rental, greasing, washing, sales, service adjusting or equipping of automobiles
or other motor vehicles.
      COMMERCIAL INDOOR RECREATION. A fully enclosed building primarily used
for commercial recreation including, but not limited to, bowling alleys,
archery ranges, golf domes and ranges, tennis facilities, billiard halls and
ice or roller skating rinks. For zoning purposes, INDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION
does not include:
         (a)   Indoor firearms target practice ranges; or
         (b)   Pool tables, video games or other coin or token operated
amusement devices that are strictly accessory uses to restaurants, taverns or
nightclubs.
      COMMERCIAL KENNEL. Any structure, lot or premise where three or more dogs
or cats, six months of age or older, are kept for commercial purposes,
including boarding, breeding or sale or the rendering of services for profit.
      COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR DISPLAY. The use of an outdoor area for the display,
sale or rental of merchandise, including building and landscaping materials,
vehicles, recreational equipment, manufactured homes and farm equipment.
      COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATION. Commercial recreation facilities within an
open, partially enclosed or screened area. Typical uses include driving ranges,
private and miniature golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, racquetball
courts, ball parks, batting cages, sports arenas, racing tracks and amusement
and water parks.
      COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. Any device or assembly of devices that is
ground-installed and uses solar energy from the sun for generating electricity
for the primary purpose of wholesale or retail sale and not primarily for
consumption on the property on which the device or devices reside.
      COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. Any device such as a wind charger,
windmill, or wind turbine system that converts wind energy to a form of
electrical energy greater than one kilowatt to provide electricity for
commercial use.
      COMMON OPEN SPACE. The entire area within the boundaries of a
subdivision, residential open space development or planned development
permanently set aside and designed for collective use by the property owners,
residents and guests of the development.
         (a)   Common open space shall be recognizable and usable and may
include residential recreation centers, open squares and greens, neighborhood
gardens and parks, pedestrian and bicycle trails, play fields, playgrounds and
wildlife habitat areas.
         (b)   Common open space shall not include space devoted to required
sidewalks, landscaped buffer areas, yards, setbacks, roads, driveways, rights-
of-way, off-street parking, parking lot islands, roadside swales, retention or
detention ponds, regulated wetlands or floodplains and/or utility easements.
         (c)   The boundaries of common open space shall be treated as lot
lines in determining lot area, yards and setbacks.
         (d)   Common open space shall be developed, used and maintained in
perpetuity in accordance with restrictive deeds, easements, covenants,
conditions or restrictions that shall be recorded with the subject lot(s).
         CONDOMINIUM. Any development undertaken under the provisions of the
Michigan Condominium Act, Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101
through 559.272, as amended and/or the Administrative Rules promulgated
therein. The following other definitions shall also apply:
            BUILDING ENVELOPE. The principal building intended for a building
site, together with any accessory structures.
            BUILDING SITE. The condominium unit, including the building
envelope and contiguous limited common elements under and surrounding the
building envelope, and it shall be equivalent to lot as used in this chapter.
            CONDOMINIUM PROJECT. A plan or project consisting of not less than
two condominium units if established and approved in conformance with the
Condominium Act, Public Act 59 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 559.101 through
559.272, as amended and the Administrative Rules promulgated therein.
            CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION PLAN. A document that shall be an exhibit
to the master deed of the condominium project. Contents shall conform with Act
59, the Condominium Act, its promulgated rules and the provisions in this
chapter.
            CONDOMINIUM UNIT. That portion of the condominium project designed
and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed,
regardless of whether it is intended for residential, office, industrial,
business, recreational or any other type of use.
            GENERAL COMMON ELEMENTS. The common elements other than the limited
common elements.
         LIMITED COMMON ELEMENTS. A portion of the common elements reserved in
the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners.
         MASTER DEED.  The condominium document recording the condominium
project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference, the
bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan for the project.
         SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED CONDOMINIUM UNIT. In a condominium subdivision,
an individual building site or envelope, which is defined by a volume of air
space and horizontal and vertical boundaries.
         SITE CONDOMINIUM PROJECT. A condominium project with a condominium
subdivision plan, planned and regulated as a subdivision. The subdivision shall
be equivalent to a subdivision as used in this chapter and in the Village of
Pinckney Subdivision Ordinance. The subdivision may consist entirely of single-
family detached condominium units.
      CONFERENCE CENTER. A year-round facility with staff and equipment
dedicated to providing an environment that will support and facilitate
meetings. Dedicated meeting rooms are separate from living, kitchen, dining and
leisure areas.
      CONSTRUCTION.  Any work or operations necessary or incidental to the
erection, alteration, demolition, installation, assembling or equipping of
structures and/or essential public services. The term CONSTRUCTION shall
include land clearing, grading, excavating and filling and shall also mean the
finished product of any such work or operations.
      CONTRACTOR’S ESTABLISHMENT. A structure or premises used for construction
activities, including offices and storage of equipment and materials.
      CONVENIENCE STORE. A retail store selling a relatively limited selection
of small items such as prepackaged food products, beverages, general household
items, tobacco products and newspapers and magazines. A convenience store does
not include gasoline sales (see instead VEHICLE SERVICE STATION).
      CORNER LOT. See LOT.
      COURT. An outdoor open space, other than a yard, enclosed wholly or
partly by buildings or circumscribed by a single building.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A road with only one outlet and sufficient space at the
closed end to provide a vehicle turning area.
      DECK.  A wooden floor usually adjoining a building, which does not have
walls or roof. A wooden alternative to a concrete or masonry patio.
      DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
      DEPARTMENT STORE. A retail store with at least 5,000 square feet of floor
area, wherein a wide variety of merchandise and services are displayed in
separate departments.
      DETENTION POND. Temporarily stores water before discharging into a
surface-water body. Primarily used to reduce flood peaks.
      DEVELOPMENT. The arranging and construction of land for human use,
including the subdivision of land, the provision of facilities for
transportation, utilities, communication and other essential public services
and the placement and erection of structures.
      DISCONTINUANCE. The failure to pursue customary operations.
      DISTRICT.  A zoning district within the Village of Pinckney as
established and set forth in this chapter:
         (a)   Commercial districts are: CBD, SBD and RTO;
         (b)   Nonresidential districts are: PL, CBD, SBD and RTO; and
         (c)   Residential districts are: R1, R2, R3, R4 and ROB.
      DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY. Any use that involves the delivery of a product
or service directly to customers inside a vehicle, typically through a window
or other appurtenance to a building.
      DUMP. An area, either public or private, utilized for the deposit of
collected materials of very low or non-existent value. Generally regarded as
the terminal deposit for unwanted matter, but not including organic garbage.
      DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building designed exclusively for permanent
occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other in three
or more separate dwelling units.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building designed exclusively for
permanent occupancy by one family and containing one dwelling unit.
      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed exclusively for permanent
occupancy by two families living independently of each other in two separate
dwelling units.
      DWELLING UNIT. A building, or portion thereof, designed exclusively for
permanent occupancy by one family, including cooking and sanitary facilities.
      ELEMENTARY, MIDDLE OR HIGH SCHOOL. See SCHOOL.
      ESSENTIAL PUBLIC SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by a public utility of the various underground, surface or overhead
transmission, collection, distribution or disposal systems that are necessary
for the preservation of the public health, safety or general welfare, such as
gas, electricity, communications, steam, fire protection, water and sewage
systems. Essential public services shall include all poles, wires, mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes,
traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment or accessories reasonably
necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by a public utility, but it
shall not be deemed to include public utility facilities or public buildings.
      EXPANSION. An increase in size, volume, density, intensity, quantity or
scope including, but not limited to, an increase in:
         (a)   The floor area of an existing structure;
         (b)   The lot area occupied by a specific use; or
         (c)   The intensity of use.
      EXCAVATION. Any breaking of ground except for agriculture or common and
routine landscaping.
      FAMILY. A group of two or more people related by birth, marriage or
adoption and residing together in the same dwelling unit.
      FAMILY DAY CARE HOME.  See CHILD DAY CARE.
      FARMERS MARKET. An establishment or premises where local farmers sell
agricultural products from covered or open-air areas designated for individual
retailers.
      FENCE. A vertical and linear structure used to mark a boundary or to
define and enclose a specific area for the purpose of protection, privacy or
confinement.
      FILL. The deposit of material onto the ground, to raise the surface of
the land to a desired level, except for agriculture or common and routine
landscaping.
      FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. A place of business primarily engaged in the
provision of financial services, such as exchanging and lending money and
guaranteeing loans. Typical uses include banks and trust companies, lending and
financing institutions, holding companies, stock and bond brokers, security and
commodity exchanges, savings and loan associations, credit agencies and credit
unions.
      FLAG LOT. See LOT.
      FLOOR AREA. The sum of the horizontal area of all the floors of a
structure, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or from the
centerline of walls separating two structures or dwelling units. FLOOR AREA
does not include:
         (a)   Attics, elevator shafts or vent shafts;
         (b)   Floor space used for mechanical equipment;
         (c)   Open and/or unenclosed porches;
         (d)   Off-street parking or loading spaces (i.e. garages or enclosed
delivery bays);
         (e)   Basements or floors below the ground floor, except when used or
intended to be used by customers, patrons or clients, or for retail sales or
commercial offices; and
         (f)   For the purpose of computing off-street parking for those uses
not enclosed within a building, the area used for the sale or display of
merchandise and/or the area used to serve customers or patrons shall be
included in the total floor area.
      FOSTER CARE.  The provision of supervision, personal care and protection
in addition to room and board, for 24 hours a day, five or more days a week and
for two or more consecutive weeks for compensation.
      FRONT LOT LINE. See LOT LINE.
      FRONT SETBACK LINE. See SETBACK.
      FUNERAL HOME. A building, or portion thereof, used for human funeral
services. The building may contain space and facilities for:
         (a)   Embalming and the performance of other services used in
preparation of the dead for burial;
         (b)   The performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures;
         (c)   The storage of caskets, funeral urns and other related funeral
supplies; and
         (d)   The storage of funeral vehicles, but shall not include
facilities for cremation. Where a funeral home is permitted, a funeral chapel
shall also be permitted.
      GARAGE. An accessory structure for the storage of motor vehicles.
      GRADE. The height of the ground on which something (i.e. a structure)
stands.
      GROSS SITE AREA. The total horizontal area of land within the perimeter
boundaries of a site.
      GROUND FLOOR. That floor of a building with an elevation nearest to grade
and direct access to grade, but not including any portion of a basement. In the
case of a building built into a hillside or with a split level, all occupiable
floors less than one story above or below grade with direct access to grade,
but not including any portion of a basement.
      GROUND FLOOR AREA.  The floor area of the ground floor of a building.
      GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar system that is not attached
to or mounted to any roof or exterior wall of any principal or accessory
building to meet the needs of on-site users.
      GROUP DAY CARE HOME. See CHILD DAY CARE.
      HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. A substance or combination of substances that,
because of quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics, may either:
         (a)   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or
an increase in serious, irreversible or incapacitating illness; or
         (b)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of,
or otherwise managed.
      HAZARDOUS WASTE. Hazardous materials that no longer have practical use,
such as substances that have been discarded, spilled or contaminated or that
are being stored temporarily prior to proper disposal.
      HEALTH CLUB. A structure or open space used as an athletic or health
club, gymnasium or weight control establishment, and providing facilities the
activities as swimming pools, saunas, tennis, racquetball or basketball courts,
running tracks or exercise and fitness rooms or areas.
      HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTION. See SCHOOL.
      HOME FOR THE ELDERLY.  A residential facility, licensed by the State of
Michigan, that provides room, board, supervision, assistance and personal care
to unrelated, non-transient individuals 60 years of age or older. HOMES FOR THE
AGED are further defined and regulated by the State of Michigan Public Health
Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 333.1101 et seq., as amended
and do not include NURSING HOMES or ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITIES, as defined
herein.
      HOME OCCUPATION.  A commercial occupation, business or service
customarily engaged in by residents in their dwelling unit, in compliance with
§§
152.240 et seq.
      HOSPITAL. A building or group of buildings having rooms for lodging
patients overnight, and used for providing in-patient medical or surgical
treatment of sick or injured persons. A hospital may include related
facilities, such as central service facilities, laboratories, pharmacies,
outpatient departments and staff offices, provided the facilities are
incidental and subordinate to the main use and are an integral part of the
hospital operation.
      HOTEL. A building designed for occupancy as a temporary abiding place of
transient individuals who are lodged with or without meals, in which there are
more than 15 sleeping rooms usually occupied singly and in which no provision
is made for cooking in any individual room or suite.
      IMPROVEMENT. Those features and actions associated with a development
project that are considered necessary by the body or official granting zoning
approval to protect natural resources or the public health, safety and welfare,
including but not limited to: roads, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening,
drainage and/or structures. Improvement does not include the entire development
project that is the subject of zoning approval.
      INDOOR SELF-STORAGE FACILITY.  A building or group of buildings in an
area surrounded by a fence or wall with controlled access that contains
individual, self-contained rental units for the storage of personal and
household goods. Also commonly known as a mini-warehouse or mini-storage
facility. Does not include retail, wholesale or industrial warehouses or
activities.
      INDUSTRY. Extraction, production, processing, testing, cleaning, repair,
storage or distribution of commodities.
      INTENSITY OF USE. The amount of activity associated with a specific use.
Intensity of use shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator, based on but
not limited to the following criteria:
         (a)   The amount of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic generated;
         (b)   Noise, odor, light and/or air pollution generated;
         (c)   Potential for litter or debris;
         (d)   Type and storage of materials connected with the use;
         (e)   Total residential dwelling units and density;
         (f)   Total lot coverage; and
         (g)   Height of structures, including building height.
      INTERIOR LOT. See LOT.
      JUNK/SALVAGE YARD. A place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials
including but not limited to scrap iron, bottles, rags, paper, rubber tires and
metals are stored, bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or
handled. Auto wrecking yards, storage or salvaging of dismantled, partially
dismantled or inoperable motor vehicles, house wrecking yards, used lumber
yards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural
steel materials and equipment are included in this definition. The following
are not included in this definition:
         (a)   The sale of used vehicles in operable condition; and
         (b)   The sale of salvaged materials incidental to manufacturing
operations.
      LANDSCAPE NURSERY.  A structure and/or premises primarily used for the
storage and retail sale of live trees, shrubs or plants and products used for
gardening and landscaping. For the purpose of this chapter, plant nursery does
not include uses limited to the temporary sale of vegetables, fruits or
Christmas trees.
      LANDSCAPED BUFFER AREA. A defined area within a lot or site, which is
covered with trees, shrubs, fences, walls or berms or a combination thereof,
designed to provide visual screening and/or noise reduction along public
rights-of-way and in between incompatible land uses.
      LAUNDROMAT. A commercial business that provides washing, drying and/or
ironing machines or dry cleaning machines for hire to be used by customers on
the premises.
      LEGAL NONCONFORMING USE. A structure or land use lawfully existing at the
time of enactment of this chapter, or amendment thereto, which does not conform
to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is situated.
      LIGHT MANUFACTURING.  Manufacturing uses that include fabricating,
processing, testing, assembling, packaging and manufacture of products from
previously prepared materials, but not including uses involving primary
production of food, wood, metal, petroleum or chemical products from raw
materials. The operations shall not deal in large volumes of product handling,
storage and distribution; nor shall the operations include on-site milling,
forging or heavy grinding of parts or similar manufacturing operations.
      LIGHT SOURCE. Any device or fixture producing artificial light including
those parts and surfaces of reflectors, refractors, globes, baffles, shades and
hoods upon which the light falls.
      LOADING AREA. A facility used and/or designed for receiving cargo from or
discharging cargo into a vehicle (including trucks over 8,000 pounds).
      LOT. An area of land described by metes and bounds on a recorded deed or
shown on a recorded plat. Lots shall:
         (a)   Be of at least sufficient size, excluding any portion of a road
or right-of-way to meet minimum standards for use, coverage, lot area and yards
as required herein; and
         (b)   Have frontage on, or a permanent means of vehicle access to, a
public or village approved private road.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/00fead6ace167be79da9f0b0063628416dc97c1e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1197.jpg]
 
         CORNER LOT. A lot with two intersecting lot lines abutting a road
along their entire length. A lot abutting a curved road shall be considered a
corner lot if the tangents of the curve, at the two points where the lot lines
intersect the street line, form an interior angle of not more than 135 degrees.
         FLAG LOT. A lot possessing less than the required road frontage,
served by a village approved private access easement.
         INTERIOR LOT. A lot with frontage on one road only.
         THROUGH LOT. A lot with frontage on two roads that do not intersect,
as distinguished from a corner lot.
      LOT AREA. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot,
excluding area within a public right-of-way.
      LOT COVERAGE. That part or percent of the gross site area occupied by
buildings, including accessory structures.
      LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front lot line and rear
lot line, measured along the median between the side lot lines.
      LOT LINES. The boundary lines of a lot, further defined as follows:
         (a)   Front lot line.
            1.   In the case of an interior lot, that line separating the lot
from the road right-of-way.
            2.   In the case of a corner lot or through lot, that line
separating the lot from the right-of-way of the road that is providing primary
vehicle access, as designated on the plat, site plan and/or land use permit
application.
            3.   In the case of a flag lot, that lot line closest and
relatively parallel to the road or private access easement providing vehicle
access.
         (b)   Rear lot line. That lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line
shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten
feet long, lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot.
         (c)   Side lot line. Any lot line other than the front lot line or
rear lot line. On a corner lot, the side lot line separating a lot from a road
is a street side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot is
an interior side lot line.
      LOT OF RECORD. A lot that is described in metes and bounds on a deed or
shown on a subdivision plat recorded with the County Register of Deeds at the
time of adoption of this chapter.
      LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
at the two points where the side lot lines intersect the street line upon which
the lot principally fronts. For cul-de-sac lots and flag lots, the lot width
may be measured at the two points where the side lot lines intersect the front
setback line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/00fead6ace167be79da9f0b0063628416dc97c1e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1200.jpg]
 
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections
which is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a single-family dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required
utilities and which includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and
electrical systems contained in the structure. Does not include RECREATIONAL
VEHICLES.
      MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A lot, parcel or tract of land under the control
of a person upon which three or more manufactured homes are located on a
continual nonrecreational basis and which is offered to the public for that
purpose regardless of whether a charge is made therefore, together with any
buildings, structures, enclosures, street equipment or facility used or
intended for use incident to the occupancy of a manufactured home and which is
not intended for use as a recreational vehicle park.
      MEDICAL OR DENTAL CLINIC. A building or portion thereof designed for and
used by two or more physicians, surgeons, dentists, psychiatrists,
physiotherapists, optometrists or similar practitioners, or a combination of
persons in these professions, but not including facilities for major surgery or
for lodging of patients overnight. A clinic may incorporate customary
laboratories and pharmacies incidental or necessary to its operation or to the
service of its patients.
      MEDICAL OR DENTAL OFFICE. See OFFICE.
      MIXED USE. The intermingling of land uses or activities within a single
site, such as residential and commercial uses.
      MOTEL.  A commercial business comprised of a series of attached, semi-
detached or detached rental units for the overnight accommodation of transient
guests, each unit containing a bedroom, bathroom and closet space and with each
unit having its own entrance from the parking area.
      NET SITE AREA. The total land area within a site after the following have
been deducted from the gross site area:
         (a)   Road rights-of-way;
         (b)   Other access, utility and facility easements;
         (c)   Other easements preventing development of the ground area within
their boundaries except those setting aside common open space in a residential
open space development; and
         (d)   Areas that are unbuildable due to environmental constraints such
as steep slopes and MDEQ regulated wetlands.
      NIGHTCLUB. An establishment properly licensed to serve alcohol and where
live entertainment is provided including, but not limited to dance, comedy,
theater or music performances. Does not include an adult cabaret, as defined
herein.
      NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot that does not conform to the dimensional
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, but which was a
legally established lot of record prior to the effective date of this chapter
or its amendment.
      NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure that does not meet the yard,
setback, lot coverage, height or other dimensional requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located, but which was legally established prior to the
effective date of this chapter or its amendment.
      NONCONFORMING USE. Any use of a lot or structure that is not allowed
within the zoning district in which it is located, but which was legally
established prior to the effective date of this chapter or its amendment.
      NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION OFFICE. See OFFICE.
      NURSING HOME. A home, whether operated for profit or not, for the care of
the aged, infirm or physically disabled, wherein two or more persons are
provided shelter, food and medical treatment as prescribed by a physician.
NURSING HOMES are further defined and regulated by the Public Health Code
(Public Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 333.1101 et seq., as amended). A
NURSING HOME does not include a HOME FOR THE AGED or ADULT FOSTER CARE
FACILITY, as defined herein.
      OFF-STREET PARKING. A defined area that is not in a road right-of-way,
designed and used for the temporary parking of licensed (registered) and
operable vehicles.
      OFFICE. A room, suite of rooms or building in which are located desks,
chairs, tables, couches, bookcases (accounting, filing, recording,
communication and/or stenographic) equipment for current use in the office
business and personnel engaged in executive, administrative, professional,
political, informative, research and/or clerical duties.
         BUSINESS OFFICE. Offices of corporate, administrative, auditing,
accounting and clerical occupations, real estate, insurance and travel agents
and similar occupations.
         MEDICAL OR DENTAL OFFICE. An office designed for and used by one
physician, surgeon, dentist, psychiatrist, physiotherapist, optometrist or
similar practitioner that does not include facilities for major surgery or for
lodging patients overnight. Does not include medical or dental clinics or
hospitals as defined herein.
         PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. Offices of attorneys-at-law, land surveyors,
architects, engineers, certified public accountants, publishers and similar
professionals.
         NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION OFFICE.  Offices of tax exempt non-profit
organizations, such as professional membership organizations, labor unions,
civic, social and fraternal associations and political, religious and
philanthropic organizations. Does not include a public building or religious
institution as defined herein.
      OFFICE DISTRICT. See DISTRICT.
      ON-SITE WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. Any device such as a wind charger, windmill,
or wind turbine system that converts wind energy to a form of electrical energy
greater than one kilowatt to service the needs of only the structures and uses
on the same lot or parcel.
      OPAQUE. Impervious to sight. This shall be measured by observation of any
two square yard area of landscape screen between one foot above the established
grade of the area to be concealed and the top or the highest point of the
required screen. The plantings must meet this standard based upon reasonably
anticipated growth over a period of three years.
      ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK. The line on the shore of a surface water body
established by the regularly occurring fluctuations of water, and indicated by
physical characteristics such as a clear, natural line impressed on the bank,
shelving, changes in the character of soil, destruction of terrestrial
vegetation, the presence of litter and debris or other appropriate means that
consider the characteristics of the surrounding area.
      OUTBUILDING. A structure, not a residence, larger than 200 square feet,
taller than ten feet, but less than 21 feet in height.
      PARCEL. A continuous area of land that has not been divided or subdivided
according to the provisions of the Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967,
as amended, M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 et seq.
      PARCEL DELIVERY SERVICE. A private commercial establishment that provides
the delivery of letters and packages, including retail sale of stamps and
packaging materials, distribution, storage and transfer of packages and fleet
storage and maintenance.
      PARKING.  The temporary storage of registered, licensed and operative
motor vehicles.
      PARKING SPACE. An off-street space exclusive of necessary driveways,
aisles or maneuvering areas suitable to accommodate one motor vehicle and
having direct unobstructed access to a road or alley.
      PATIO.  A concrete, brick or masonry floor usually adjoining a building,
which is not elevated above the ground surface and does not have walls or a
roof.
      PERMITTED USE. A principal use and/or accessory use for which the zoning
district in which it is located has been established. Does not include a
special land use as defined, herein.
      PERSONAL SERVICE. An establishment primarily engaged in providing
frequent or recurring services of a personal nature. Typical uses include
barber and beauty shops, custom tailoring shops, minor repair shops (i.e.,
shoes, watches and small appliances) and similar personal services. Does not
include laundromats, dry cleaners or personal improvement schools.
      PERSONAL IMPROVEMENT SCHOOL. A commercial establishment primarily engaged
in conducting personal improvement classes of a nonprofessional nature. Typical
uses include art and music schools, driving and computer instruction, dance
studios, hobby instruction and martial arts training. Does not include personal
services, elementary, middle or high schools, vocational schools or institutes
of higher education.
      PLANNING COMMISSION. The Village of Pinckney Planning Commission.
      PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A unified development of land under single ownership
or control, that includes one or more principal buildings where the
requirements of a given zoning district may be modified by approval of an
overall development plan. A planned development may be developed in a single
operation or phased series of stages and may include common open space,
structures, roads, circulation ways, utilities and other site features and
improvements.
      PLAY FIELD. An area of open space used for active recreation such as
baseball, football and soccer fields, tennis and basketball courts and ice
rinks.
      PLAYGROUND. An area of open space used for children's recreation and
designed to accommodate recreational equipment such as play structures, swings,
slides and monkey bars.
      PLOT PLAN. A site plan containing the information required in §
152.389(D)(1) through (D)(15), submitted for review and approval by the Zoning
Administrator as part of a land use permit, in accordance with §
152.386.
      PORCH. A structure attached to the exterior of a building often forming a
covered entrance with steps and a separate roof.
         ENCLOSED PORCH. A porch that is enclosed on all four sides, usually
with screens and/or windows.
         UNENCLOSED PORCH.  A porch that is open on one or more sides.
      PRINCIPAL BUILDING. The building occupied by or designed for the
principal use.
      PRINCIPAL USE. The predominant use to which the premises are devoted.
      PRIVATE CLUB. Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a
corporation, association or person for a common social, educational or
recreational purpose, but not primarily to render a service that is normally
carried on as a commercial business. A private club is usually characterized by
certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings
and a constitution and bylaws.
      PRODUCE STAND. A booth, stall or other partially enclosed structure where
seasonal produce is sold to the general public.
      PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. See OFFICE.
      PROPERTY. Real estate.
      PUBLIC BUILDING.  Publicly owned and operated buildings, such as
government offices, post offices, police stations, fire stations, libraries,
museums, indoor public recreation facilities. Does not include public utility
facilities or elementary, middle and high schools.
      PUBLIC PARK. Any lot or tract of land owned and operated by a public
agency and used for outdoor active or passive recreation, including open space,
plazas, playgrounds and play fields. Does not include public swimming pools,
golf courses or indoor recreation facilities. (The latter is included in the
definition of PUBLIC BUILDING, above.)
      PUBLIC UTILITY. A private company regulated by the state public service
commission, Municipal Department or Commission, with an exclusive franchise for
providing an essential public service, for example, electrical, gas, steam,
communication, transportation, sewer or water service.
      PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY. Public utility buildings, telephone exchange
buildings, electrical transformer stations and substations and gas regulator
stations, water supply and sewage disposal plants, water and gas tanks,
railroad transfer and storage tracks and railroad rights-of-way. This use does
not include freight terminals or commercial radio, television and other
transmitting or relay stations.
      QUALIFIED PERSON. Must have a recognized degree, certificate, and the
like, or extensive experience and ability to solve the subject problems at the
worksite.
      RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT.  One or more of the following stored on a site
for the purpose of commercial outdoor display: tents, campers, boats, personal
watercraft, floats, surfboards and rafts, off-road vehicles, trailers and
recreational vehicles.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A motor driven vehicle used for recreational travel
purposes, including:
         (a)   Boats, jet-skis, snowmobiles and other motorized off-road
vehicles; and
         (b)   Temporary dwellings such as motor homes, buses, fifth wheels,
trailers and truck caps. For the purpose of this definition, TEMPORARY DWELLING
shall mean designed to sleep and cook in on a temporary, short-term basis.
      RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. A building, or group of buildings, controlled by a
tax-exempt religious organization wherein people regularly assemble for
religious worship, meetings, instruction and related activities. A religious
institution does not include a chapel within a funeral home as defined herein.
      RESIDENCE. A dwelling unit that is used for human habitation other than
on a transient basis.
      RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. See DISTRICT.
      RESIDENTIAL OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT. One or more lots developed as a
single entity with residential uses clustered on no more than 70% of the net
site area with the remaining net site area permanently dedicated as common open
space.
      RESIDENTIAL RECREATION CENTER.  A privately owned recreational facility
for use by the owners, residents and guests of a particular residential
development, religious institution, private school or private club, including
both indoor and outdoor facilities such as club houses, gyms, swimming pools,
tennis courts, play fields and playgrounds.
      RESTAURANT. Any use that includes the sale of food and/or beverages to
customers in a ready-to-consume state. The method of operation may be
characteristic of a carry-out restaurant, drive-in restaurant, fast food
restaurant, standard restaurant or tavern or combination thereof, as defined
below:
         RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT. A restaurant without a drive-through window,
whose principal business is the sale of prepared food in disposable packaging
for consumption off the premises.
         RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN. A restaurant whose principal business is the
sale of prepared food for consumption in a vehicle on the premises and outside
of an enclosed building.
         RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD. A restaurant whose principal business is the
sale of prepared food in disposable packaging for consumption off the premises,
or on the premises within an enclosed building. Orders are taken at a drive-
through window or walk-up counter and payment is made prior to consumption.
         RESTAURANT, STANDARD. A restaurant whose principal business is the
delivery of prepared food to customers seated at tables or in a cafeteria line,
and its subsequent consumption by customers at tables within a completely
enclosed building or designated outdoor seating area. Food and beverages are
usually served in or on non-disposable tableware. Carry-out orders are provided
only on an incidental basis. Drive-through service is not provided and food is
not served to customers within in a vehicle. This definition includes BANQUET
FACILITIES.
      RETAIL FOOD STORE. A store or market that sells primarily groceries,
baked goods, produce, dairy products, meats and similar food products in small
quantities directly to the consumer for consumption off the premises. Does not
include RESTAURANTS.
      RETAIL STORE. A store that sells small quantities of merchandise directly
to the consumer, including stores selling clothing, jewelry, antiques,
furniture, hardware, electronics, gifts, books, records, flowers, household
goods, office and art supplies and similar items.
      RETENTION POND. A stormwater management practice that captures stormwater
runoff and does not discharge directly to a surface water body. The water is
"discharged" by infiltration or evaporation.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A permanent easement established for the passage of persons
or vehicles, or for the location of utilities, delineated by legally
established lines or boundaries.
      ROAD. A public or private right-of-way that accommodates vehicular
traffic and provides vehicular access to abutting properties, including
thoroughfares, avenues, highways, boulevards, courts, lanes and drives, but not
including alleys or driveways to buildings.
         ARTERIAL ROAD. A road designed primarily to accommodate high volume,
through traffic between cities, villages and other major traffic generators.
On-street parking is seldom allowed and driveway connections are severely
restricted. Examples include Main Street (M-36), Pearl Street (D-19) and
Dexter-Pinckney Road.
         COLLECTOR ROAD. A road designed primarily to provide direct access
between local roads and arterial roads. Examples include Hamburg, Unadilla,
Putnam and Howell Streets and Mower and Patterson Lake Roads.
         LOCAL ROAD.  A road designed primarily to provide direct access to
adjacent property. Local roads rarely serve through traffic. On-street parking
is often allowed and there are relatively few restrictions on driveway
connections.
      ROAD FRONTAGE. The legal line of demarcation between a lot or parcel and
a road right-of-way or easement.
      ROOF LINE. The top edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever
forms the top line of the building silhouette.
      ROOF- OR BUILDING-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system
attached to or mounted on any roof or exterior wall of any principal or
accessory building primarily to meet the needs of on-site users.
      ROOM. For the purpose of determining minimum lot area and maximum density
in a multiple-family district, a living room, dining room, bedroom, den,
library, studio, sunroom or other room equal to at least 80 square feet in
area. A room shall not include the area in a kitchen, bathroom, utility room,
corridor, hallway, closet, attic or basement.
      ROOMING HOUSE. A building containing at least three and no more than ten
rooms without cooking facilities, which are rented as sleeping and living
quarters, and where meals may or may not be furnished to renters. Rooms with
private cooking facilities shall be considered separate dwelling units. Does
not include a BED AND BREAKFAST INN, HOTEL or MOTEL as defined herein.
      SCHOOL. A public or private institution funded, chartered or recognized
by the State of Michigan and providing instruction to students pursuant to
state law concerning compulsory education.
         ELEMENTARY, MIDDLE OR HIGH SCHOOL. Any building or group of buildings
or premises approved by the State of Michigan for public or private elementary
or secondary instruction.
         HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTION. A public or private college, university
or other institution of higher education accredited by the State of Michigan
and offering undergraduate or graduate degrees.
      SETBACK. The minimum required horizontal distance between a structure and
the adjoining lot lines and street line(s).
         FRONT SETBACK LINE. The minimum required horizontal distance between
any structure and the front lot line.
      SHADOW FLICKER. Alternating changes in light intensity caused by the
moving blades of a wind energy system casting shadows on the ground and
stationary objects, such as but not limited to a window at a dwelling.
      SHED. A structure smaller than 200 square foot and less than ten feet in
height.
      SHOPPING CENTER. A group of three or more retail stores on a site
developed in accordance with an overall planned development, designed, built
and managed as a single, integrated project with common off-street parking
areas provided on the site.
      SIDE.  That edge of a lot not designated as front or rear.
      SIGN. Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, that is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event or location or otherwise convey information in written
or pictorial form. SIGNS are further defined as follows:
         BANNER SIGN. Any sign for advertising purposes, composed of fabric,
plastic, or other non-rigid material without enclosing framework.
         BILLBOARD. A sign regulated as a billboard by the Highway Advertising
Act of 1972, as amended.
         CANOPY SIGN. A sign displayed and affixed flat on the surface of a
canopy and does not extend vertically or horizontally beyond the limits of the
canopy.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/00fead6ace167be79da9f0b0063628416dc97c1e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1435.jpg]
         CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN. A sign or portion thereof with characters,
letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering
the structural integrity of the sign. A sign on which the only copy that
changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time, temperature shall be
considered a “time, temperature” portion of a sign and not a changeable copy
sign for purposes of this chapter.
         DIGITAL/ELECTRONIC SIGN. A sign that uses changing lights or other
electronic media to form a sign message wherein the sequence of messages and
the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by an
electronic process.
         DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign directing and guiding vehicular or pedestrian
traffic or parking but bearing no advertising matter.
         FREE STANDING SIGN. A sign not attached to any building, and self-
supported by poles, pylons, braces or other structural supports mounted in the
ground.
         GROUND SIGN. A sign supported by one or more upright brace or braces
of reasonable size necessary to support such sign, permanently mounted in or
upon the ground and in no way attached to a building structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/00fead6ace167be79da9f0b0063628416dc97c1e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1437.jpg]
         IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign that only conveys the name of a person or
business, or the address or name of a building, or a combination thereof, in
order to identify the location of uses on the premises and not to advertise.
         MARQUEE SIGN. A sign attached to or erected on a marquee, canopy or
awning which projects from and is supported by a building.
         MENUBOARD. A freestanding sign for restaurant establishments to
display their menu items and prices in compliance with §
152.305(C) of this chapter.
         MURAL. A design or representation painted or drawn on the wall of a
building, which does not advertise an establishment, product, service, or
activity.
         OFF-SITE DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign that guides and directs traffic to a
specified destination on another site in the most direct manner possible.
         PLACARD. A sign not exceeding two square feet in area, which provides
notices of a public nature, such as “No Trespassing,” “No Hunting,” “Closed,”
or “Open.”
         POLITICAL SIGN. A temporary sign used in connection with an official
local government, school district, county, state, or federal election or
referendum.
         PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or a
building.
         PROJECTING SIGN. A sign which is supported by a wall, roof, or
building and which projects from the building at some angle greater than 20°
degrees thereto.
         READER BOARD. A portion of a sign on which text is periodically
changed manually by removing and inserting prefabricated letters and numbers.
         ROOF SIGN. A sign attached to or supported by the roof of a building,
which extends above the immediately adjacent roof line of the building, or a
sign that is wholly or partially above the roof line of a building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/00fead6ace167be79da9f0b0063628416dc97c1e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1439.jpg]
         SIGN MESSAGE AREA. A sign message area is the area, computed in square
feet, within which the letters, figures, numbers, or symbols are contained. The
area is determined by measuring the height of the extreme perimeters of all
letters, figures, numbers, or symbols, by the width of the same. The area of
all changeable copy signs shall be determined by measuring the total area
within which the copy can be altered.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/00fead6ace167be79da9f0b0063628416dc97c1e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1441.jpg]
         SIGN STRUCTURE. That part of the sign which structurally supports the
sign message area whether integrated into the message area through the use of
the same materials or through the use of complementing but different materials.
         SIGN SURFACE. That part of the sign upon, against, or through which
the message is displayed or illustrated.
         SPECIAL EVENT SIGN. Temporary signs containing public messages
concerning special events sponsored by governmental agencies or non-profit
organizations, such as fairs, festivals, art and craft shows, and charitable
events.
         SUSPENDED SIGN. A sign that is suspended or hung from the underside of
an eave, porch roof, or awning.
         TEMPORARY SIGN. A single or double surface painted or poster panel
type sign or some variation thereof, which is temporary in nature, easily
movable, and not permanently attached to the ground or a building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/00fead6ace167be79da9f0b0063628416dc97c1e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1443.jpg]
         WALL SIGN. Any sign that shall be affixed parallel to the wall or
printed or painted on the wall of any building; provided, however, said wall
sign shall not project above the top of the wall or beyond the end of the
building. For the purpose of this chapter, any sign display surface that is
affixed flat against the sloping surface of a mansard roof shall be considered
a wall sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/00fead6ace167be79da9f0b0063628416dc97c1e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1445.jpg]
         WINDOW SIGN. A sign installed inside a window and intended to be
viewed from the outside.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/00fead6ace167be79da9f0b0063628416dc97c1e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1447.jpg]
      SITE. Any lot, parcel or tract of land, or combination of contiguous
lots, parcels or tracts of land that are under one ownership or more than one
ownership, where development is part of a single unified project and site plan.
      SITE PLAN. The documents and drawings specified herein as being necessary
to ensure that a proposed land use is in compliance with this chapter.
      SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A system that collects or stores solar radiation or
energy for the purposes of transforming it into any other form of usable
energy, including, but not limited to the collection and transfer of heat
created by solar energy to any other medium by other means.
      SPECIAL LAND USE. A use that is permitted in a district only after it is
reviewed and approved by the Village Planning Commission.
      STORY. That part of a building between the surface of a floor and the
surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the
space between the surface of the floor and the roof. The term STORY does not
include an attic or basement (see
Figure 2-3 below).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/00fead6ace167be79da9f0b0063628416dc97c1e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1203.jpg]
 
      STORY, HALF.  An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof with a
minimum floor area of 200 square feet and clear height of at least seven feet
six inches. For the purpose of this chapter, the floor area is only that area
having at least four feet clear height between floor and ceiling.
      STREET. For the purposes of this chapter, a STREET shall be the same as a
ROAD.
      STREET LINE. The dividing line between a lot and road right-of-way.
      STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting structure of a
building such as bearing walls, columns, girders or beams, or any substantial
changes in the roof and/or exterior walls.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
more or less permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having
a permanent location on the ground, excepting utility poles.
      STRUCTURE HEIGHT.  For all structures other than buildings, STRUCTURE
HEIGHT shall mean the vertical distance measured from the highest point of the
structure to the lowest point of the average finished grade immediately below
and adjacent to the structure. (See separate definition of BUILDING HEIGHT)
      SUPERMARKET. A conventional retail grocery store selling a wide variety
of meat, dairy, produce and other food products and some household merchandise.
May include a pharmacy as an accessory use. Does not include warehouse clubs.
      SWIMMING POOL. Any structure intended for swimming or recreational
bathing that contains water of 24 inches deep. This includes in-ground, above-
ground, and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas located on a lot as a n
accessory use to a residential or recreational use.
      TAVERN. An establishment operated primarily for the dispensing of
alcoholic beverages. Live entertainment and the sale of prepared food to
customers may be incidental and subordinate uses. If the alcoholic beverage
service area is incidental and subordinate to a larger theater or restaurant,
represents less than 50% of the gross leasable area (GLA), the TAVERN shall be
defined as that part of the structure so designated on an approved site plan.
The remainder of the structure shall be considered the theater or restaurant
under these regulations.
      THEATER. An enclosed building used principally for presenting motion
pictures or live performances including, but not limited to, dance, comic,
theatrical or musical performances with or without the consumption of food or
beverages on the premises. Does not include an adult cabaret as defined herein.
      TRACT. Two or more contiguous lots or parcels in the same ownership.
      USE. For the purposes of this chapter, USE means:
         (a)   The purpose for which land or structures thereon are designed,
arranged or intended to be occupied or used, or for which they are occupied or
maintained; or
         (b)   Any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on in a
structure or on a lot.
      VARIANCE. A modification in the literal provisions of this chapter
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals when strict enforcement would cause
undue hardship or practical difficulties owing to circumstances unique to the
property on which the modification is granted.
      VEHICLE. A passenger automobile, motorcycle, motor home, van or truck
with a gross vehicle weight of less than 8,000 pounds and defined as a motor
vehicle by the Motor Vehicle Code.
      VEHICLE CIRCULATION AREA. Space provided within a lot or site for vehicle
maneuvering including drives, aisles and traffic lanes but excluding parking
spaces, sidewalks and public rights-of-way.
      VEHICLE DEALERSHIP.  A structure or premises used primarily for the sale
of new and/or used vehicles, including incidental storage, maintenance and
servicing.
      VEHICLE REPAIR SERVICE. A structure or premises used primarily for the
repair of vehicles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles and recreational
vehicles, including the sale, installation and servicing of equipment and
parts. Typical uses include both major vehicle repair and minor vehicle repair.
         MAJOR VEHICLE REPAIR.  Vehicle repair, rebuilding or reconditioning
such as work on the engine block, head and internal parts, engine replacement,
work on the transmission case and internal parts, transmission replacement,
work on torque converters or drive trains, collision service including body
frame or fender repair, painting, steam cleaning and similar activities.
         MINOR VEHICLE REPAIR. Vehicle service and repair such as engine tune-
up, lubrication, alternator, battery, radiator, belt, hose, tire, muffler and
exhaust system repair or replacement, rust proofing and wheel balancing and
alignment. Does not include any use specified in the definition of MAJOR
VEHICLE REPAIR.
      VEHICLE SERVICE STATION. Any structure or premises used for the retail
sale of vehicle fuels, oils and accessories (such as tires, batteries, brakes
and shock absorbers). May include the retail sale of small convenience goods
such as newspapers, magazines, tobacco products and prepackaged food and
beverages. May also include minor vehicle repair conducted entirely within a
completely enclosed building as an incidental accessory use, but shall not
include MAJOR VEHICLE REPAIR.
      VEHICLE WASH. See CAR WASH.
      VETERINARY CLINIC. A place for the medical care, diagnosis and treatment
of sick or injured animals, including those in need of surgery. A veterinary
clinic may include customary pens or cages, which are permitted only within the
wall of the clinic structure.
      VOCATIONAL SCHOOL. An establishment, for profit or not, offering
regularly scheduled instruction in technical, commercial or trade skills
including, but not limited to business, office, real estate, building and
construction trades, electronics, computer programming and technology,
automotive and aircraft mechanics and similar types of instruction.
      WALL. A vertical and linear structure used to mark a boundary, or to
define and enclose a specific area for the purpose of protection, privacy or
confinement. A wall is generally distinguished from a fence by the solidity of
construction, being usually made from solid brick or concrete. This definition
does not include retaining walls constructed for the purpose of holding back
and supporting a mass of earth.
      WAREHOUSE. A building wherein goods, merchandise and materials are stored
for subsequent sale, distribution or use off-site.
      WHOLESALE AND WAREHOUSING, LIMITED. The small-scale storage and sale of
goods to other businesses for resale, excluding indoor self-storage facilities,
major distribution centers, motor freight terminals, moving and storage firms
and similar high volume, high-turnover facilities. Limited wholesale and
warehousing facilities shall be under 50,000 square feet in area and operate
only during normal business hours.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. An unmanned structure consisting of
antennas, antenna support structures or other equipment used to provide
wireless services as set forth in § 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
      YARD. A space on the same lot with a structure, open to the sky,
unoccupied and unobstructed, except for specifically permitted uses or
encroachments. The measurement of a yard shall be the horizontal distance
between a lot line and structure. (See
Figure 2-2)
         FRONT YARD. A yard extending across the full lot width, from the front
lot line to the nearest part of the principal building or structure.
         INTERIOR SIDE YARD. A side yard separating a lot from another lot.
         REAR YARD.  A yard extending across the full lot width from the rear
lot line to the nearest part of the principal building or structure.
         SIDE YARD. A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between the side lot line and the nearest part of the principal building or
structure.
         STREET SIDE YARD. A side yard separating a lot from a road.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 82, passed 5-12-2008; Ord. 98, passed 3-28-
2011; Am. Ord. 107, passed 12-12-2011; Ord. 153, passed 12-14-2020; Ord. 154,
passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 161, passed 8-8-2022; Ord. 167, passed 1-9-2023)
§ 152.268 TRANSIENT AND SEASONAL SALES.
   The sale of seasonal items, examples of which are Christmas trees, flowers
and plants, pumpkins, and fruit and beverages, by persons other than the owner
or occupant of the premises, shall be permitted on properties located in the
Central Business District (CBD), Secondary Business District (SBD), or Public
Lands District (PL) that have frontage on Main Street (M-36). Farmers market
and other uses related to special events are permitted on public property as
approved by the Village Council. Such uses will be subject to the following
standards and conditions:
   (A)   Transient or seasonal sales may be located within any required setback
as long as a five foot pedestrian access is maintained, but shall not be
located within any public road right-of-way or sidewalk.
   (B)   Transient or seasonal sales shall not occupy or obstruct the use of
any fire lane, required off-street parking or landscape area required to meet
requirements of this zoning code, or create a traffic or safety hazard.
   (C)   Transient or seasonal sales shall be conducted in a manner so as not
to create a public nuisance to neighboring properties. Adequate on-site parking
together with proper ingress and egress to the site shall be provided.
   (D)   Transient and seasonal sales shall be allowed only upon a zoning
compliance permit issued by the Village Zoning Administrator. To secure a
permit, an application for a permit shall be submitted which shall include the
following:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of the merchant who will conduct the
transient and/or seasonal sale;
      (2)   Written approval for such sales by the legal owner of the property
affected;
      (3)   A plot plan depicting the layout of the area where sales will be
conducted, as necessary to determine compliance with this section;
      (4)   Health department approval, where applicable;
      (5)   A permit fee as established by the Village Council;
      (6)   Permit may be revoked by the village if the use becomes a nuisance
or fails to comply with the provisions of this section.
   (E)   Signage for transient or seasonal sales shall be limited to one
portable non-illuminated free standing sign with a maximum size of nine square
feet per side and a height limitation of four feet six inches.
   (F)   The permit issued under this section for transient and/or seasonal
sales shall be valid for a maximum period of five days from the date of
issuance or a period determined by the Village Zoning Administrator. At the end
of the permit period, any and all temporary structures shall be removed.
(Ord. 118, passed 6-10-2013)
§ 152.269 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (ADU).
   (A)   Intent. It is the intent of the Village of Pinckney to address the
need to provide and preserve affordable and secure housing for all the
population, while preserving the appearance and character of the village's
residential areas by permitting, as an accessory use, the creation of a
separate self-contained dwelling unit within, incidental and subordinate to, an
existing single-family residence. The creation of such accessory dwelling units
will promote the general welfare of the village, without increasing the number
of residential buildings.
   (B)   General requirements. No ADU shall be established prior to the
issuance of a land use permit for the ADU. The Zoning Administrator shall be
the approving body for all ADUs. The following regulations shall apply to all
accessory dwelling units whether on conforming or non-conforming lots:
      (1)   An ADU shall be established only on a lot on which a principal
dwelling exists. The splitting of a lot that results in an ADU on a different
lot than the principal dwelling to which it is accessory is prohibited.
      (2)   The accessory dwelling unit shall be a maximum of 40% of the gross
floor area of the principal structure, not to exceed 600 square feet.
      (3)   An ADU shall be established only on a lot owned by the occupant of
the principal dwelling; though upon construction of the ADU, the lot owner
shall reside in the principal dwelling or the ADU.
      (4)   The accessory dwelling unit shall have a maximum of two bedrooms.
      (5)   The occupancy of the accessory dwelling unit shall be no more than
four persons.
      (6)   Access to an attached accessory dwelling unit shall be limited to a
common entrance foyer or exterior entrance to be located on the side or rear of
the building.
      (7)   The principal residence and the accessory dwelling unit shall share
the same vehicular access to the property.
      (8)   The number of off-street parking spaces for the accessory dwelling
unit shall be not less than one and shall not block the required parking for
the main residence.
      (9)   All zoning district bulk and setback requirements shall apply to
the site (see § 152.044).
      (10)   In the case of an ADU that is not attached to the principal
dwelling, the ADU shall be located in the rear yard only.
      (11)   An ADU shall not be comprised of a mobile home or any device
designed for regular or periodic movement including vehicles and cargo
containers.
      (12)   No lot shall have more than one ADU on such lot and the lot shall
maintain one mailing address that shall service the ADU and principal dwelling.
      (13)   An ADU, and modifications to the principal dwelling to accommodate
an ADU, shall be of similar or better workmanship as the principal dwelling,
shall not detract from the appearance of the lot as a place of one residence
and shall be aesthetically compatible in appearance with other single-family
dwellings in the immediate area based on architectural design and exterior
materials.
      (14)   A deed restriction that runs with the land shall be filed with the
Register of Deeds prior to occupancy, and it shall incorporate the following
restrictions:
         (a)   The ADU may not be sold separately from the single-family
dwelling;
         (b)   The owner occupancy requirement shall be maintained; and
         (c)   The deed restriction will be in effect until the ADU is removed.
(Ord. 161, passed 8-8-2022)
§ 152.270 STORAGE CONTAINERS AS STORAGE BUILDINGS.
   (A)   It is the intent of this section to limit the placement and use of any
shipping containers that are or have been used for shipping on a railroad,
ship/boat, or road truck ("storage containers") as an accessory building or
storage building in order to protect the public health and safety and the
aesthetic quality of the Village of Pinckney.
   (B)   Storage containers may be utilized as a detached accessory structure
incidental to a principal structure subject to the following standards:
      (1)   Storage containers are allowed only in the R-1 and RTO zoning
districts on parcels greater than five acres.
      (2)   Only one storage container shall be permitted per parcel.
      (3)   Storage containers shall be located within the rear yard and shall
be set back at least ten feet from the side and rear property lines and at
least ten feet from the principal structure.
      (4)   A storage container as an accessory structure shall not exceed 200
square feet in area and eight and one-half feet in height.
      (5)   The exterior appearance of all storage containers shall be
maintained and absent of all rust, holes, and other evidence of damage.
      (6)   Storage containers shall not be utilized for or contain habitable
space.
      (7)   A storage container may not be used for the storage of toxic or
hazardous materials.
      (8)   Requests for a temporary use of a storage container or containers
will be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator to determine that adequate space
exists and that placement does not impact vehicular traffic. Storage
containers, at the option of the Zoning Administrator, may require temporary
screening and containment.
      (9)   The allowable number of temporary storage containers may be limited
by the Zoning Administrator based on demonstrated need, aesthetic impact on the
property, and Fire Department access.
      (10)   A temporary storage container may be placed on a paved or gravel
off-street surface in the front yard. In all cases, temporary storage
containers shall be set back at least 20 feet front the front property line and
ten feet from the side and rear property line.
      (11)   The use of a temporary storage container is permitted for not more
than 60 continuous or separate days. A one-time extension may be permitted by
the Zoning Administrator beyond the initial 60 days upon good cause shown if
such request is made to the Zoning Administrator prior to the expiration of the
initial period.
      (12)   A temporary storage container may be placed on a property with an
active building permit and must be removed no later than 12 days after the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy or the completion of construction.
(Ord. 163, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 152.271 ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Intent. It is the intent of the Village of Pinckney to promote the
effective and efficient use of alternative energy sources such as wind and
energy by regulating the placement, design, and installation of these systems
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of its residents.
   (B)   On-site wind energy systems (WES).
      (1)   On-site wind energy systems are designed to primarily serve the
needs of a home, small business, or any other existing or permitted use on a
parcel of land. These systems are permitted in all zoning districts, subject to
the requirements of this section and all county, state and federal regulations
and safety requirements as well as applicable industry standards.
      (2)   General requirements.
         (a)   Minimum lot area size. The minimum lot size for a property to be
eligible to have an on-site wind energy system shall be two acres.
         (b)   Setbacks. All wind energy systems must be setback from property
lines at a distance equal to or greater than one and one-half times the height
of the structure, measured from the base of the structure to the highest reach
of its blade.
         (c)   One wind energy device shall be permitted per lot and located in
the rear or side yard.
         (d)   Local, state and federal construction and electrical
requirements. On-site wind energy systems shall comply with all applicable
state construction and electrical codes and local building permit requirements.
The support system, footings and tower shall be constructed in accordance with
all applicable building codes governing structural integrity and wind loads.
         (e)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain the
appropriate FAA permits for the structure, or to obtain a determination of no
significant impact to air navigation from the FAA.
         (f)   In the case of a wind energy system to be interconnected with
the power grid of the local electric utility, the applicant shall provide proof
of written notice to the utility of the proposed interconnection and the
utility's response thereto. The applicant shall comply with all requirements of
the servicing utility if the wind energy system is interfaced with the utility
grid. The utility will install appropriate electric metering and the customer
will be required to install a disconnecting device adjacent to the electric
meter(s).
         (g)   The applicant must provide a copy of the manufacturer's material
safety data sheet(s) which shall include the type and quantity of all materials
used in the operation of all equipment including, but not limited to, all
lubricants and coolants.
         (h)   Braking system. The wind energy system shall have an automatic
braking, governing, or feathering system to prevent uncontrolled rotation or
over speeding.
         (i)   Lightning protection. The wind energy system shall have
lightning protection.
         (j)   Labeling. The following information shall be provided in a
visible, easily read, and easily accessible location:
            1.   Maximum power input (kilowatt-kW), rated voltage (volt-V), and
rated current output (ampere) of the generator, alternator, and the like. A
visible warning sigh of high voltage as required by the State Construction Code
shall be placed at the base of the structure;
            2.   Manufacturer's name and address, model number and serial
number;
            3.   Emergency and normal shutdown procedures; and
            4.   Emergency contact name and telephone number.
         (k)   Accessibility. Towers shall be designed and constructed in such
a manner that integrated tower climbing devices are a minimum of 12 feet above
the base of the tower and only accessible by using a separate climbing device.
         (l)   Visibility of guy wires. If an on-site wind energy system is
supported by guy wires, the wires shall be clearly visible to a height of at
least eight feet above the guy wire anchors.
         (m)   Color. Towers and blades shall be a non-reflective, non-
obtrusive neutral color such as white, off-white, or gray.
         (n)   Minimum ground clearance. For both horizontal and vertical axis
turbines, a wind energy system rotor shall be located on the tower or support
such that the minimum blade clearance above ground level is 15 feet.
         (o)   Noise. The maximum level of audible noise permitted to be
generated by a wind energy system shall be 50 decibels, as measured on the dBA
scale, measured at the property lines nearest the system. An application for a
wind energy system shall not be approved unless the applicant demonstrates that
the proposed project complies with all noise regulations.
         (p)   Placement. Wind energy systems shall be located in such as
manner so as to not generate shadow flicker on any habitable buildings.
         (q)   Removal. When a system has not been used for 180 days or more,
the removal of equipment or the cessation of operations (transmission of
electrical power) shall be required. The property owner shall immediately apply
for any required demolition or removal permits, proceed with, and complete the
demolition/removal. If the removal has not been lawfully completed within 60
days, and after at least 30 days written notice, the village may remove or
secure the removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with its
actual cost and reasonable administrative charge to be draw, collected and/or
enforced from or under the security posted at the time of application.
         (r)   Permit required. A land use permit is required per §
152.023.
   (C)   Commercial wind energy system (WES). Commercial wind energy systems on
any parcels located in any zoning district in the Village of Pinckney are
prohibited. This limitation is to protect the public health and safety and the
aesthetic quality of the Village of Pinckney.
   (D)   Solar energy systems. Building- or ground-mounted private solar energy
systems that generate up to but do not exceed the manufacturer's rating of 100
kW to primarily meet the needs of a home, small business, or any other existing
or permitted use on a parcel of land are permitted as a permitted accessory use
in all zoning districts, subject to the requirements of this section and all
county, state and federal regulations and safety requirements as well as
applicable industry standards.
      (1)   General requirements.
         (a)   The exterior surfaces of solar energy systems shall be generally
neutral in color and substantially non-reflective of light.
         (b)   A unit shall be installed or located such that reflected solar
radiation or glare shall not be directed onto adjacent building, properties or
roadways.
         (c)   Solar energy systems must be installed in compliance with the
National Electric Safety Code, the manufacturer's specifications, and all other
applicable codes. A copy of the manufacturer's installation and maintenance
instructions must be submitted for review.
         (d)   If the applicant's intent is to install a customer-owner system
that will be interconnected to the power grid, written evidence that the area's
electrical utility provider has been notified shall be submitted. Off-grid
systems are exempt from this requirement.
         (e)   A solar energy system shall be permanently and safely attached
to the building, structure, or ground. Proof of the safety and reliability of
the means of such attachment shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator/
Livingston County Building Department prior to installation.
         (f)   There shall be no signs on the unit, other than a sign or logo
identifying the manufacturer with an area no greater than three square feet,
and any necessary safety information signs.
      (2)   Building-mounted solar systems.
         (a)   Such system may only be attached to a principal building or an
accessory building serving the principal use such as a barn, garage, or shed.
         (b)   No part of the solar energy system erected on a roof shall
extend beyond the peak of the roof and not closer than three feet from the
edges of the roof or peak in order to maintain accessibility.
         (c)   If the solar energy system is mounted on a building in an area
other than the roof, no part of the system shall extend beyond the wall on
which it is mounted.
         (d)   No part of a solar energy system mounted on a roof shall extend
more than two feet above the surface of the roof. When such units are mounted
to a flat roof, they shall not project higher than three feet above the
building height and shall be screened with a wall at least one foot taller than
the unit. In no instance shall a roof-mounted unit exceed the maximum allowable
height for the zoning district in which it is located.
         (e)   A solar energy system shall be only of such weight as can safely
be supported by the structure. Proof thereof, in the form of certification by a
qualified person, shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator/Livingston
County Building Department prior to installation.
         (f)   A wall-mounted solar energy system shall not extend further than
ten feet from the building wall, may not extend into a required yard and may
not exceed the height of the building wall to which it is attached. Such units
may only be attached to one side or rear building façade.
         (g)   In the event that a roof or building mounted solar energy system
has been abandoned (not in operation) for a period of one year, it shall be
removed by the property owner within six months from the date of abandonment.
      (3)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems.
         (a)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be located only in the
rear yard and shall meet the side and rear yard setback requirements applicable
in the zoning district in which the solar energy system will be located.
         (b)   A ground-mounted solar energy system shall not exceed 15 feet in
height, measured from the ground at the base of the unit to the highest reach
of the solar panels.
         (c)   Ground-mounted solar energy systems may not occupy more than 5%
of the parcel upon which it is located up to 1,500 square feet.
         (d)   All power transmission lines shall be underground.
         (e)   There shall be a greenbelt screening around any ground-mounted
solar energy system and equipment associated with the system to obscure the
solar energy system from adjacent residences. The greenbelt shall consist of
shrubbery, trees or other noninvasive plant species that provide a visual
screen. In lieu of a planting greenbelt, a decorative fence (meeting the
requirements of this section applicable to fences) may be used.
         (f)   In the event that a ground-mounted solar energy system has been
abandoned (not in operation) for a period of one year, it shall be removed by
the property owner within six months from the date of abandonment.
   (E)   Commercial solar energy system. Commercial solar energy systems on any
parcels located in any zoning district in the Village of Pinckney is
prohibited. This limitation is to protect the public health and safety and the
aesthetic quality of the Village of Pinckney,
(Ord. 167, passed 1-9-2023)
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
§ 152.280 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish standards for off-
street parking and loading that result in safe, adequate and efficient vehicle
parking and delivery throughout the village.
   (B)   It is recognized that, due to the specific site conditions and
requirements of any given development, inflexible application of these
standards may result in development with too much or too little parking or
loading space.
   (C)   Too much parking will result in wasted space, community blight and
increased storm water runoff, flooding and water pollution.
   (D)   Too little parking may lead to traffic congestion or unauthorized
parking on adjacent streets or property.
   (E)   Flexibility and the efficient use of land is encouraged by allowing
shared off-street parking for multiple uses on the same lot and on separate
lots located near each other.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.281 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Compliance required.
      (1)   Off-street parking, loading and stacking facilities shall comply
with the requirements of the Village of Pinckney Technical Standards, Michigan
Construction Code and applicable road agencies.
      (2)   Off-street parking, vehicle loading and stacking facilities in
compliance with this subchapter shall be provided in all districts whenever:
         (a)   A new use or building is established; and
         (b)   An existing use or building is expanded or changed.
      (3)   Off-street parking and loading areas shall be landscaped in
compliance with §
152.331.
   (B)   Central Business District. To allow for design flexibility, the
Planning Commission may waive or modify the requirements of this subchapter for
off-street parking or loading in the Central Business District (CBD), upon
finding that all of the following criteria are met:
      (1)   Due to one or more unique characteristics of the property, such as
its size, shape, topography, location, existing structures or surroundings, the
strict application of off-street parking and loading requirements in this
subchapter will deprive the property owner of its reasonable use, as enjoyed by
other property owners in the CBD;
      (2)   The modification will not create a traffic hazard or any other
unsafe, undesirable condition. The applicant may be required to submit a
traffic study and/or other documented evidence of compliance with this
criterion; and
      (3)   The modification will be consistent with the purposes of the CBD
and this subchapter and will provide adequate parking for the proposed use(s).
   (C)   Zoning. Any lot used for off-street parking, vehicle loading or
stacking shall be zoned to allow the principal use(s) being served.
   (D)   Setbacks. Off-street parking, loading and stacking spaces shall be
setback from street lines and lot lines as required for structures in the
zoning district in which the spaces are located.
   (E)   Signs. Signs shall comply with §§
152.300 et seq.
   (F)   Landscaping. Landscaping and screening shall comply with §§
152.325 et seq.
   (G)   Lighting. Lighting shall comply with §
152.371(B).
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-2017; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-
2021)
§ 152.282 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   Use. Off-street parking shall be used only for the short-term storage
of licensed and operable vehicles. Off-street parking shall not be used for the
sale, servicing, repair, dismantling or long-term storage of any vehicle,
equipment or material. For the purposes of this requirement, SHORT-TERM shall
mean fewer than 24 consecutive hours and LONG-TERM shall mean 24 or more
consecutive hours.
   (B)   Location.
      (1)   Required off-street parking shall be located on the same lot or
within 300 feet of the use(s) being served.
      (2)   Off-street parking spaces that serve a multiple-family dwelling or
a commercial use shall be located in the rear yard or in a side yard to the
maximum extent practicable.
      (3)   Off-street parking spaces shall be at least five feet from any
principal building.
   (C)   Ownership. If off-street parking spaces are not under the same
ownership as the principal use(s) being served, evidence of the right to use
the off-street parking spaces shall be submitted with the application for site
plan approval. This evidence shall be in the form of a property easement, long-
term lease or other legally binding agreement between the owner of record and
joint users. The agreement shall clearly establish rights of use and
responsibility for ongoing maintenance and shall be recorded with the
Livingston County Register of Deeds before issuance of a land use permit. The
agreement shall require written notification by the lessee to the village at
least 14 days prior to the amendment or termination of the agreement.
   (D)   Dimensions.
      (1)   Individual parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet in width
and 20 feet in length. Where a parking space is against an edge, the vehicle
overhang may be credited as two feet, if abutting landscaping or abutting
sidewalk is at least seven feet wide.
      (2)   Traffic aisles within parking lots shall be a minimum width of 22
feet.
   (E)   Calculation. FLOOR AREA is defined in §
152.283. For the purpose of calculating off-street parking spaces, the
following rules shall apply:
      (1)   Mixed and shared uses. The total number of off-street parking
spaces shall be the sum of the required spaces for each individual use computed
separately.
      (2)   Students and employees. The Planning Commission shall determine the
number of employees and students based upon the largest possible number of
employees working on any single shift, the maximum student enrollment permitted
by the State of Michigan or the maximum building capacity.
      (3)   Fractions. Fractions of less than one-half shall be disregarded and
fractions of one-half or more shall be counted as one space.
      (4)   Barrier free parking. Barrier free parking facilities shall be
provided and designed in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) and Construction Code requirements. ADA required spaces may be excluded
from the minimum number of spaces required per §
152.283.
   (F)   Maximum. The number of off-street parking spaces provided to serve a
use shall not exceed the number of spaces required in §
152.283, except the Planning Commission may allow an increase of up to 50% at
its discretion.
   (G)   Reduced minimum. The Planning Commission may reduce the number of off-
street parking spaces required in §
152.283 by up to 25%, based upon a parking analysis submitted by the applicant.
      (1)   The parking analysis shall clearly demonstrate that fewer spaces
will result in a better design and more efficient use of land, or will
otherwise achieve an established goal within the Village Master Plan.
      (2)   Consideration shall be given to peak use, availability of car pool
and off-site parking, public transportation, pedestrian and bicycle access and
preservation of natural resources and community character.
      (3)   The parking analysis shall contain, at a minimum:
         (a)   Plans showing the location of all relevant uses and structures
and the location of roads, off-street parking, public transit and bicycle and
pedestrian facilities; and
         (b)   A schedule showing the maximum number of vehicles to be
accommodated during peak hours of operation. This schedule shall be based on
the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual, 6th Edition.
   (H)   Surface. Surfacing shall comply with the Village Technical Standards.
   (I)   Wheel guards. Boundary or perimeter areas shall be provided with wheel
or bumper guards or continuous curbing located so that no part of parked
vehicles will extend beyond the lot line or into any access aisle, maneuvering,
setback, pedestrian or landscaped area.
   (J)   Access.  All parking areas containing three or more parking spaces
shall be located and designed so that vehicles can enter and exit the parking
area without backing onto a public right-of-way.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-2017; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-
2021)
§ 152.283 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES.
   (A)   The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be as required
in this section.
   (B)   For uses not specifically mentioned in this section, the number of
required parking spaces shall comply with that of a similar use as determined
by the Planning Commission.
Land Use Minimum Number Parking Spaces
Residential
Land Use                                Minimum Number Parking Spaces
Residential
Single-family dwelling                  2 per dwelling unit
Two or multiple-family dwelling         1.5 per dwelling unit
Manufactured home park                  2 per dwelling unit
Rooming house                           1 per bedroom
Institutional
Home for the elderly                    1 per dwelling unit
Nursing home and hospital               1 per employee + 1 per 4 beds
Child care center                       1 per employee + 1 per 10 licensed
                                        child care slots
Elementary or middle school             1 per employee + 1 per 25 students
High school, trade school or higher     1 per employee + 1 per 10 students
education institution
Public building (including museum,      1 per 500 square foot floor area
library and post office)
Place of assembly (including religious  1 per 4 auditorium seats or 1 per 8
institution, funeral home, theater,     feet of bench or 1 per 50 square feet
auditorium, indoor or outdoor arena and of assembly area without fixed seats
private club)
Commercial
Office, all types                       1 per 300 square feet floor area
Personal service                        1 per 300 square feet floor area
Restaurant, all types                   1 per 75 square feet floor area
Retail store (including retail food     1 per 300 square feet floor area
store                                   supermarket and department store
Convenience store                       1 per 200 square feet floor area
Automobile service station              1 per 200 square feet floor area
Automobile repair service               1 per 500 square feet floor area
Automobile dealership                   1 per 350 square feet floor area
Bulk retail (including building, garden 1 per 600 square feet floor area
supplies)
Wholesale trade and warehousing         1 per 600 square feet floor area
Hotel, motel and bed and breakfast inn  1 per bedroom
 
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.284 OFF-STREET LOADING.
   (A)   Compliance required.  Off-street loading facilities shall be required
on the same lot as any use that involves the regular loading or unloading of
commercial vehicles.
   (B)   Use. Vehicle loading facilities shall not be used for the sale,
servicing, repair, dismantling or storage of any vehicle, equipment or material
and shall not be counted as an off-street parking space.
   (C)   Location. Off-street loading facilities shall not be located in the
front yard.
   (D)   Dimensions. Each loading space shall be at least ten feet in width and
30 feet in length, with 14 feet of height clearance.
   (E)   Minimum loading space.  FLOOR AREA is defined in §
152.267. The minimum number of off-street loading spaces shall be as follows:
 
Building Floor Area            Minimum Number Loading Spaces
Up to 2,000 square feet        None
2,000 to 20,000 square feet    1 space
20,000 to 100,000 square feet  1 space + 1 space for each 20,000 square feet in
                               excess of 20,000 square feet
100,000 to 500,000 square feet 5 spaces + 1 space for each 40,000 square feet
                               in excess of 100,000 square feet
100,000 to 500,000 square feet 15 spaces + 1 space for each 80,000 square feet
                               in excess of 500,000 square feet
 
   (F)   Waiver. The Planning Commission may reduce the number of off-street
loading spaces required in division (E) above upon finding that fewer spaces
will not result in traffic congestion, a safety hazard, a public nuisance or
undue encroachment upon neighboring property.
   (G)   Surface. Loading dock approaches shall be paved and have an asphalt or
concrete base so as to provide a permanent, durable and dustless surface.
   (H)   Access. Vehicle loading and unloading facilities shall be located and
designed so that vehicles can enter and exit without backing onto a public
right-of-way.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.285 DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES.
   (A)   Compliance required. All uses that provide drive-through facilities
for serving customers within their automobiles shall provide adequate off-
street stacking space within a defined drive-through lane.
   (B)   Dimensions. Each drive-through lane and stacking space shall be at
least ten feet in width. Each stacking space shall be 20 feet in length.
   (C)   Minimum stacking spaces. The minimum number of stacking spaces in each
drive-through lane shall be as follows. Stacking spaces shall be in addition to
the space at the service window.
 
Land Use                                   Stacking Spaces Per Service Lane
Bank, pharmacy, dry cleaner or similar use 4
Fast food restaurant                       6
Self service car wash                      3 at entry + 1 at exit
Automatic car wash                         6 at entry + 2 at exit
 
   (D)   Design standards.
      (1)   Clear identification and delineation between the drive-through and
parking areas shall be provided. Drive-through facilities shall be designed in
a manner that protects pedestrian and vehicular safety.
      (2)   All drive-through facilities shall provide a bypass lane that
allows vehicles to pass those waiting to be served and exit the premises.
      (3)   No vehicle stacking areas shall cross any maneuvering lane, drive,
sidewalk or public right-of-way.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021) Penalty, see §
152.999
SIGNS
§ 152.300 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate the location, size,
construction, and manner of display of signs and outdoor advertising in order
to minimize their harmful effects on the public health, safety, and welfare.
While this subchapter recognizes that signs and outdoor advertising are
necessary to promote commerce and public information, failure to regulate them
may lead to poor identification of individual businesses, deterioration and
blight of the business and residential areas of the village, conflicts between
different types of land use, and reduction in traffic safety to pedestrians and
motorists.
   (B)   To achieve its intended purpose, this subchapter has the following
objectives:
      (1)   To prevent the placement of signs in a manner that will conceal or
obscure signs or adjacent businesses;
      (2)   To keep the number of signs and sign messages at the level
reasonably necessary to identify a business and its products;
      (3)   To keep signs within a reasonable scale with respect to the
buildings they identify;
      (4)   To reduce visual distraction and obstructions to motorists
traveling along, entering, or leaving streets;
      (5)   To promote a quality manner of display which enhances the character
of the village;
      (6)   To prevent the proliferation of temporary signs which might promote
visual blight; and
      (7)   To eliminate the potential for any adverse affects on the
neighboring properties.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Am. Ord. 107, passed 12-12-2011; Ord. 173, passed
12-11-2023)
§ 152.301 PERMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to display, erect, relocate, or alter any sign
without obtaining a sign permit, except otherwise noted within this subchapter.
   (B)   A permit fee shall be paid in accordance with the schedule adopted by
the Village Council.
   (C)   A permit shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator only if the
proposed sign meets all requirements of this subchapter.
   (D)   When a sign permit has been issued by the village, it shall be
unlawful to change, modify, alter, or otherwise deviate from the terms or
conditions of said permit without prior approval of the Zoning Administrator. A
written record of such approval shall be entered upon the original permit
application and maintained in the files of the village.
   (E)   The application for a sign permit shall be made by the owner or tenant
of the property on which the sign is to be located, or his or her authorized
agent or sign contractor. Such applications shall be made in writing on forms
furnished by the village and shall be signed by the applicant.
   (F)   The application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by the
following plans and other information:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner or persons
entitled to possession of the sign and of the sign contractor or erector;
      (2)   The location by street address of the proposed sign structure;
      (3)   A plot plan showing the full dimensions of the sign, proposed copy
and graphics, and the location of the sign in relationship to all lot lines,
structures, easements, rights-of-way, and the edge of road and parking lot
pavement;
      (4)   Elevation and detail drawings showing colors and materials to be
used, and clearly demonstrating compliance with all of the standards in this
subchapter; and
      (5)   Any sign that uses electricity shall require an electrical permit
from the County Building Department, regardless of size.
   (G)   Expiration. Sign permits shall become null and void if the work for
which the permit was issued is not completed within six months of the date of
issue.
   (H)   Maintenance. No permit shall be required for the routine repair,
servicing, cleaning, or repainting of an existing sign message.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 82, passed 5-12-2008; Ord. 107, passed 12-12-
2011; Ord. 173, passed 12-11-2023) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.302 PERMITTED SIGNS IN ALL DISTRICTS.
   The following signs are permitted in all districts without a sign permit,
provided no sign shall be located within a public right-of-way, except as
noted, or located in a manner that distracts or obstructs the vision or
movement of motorists or pedestrians.
   (A)   Name and address signs. Nameplates containing only a resident's name
and address, and not exceeding two square feet in size.
   (B)   Directional signs. On-premise directional signs which indicate the
direction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow on private property.
Directional signs shall not exceed two square feet in size and six feet in
height, shall contain no advertising, and may be illuminated.
   (C)   Ingress and egress signs. One sign is permitted at each point of
ingress and one sign is permitted at each point of egress. The signs shall not
exceed two square feet in area and two feet in height, and shall be setback at
least five feet from the road right-of-way.
   (D)   Street numbers.
   (E)   Placards. No hunting, no fishing, no trespassing signs unless less
than two square feet in area and spaced no less than 100 feet apart.
   (F)   Landmark and historical markers. If a structure within the village has
been designated as a state historical site or listed in the National Register
of Historic Places, then a marker designating that fact, obtained from the
appropriate state or federal agency, shall be permitted in addition to any
other sign or signs which may lawfully be placed on the structure or the
property on which the structure is located.
   (G)   Interior signs. Signs in the interior of a building, with the
exception of window signs.
   (H)   Structural information signs. Names of buildings, dates of erection,
monument citations, commemorative tablets, and the like, when carved into
stone, concrete, or similar material or made of other permanent type
construction and made an integral part of the structure.
   (I)   Any sign that is not visible from a street, other public place, or an
adjacent property including, signs placed inside a structure or building that
are not visible or legible through windows or building openings.
   (J)   Flags on a permanent flagpole.
   (K)   Any sign erected and maintained by any government agency on public
property or within the public right of-way for the purpose of directing,
managing or regulating traffic is exempt from the provisions of this
subchapter. Such signs include, but are not limited to, street signs, traffic
signals, traffic safety signs, speed limit signs, city entry/welcome signs,
neighborhood identification signs, and directional signs.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 72, passed 4-4-2006; Ord. 75, passed 11-13-
2006; Ord.82, passed 5-12-2008; Ord. 107, passed 12-12-2011; Ord. 173, passed
12-11-2023) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.303 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs are prohibited in all districts, unless otherwise
provided for in this subchapter:
   (A)   Any sign constructed, maintained, or altered in a manner not in
compliance with this subchapter;
   (B)   Billboards;
   (C)   Roof signs;
   (D)   Beacons, strings of lights, pennants, spinners, or streamers used for
commercial purposes;
   (E)   Signs containing flashing, intermittent, or moving lights, or signs
with moving or revolving parts, or reflecting parts which may distract drivers;
   (F)   Signs which imitate traffic signals, traffic direction signs, or
similar traffic control devices, and signs which make use of words including
but not limited to "stop," "look," "danger," or any other words, phrases,
symbols, or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or
confuse traffic;
   (G)   Any sign that, by reason of the location, shape, color, or movement,
may obstruct the view of or be confused with any official traffic sign, signal,
or control device;
   (H)   Signs affixed to trees, rocks, shrubs, or similar natural features,
except signs denoting a site of historic significance;
   (I)   Signs other than those erected by a public agency which are located
within or overhang the public right-of-way or on public property, unless
otherwise specified herein;
   (J)   Temporary signs mounted upon trucks, vans, or other wheeled devices.
Signs permanently painted on or otherwise permanently displayed upon a vehicle,
licensed and operating on the public streets and highways, identifying the
owner's occupation or livelihood, shall be permitted;
   (K)   Any sign or sign structure which constitutes a hazard to public health
and safety due to inadequate maintenance;
   (L)   Any sign affixed to a light standard except for government agency
signs authorized under §
152.302(K).
   (M)   Any sign unlawfully installed, erected, or maintained.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 75, passed 11-13-2006; Ord. 107, passed 12-12-
2011; Ord. 173, passed 12-11-2023) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.304 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   All signs should be made of high-quality materials and design.
      (2)   Signs shall be in harmony and consistent with the architecture of
the building and relate to the features of the building.
      (3)   The design shall be consistent with the character of the
surrounding area.
      (4)   The sign shall not be a nuisance to any residential uses.
   (B)   Location.
      (1)   All signs must advertise a business or service on the premises upon
which the sign is located and to which the sign is accessory, unless otherwise
specified herein.
      (2)   No sign, or portion thereof, shall be closer than four feet to any
electric light pole, street lamp, or other public utility pole or standard.
      (3)   No sign, or portion thereof, shall be closer than 13 feet to any
electrical conductor without proof of approval by the public utility company.
      (4)   No sign shall obstruct any opening required for building
ventilation.
      (5)   No sign shall impede free entry or exit through any door, window,
or fire escape.
      (6)   No sign shall be located in, project into, or overhang a public
road right-of-way without the approval of the controlling government agency and
the Village Council.
      (7)   No sign shall in any way obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic,
or the view in any direction at a road intersection. The applicant shall submit
proof of compliance with this standard from the applicable road agencies.
   (C)   Illumination.
      (1)   No sign shall be illuminated by other than electrical means.
      (2)   The light from illuminated signs shall be directed and shielded in
a manner that will not interfere with vehicular traffic or the enjoyment and
use of adjacent properties.
      (3)   No sign may be erected which flashes, rotates, or has moving parts.
      (4)   Internal illumination shall be permitted under the following
circumstances:
         (a)   Individual back-lit letters which are silhouetted against softly
illuminated walls;
         (b)   Individual letters with translucent faces, containing soft
lighting elements inside each letter; and/or
         (c)   Metal-faced box signs with cut-out letters and soft-glow
fluorescent tubes.
      (5)   Only indirectly illuminated signs shall be allowed in any
residential district.
      (6)   Internally-illuminated plastic signs with dark-colored detachable
letters shall be strictly prohibited in all districts.
      (7)   Gas-filled light types (fluorescent) shall be allowed for indirect
illumination and when placed in such a manner that the tubes are not exposed to
view from any point along the roadway or sidewalk.
      (8)   Rear-illuminated (backlit) awnings are prohibited.
   (D)   Safety.
      (1)   All signs shall be erected in compliance with all applicable
building codes, and other applicable ordinances governing construction within
the village. In the event of conflict between this section and other laws, the
most restrictive shall govern.
      (2)   All signs shall be so placed as to not interfere with the
visibility or effectiveness of any official traffic sign or signal, driver
vision or pedestrian movement on any public sidewalk.
      (3)   No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to
obstruct firefighting or prevent free access to any door, window, or fire
escape.
      (4)   Corner clearance. Signs higher than 30 inches shall be prohibited
in the triangular area formed at the intersection of any two street right-of-
way lines (existing or proposed) by a straight line drawn between said right-
of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of
intersection. No sign shall be located in that area, or project into, or
overhang into the area.
      (5)   Every sign and sign structure shall be maintained in a safe
condition, in compliance with all applicable building and electrical codes and
this Code, including adequate protection against corrosion. If at any time the
Zoning Administrator determines that a sign or sign structure constitutes a
dangerous structure, the Zoning Administrator may require immediate action to
mitigate the danger, including demolition of the sign or sign structure.
      (6)   A sign or sign structure that is broken, torn, bent, has a broken,
bent, or damaged support, or is not reasonably level and plumb shall be
repaired or reinstalled in a manner prescribed by the Zoning Administrator.
      (7)   A sign or sign structure shall not have more than 20% of its area
covered with disfigured, cracked, rippled, or peeling material or paint for a
period of more than 30 consecutive days.
      (8)   A sign shall not have weeds, vines, or other vegetation growing
upon it in a manner that obstructs the view of the sign for a period of more
than 30 consecutive days.
      (9)   An illuminated sign shall not remain partially illuminated with a
failed light source for a period of more than 30 consecutive days.
      (10)   A sign structure now or hereafter existing which no longer
contains a sign shall be removed.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 95, passed 6-28-2010; Ord. 107, passed 12-12-
2011; Ord. 173, passed 12-11-2023) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.305 MISCELLANEOUS PERMITTED SIGNS.
   (A)   Signs for outdoor sales of automobiles or vehicles. Permits are not
required for automobile or vehicle sales subject to the following. No person
shall place a sign on a motor vehicle offered for sale or trade except as
follows:
      (1)   Properly licensed auto dealerships and properly licensed used car
lots may place signs on motor vehicles located on the dealership lot. Banners
and flags are prohibited.
      (2)   The owner of a motor vehicle may place a sign on or within the
vehicle provided:
         (a)   The vehicle is located only on the vehicle owner's residential
property; and
         (b)   Not more than one vehicle with a sign is displayed on the
residential property.
         (c)   The owner of a non-residential property may place or allow to be
placed a sign on or within the vehicle provide that not more than one vehicle
is displayed on the nonresidential property.
   (B)   Time-temperature-date devices. Clocks and thermometers may be
incorporated in to any sign provided such device does not exceed nine square
feet.
   (C)   Menuboard signs for drive-in and drive-through businesses.
      (1)   The Planning Commission, in its sole discretion, may approve up to
two menuboards upon determination that they are integral to the nature of the
business.
      (2)   Each menuboard shall not exceed seven feet in height.
      (3)   One menuboard (in stacking lane) shall not exceed 16 square feet
and the other (at the speaker) shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.
      (4)   The area of the menuboard is exclusive of the structure's framing.
      (5)   All menuboards shall be single-sided.
      (6)   No menuboard may be located within the required front yard and
between 20 and 40 feet from any parcel perimeter.
      (7)   Only up to four square feet of the menuboard shall include digital/
electronic signage.
      (8)   The Planning Commission may consider a modified sign area, subject
to the following:
         (a)   Only one of the menuboards may be increased in area;
         (b)   The menuboard is completely screened from the roadway; and
         (c)   Under no circumstances shall the menuboard exceed 48 square feet
in area.
   (D)   Off-premise directional signs. Off-premise directional signs directing
vehicular traffic to a church, governmental building, public parks and
recreational facilities, public hospitals, or educational institutions may be
permitted in all districts subject to the following standards:
      (1)   No more than two signs per use shall be permitted.
      (2)   The size of an off-premise directional sign shall not exceed two
square feet in size.
      (3)   The height of an off-premise directional sign shall be no less than
three feet nor exceed six feet. However, variations in height may be granted to
accommodate vehicular visibility to avoid obstruction to visibility.
      (4)   Illumination shall not be permitted.
      (5)   Permission of the property owner where the proposed sign is to be
located or a right-of-way permit from the applicable road agency must be
provided.
   (E)   Interior window signs.
      (1)   Window sign means any sign, excluding the posting of hours of
operation and/or street and building address, which is painted or mounted onto
a window pane, or which is hung directly inside the window with the purpose or
effect of identifying any premises from the sidewalk or street.
      (2)   Window signs shall not exceed more than 30% percent of each window
area in which they are displayed.
      (3)   Non-temporary signs hung inside windows shall be made of clear
materials, including but not limited to transparent plastic, with lettering
painted or attached to them, with all hours of operation, credit card and
address signs being exempt.
      (4)   Window signs do not require sign permits, nor count in the
calculation of total building signage permitted.
      (5)   Permanent and/or illuminated window signs require a permit and
application.
   (F)   Mural signs. When a mural or graphic includes identification of an
establishment or specific services, goods or products, or a representation of
the types of services, goods, or products provided on the site, the mural area
will count towards the total permitted wall sign area. Murals are subject to
special land approval and the following standards:
      (1)   No mural may be placed on any building or structure that includes
nonconforming signs.
      (2)   Only one wall, façade, or surface of a building or structure may be
used for a mural.
      (3)   A wall, façade, or surface that is used for a mural pertaining to
the business on which it is located shall be counted as one sign. A mural will
count towards the total wall signage allowed for the business; however, the
Planning Commission in its sole discretion may permit murals of larger size.
Larger murals shall be permitted when determined to demonstrate at least one of
the following:
         (a)   Accentuates the historic features of the building;
         (b)   Masks an unattractive building façade;
         (c)   Creates an aesthetically pleasing amenity; or
         (d)   Superior in aesthetics to an attached wall sign.
      (4)   The owner of record of the building or structure on which the
proposed mural is to be placed shall, in writing, consent to the placement of
said mural on the property, and shall agree to restore the wall, façade, or
surface upon which the mural is placed to its prior existing condition if and
at such time the mural is not maintained by the applicant. The permit
application shall include a statement detailing the applicant's plans for the
maintenance of the mural.
      (5)   In the review of the special land use, the Planning Commission
shall grant approval only if the following criteria are met:
         (a)   The placing of the proposed mural at the location selected by
the applicant would not constitute a significant traffic safety hazard.
         (b)   Neither the mural, nor the placement of the mural, would
endanger the public health, safety, or general welfare.
         (c)   Neither the mural, nor the placement of the mural, would be
injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity
of the proposed location.
   (G)   Electronic message signs include any sign that utilizes computer-
generated messages or some other electronic means of changing copy. These signs
include displays using incandescent lamps, LEDs, and LCDs. Electronic message
signs shall only be permitted to be incorporated in a freestanding sign within
the SBD (Secondary Business District) subject to the following:
      (1)   No such sign shall exceed a brightness level of 0.5 foot candles
above ambient light at a residential lot line or one foot candle at a
nonresidential lot line.
      (2)   No such sign shall display an illuminative brightness of such
intensity or brilliance that it impairs the vision or endangers the safety and
welfare of any pedestrian, cyclist, or person operating a motor vehicle.
      (3)   Each sign shall have a functioning ambient light monitor and
automatic dimming equipment.
      (4)   No electronic message sign shall be located within 50 feet of the
driving surface of a signalized intersection except for the sole purpose for
the display of gas prices.
      (5)   The transition or change sequence of any image or display of an
electronic message sign shall appear instantaneous as perceived by the human
eye without any special effects. Such sign shall not exhibit any
characteristics of a moving or flashing sign as defined herein.
      (6)   Electronic message signs shall not change more than once per
minute.
      (7)   Each electronic message shall be complete in itself and shall not
continue on a subsequent message.
      (8)   No such sign shall resemble or simulate any warning or danger
signal, or any official traffic control device, sign, signal or light or have
the brilliance or intensity that will interfere with any official traffic sign,
device or signal.
      (9)   All electronic message signs must be a minimum of 100 feet from any
residential structure and the changeable copy portion of the sign shall be
turned off or have a static (non-changing) display between the hours of 11:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
      (10)   No electronic message sign shall be permitted to operate unless it
is equipped to default to an unlit black screen when more than 50% of its light
source fails or its light sources otherwise are not displaying normally.
      (11)   An electronic message sign shall not include any audio message or
audible sound.
   (H)   Entranceway sign. A sign that identifies the name of a residential
subdivision or development located at the main entranceways to the subdivision
or development is permitted with the approval of the Planning Commission. At
the Planning Commission's discretion, a decorative masonry entranceway
structure shall be permitted to be located either within a boulevard of a
street leading into the residential development or upon a private easement
granted to a subdivision association (or similar perpetual entity) pertaining
to property near the entrance to the development. The subdivision association
(or similar entity) shall have the responsibility for maintaining the
entranceway structure and sign. Such structure shall comply with applicable
corner clearance requirements; shall, if located within a boulevard, be set
back at least 12 feet measured from the extended right-of-way line of the
street perpendicular to the boulevard; and shall not exceed six feet in height
without approval of the Planning Commission. An agreement providing for the
maintenance of the structure in recordable form satisfactory to the Village
Attorney shall be furnished prior to erection of the structure.
(Ord. 107, passed 12-12-2011; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 173, passed 12-
11-2023) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.306 PERMITTED GROUND SIGNS.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Two ground signs shall be permitted per premise which has frontage
on two public roads. One sign shall not exceed the area requirements set forth
herein. The second sign shall not exceed 50% of the area requirements set forth
herein.
      (2)   A ground sign shall have a setback of five feet from a public road
right-of-way and a setback distance equal to the height of the sign from all
other property boundaries.
      (3)   Height. The height of a ground sign shall be computed as the
vertical distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the
highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be
the lower of:
         (a)   Existing grade prior to construction; or
         (b)   The newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any
filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purposes of locating
the sign.
      (4)   Area. Area of the sign shall include the total area within any
circle, triangle, rectangle or other geometric shape enclosing the extreme
limits of writing, representation, emblem or any similar figure, together with
any frame or other material forming an integral part of the display or used to
differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed, and is
further calculated as follows:
         (a)   Single face sign. One square foot per one linear foot of road
frontage, total not to exceed the total maximum area per side as listed in
Table 2 below.
         (b)   Multi-faced signs. One square foot per one linear foot of road
frontage, total not to exceed the total area maximum as listed in Table 2
below.
   (B)   Multiple tenants. One ground sign stating the name of a business
center and major tenants therein may be erected for a shopping center, office
park, industrial park or other integrated group of stores, commercial
buildings, office buildings or industrial buildings in the CBD, SBD and RTO
Districts. The sign area shall not exceed 50 square feet in total area. Such
signs may be up to eight feet in height. If the lot fronts on two or more
collector or arterial streets, one such sign may be permitted for each
frontage.
   (C)   Specific requirements. Ground signs shall be permitted by district in
accordance with the following requirements.
 
TABLE 1
GROUND SIGNS PERMITTED BY DISTRICT
District       Height Single Faced Sign; Per Side  Total Max Area Two or More
                      (max)                        Faced
CBD and SBD    8 feet 25 square feet               50 square feet
ROB and O      5 feet 18 square feet               36 square feet
RTO and PL     8 feet 16 square feet               32 square feet
R1, R2, R3, R4 4 feet 6 square feet                12 square feet
 
   (D)   Signs requiring special land use approval. The Planning Commission may
consider a sign that is greater than the maximum height and area requirements
or less than the minimum setback requirements as a special land use. In review
of a special land use, the Planning Commission shall consider the standards set
forth in §
152.240 and the following:
      (1)   The standards set forth in §§
152.301 and
152.304;
      (2)   The size, shape, and topography of the property;
      (3)   The relationship of the sign to neighboring properties and signs;
and
      (4)   The relationship to and visibility from the public street where the
property is located.
(Ord. 107, passed 12-12-2011; Ord. 173, passed 12-11-2023) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.307 RESERVED.
§ 152.308 PERMITTED WALL SIGNS.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   No wall sign shall be erected to extend above the top of the wall
to which it is attached, nor extend beyond the ends of the wall to which it is
attached. Signs erected on the vertical portion of the mansard roof are
considered to be wall signs.
      (2)   All wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to the
building by means of metal anchors, bolts, or expansion screws, and in
accordance with the Building Code. In no case shall any wall sign be secured
with wire, straps of wood, or nails.
      (3)   For buildings with distinct and separate uses, separate wall signs
shall be permitted for each such use. However, the total allowable square
footage shall not exceed the maximum allowable square footage specified for
each district.
      (4)   If a building faces two separate roads, one wall sign may be
permitted facing each road, and the total allowable square footage of all wall
signs shall not exceed the maximum allowable square footage specified for each
district in Table 2 below.
   (B)   Specific requirements. Wall signs shall be permitted by the district
in accordance with the following requirements.
 
TABLE 2
WALL SIGNS PERMITTED BY DISTRICT
District              Maximum Height Sign Message Area (max.)
                                     1 foot for each lineal foot of building
CBD and SBD Districts 6 feet         frontage not to exceed a total of 100
                                     square feet
                                     1 square foot for each lineal foot of
ROB and O District    4 feet         building frontage not to exceed a total of
                                     40 square feet
                                     1 square foot for each lineal foot of
RTO and PL Districts  4 feet         building frontage not to exceed a total of
                                     50 square feet
                                     square foot for each lineal foot of
R1, R2, R3 and R4     4 feet         building frontage not to exceed a total of
                                     20 square feet
 
   (C)   Wall signs requiring special land use approval. The Planning
Commission may consider a sign that is greater than the maximum area
requirement as a special land use. In review of a special land use, the
Planning Commission shall consider the standards set forth in §
152.240 and the following:
      (1)   The standards set forth in §§
152.301 and
152.304;
      (2)   The size, shape, and topography of the property;
      (3)   The relationship of the sign to neighboring properties and signs;
and
      (4)   The relationship to and visibility from the public street where the
property is located.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 75, passed 11-13-2006; Ord. 95, passed 6-28-
2010; Ord. 107, passed 12-12-2011; Ord. 173, passed 12-11-2023) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.309 PERMITTED PROJECTING OR SUSPENDED SIGNS.
   (A)   Projecting and suspended signs shall be permitted in CBD, Central
Business Districts.
   (B)   The surface area of the projecting or suspended sign shall not exceed
six square feet on each side or a total of 12 square feet. The total square
feet of signage (both sides) shall be subtracted from the total allowable wall
signage square footage for the district.
   (C)   The bottom of the projecting or suspended sign shall be a minimum of
eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk or ground area, or otherwise be
located so as not to interfere with pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 107, passed 12-12-2011; Ord. 173, passed 12-
11-2023) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.310 PERMITTED TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   The following temporary signs shall be permitted in accordance with the
regulations herein. Any illegally placed signs may be removed. Signs that are
removed by the village will be kept for seven days at Village Hall and
discarded if they remain unclaimed.
   (A)   All temporary signs:
      (1)   Shall be on private property only with property owner permission;
      (2)   Shall be non-illuminated;
      (3)   Shall be made of water-resistant materials;
      (4)   Shall not be located in a public right-of-way and located and
designed to avoid interference with or distraction to vehicular and pedestrian
traffic; and
      (5)   Streamers, flags, and the like are strictly prohibited.
   (B)   Specific requirements. Temporary signs shall be permitted by the
district in accordance with the following requirements.
TABLE 3
TEMPORARY SIGNS PERMITTED BY DISTRICT
                                 Single Faced Per Side  Total Max Area Sign;
District Number Permitted Height (max) Per Sign         Two or More Faced Per
                                                        Sign
TABLE 3
TEMPORARY SIGNS PERMITTED BY DISTRICT
                                          Single Faced Per    Total Max Area
District       Number Permitted    Height Side (max) Per Sign Sign; Two or More
                                                              Faced Per Sign
               1 portable sidewalk
CBD            sign per ground     4 feet 6 square feet       12 square feet
               floor commercial
               use
SBD            4 per parcel        4 feet 6 square feet       12 square feet
ROB and O      4 per parcel        4 feet 6 square feet       12 square feet
RTO            4 per parcel        4 feet 6 square feet       12 square feet
PL             1 per parcel        6 feet 25 square feet      50 square feet
R1, R2, R3, R4 14 per parcel       4 feet 6 square feet       12 square feet
 
   (C)   Portable sidewalk signs are subject to the following:
      (1)   The sign shall be removed when weather conditions create
potentially hazardous conditions.
      (2)   The sign shall be located directly in front of the building it
represents. The sign shall also be located on the building side of the sidewalk
in such a manner that it is not in the pedestrian clear path of travel area.
      (3)   No sign referring to off-premise locations shall be permitted.
      (4)   Sidewalk signs shall be removed daily at the close of business
hours.
   (D)   Real estate signs in all districts.
      (1)   The sign shall be removed when weather conditions create
potentially hazardous conditions.
      (2)   For all residential developments involving the sale, rental or
leasing of multiple individual lots and/or dwelling units, one freestanding
sign shall be permitted per each entrance of the development advertising the
sale of such lots and/or dwelling units (including weekend open house signs).
Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and a height of 12 feet.
      (3)   All weekend open house signs may be posted no more than 24 hours
before the open house and shall be removed within four hours following the open
house. One additional (off-site) sign is allowed on private property.
   (E)   Community and civic events.
      (1)   The sign shall be removed when weather conditions create
potentially hazardous conditions.
      (2)   Permission to display a promotional banner or sign for civic or
charitable activity across M 36 must be authorized by the Zoning Administrator
and Village Council. Appropriate conditions can be placed on the granting of
the permit, including but not limited to duration, size, location, and the
like. Requests for placement location must be made in writing to the Zoning
Administrator two weeks prior to placement of the sign.
   (F)   Any temporary sign relating to a specific event must be removed within
24 hours after the close of the event.
   (G)   Any sign that has become faded, torn or has become unsightly shall be
removed immediately.
(Ord. 107, passed 12-12-2011; Ord. 173, passed 12-11-2023) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.311 ABANDONED SIGNS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ABANDONED SIGN.
         (a)   Any sign that does not display a well-maintained message for 14
consecutive days;
         (b)   Any sign for which the owner cannot be located at the owner's
last address as reflected in the records of the village; or
         (c)   Any sign no longer fully supported by the structure designed to
support the sign, for a consecutive 30-day period.
   (B)   Illegal abandoned signs. Any sign abandoned for 14 days shall become
illegal. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether a sign is abandoned.
The sign owner shall be notified of its illegal status and shall have 30 days
from the date of notice to bring the sign into compliance with this chapter or
remove it. After this period, the village may remove the sign at the owner's
expense.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 107, passed 12-12-2011; Ord. 173, passed 12-
11-2023) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.312 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   Nonconforming signs shall comply with §
152.419(E).
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 107, passed 12-12-2011; Ord. 173, passed 12-
11-2023) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.313 REGULATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Signs in violation of the regulations in this subchapter will be enforced by
the Zoning Administrator or designee and subject to
Chapter 131 of this code.
(Ord. 173, passed 12-11-2023)
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
§ 152.325 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to: enhance the appearance and value of
the community, buffer conflicting land uses, minimize noise, air, light, soil
and water pollution, divide large expanses of pavement, define and shade
pedestrian and parking areas and encourage the preservation of natural
vegetation and existing trees.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.326 APPLICATION.
   No final site plan required by §§
152.385 et seq. shall be approved unless it complies with all of the
landscaping and screening standards set forth herein.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.327 LANDSCAPE PLANS.
   (A)   A separate, detailed landscape plan shall be submitted with any final
site plan required by §§
152.385 et seq.
   (B)   For the purposes of this subchapter, breast height shall be measured
vertically along the main stem and shall be four and one-half feet above grade.
   (C)   The landscape plan shall be drawn at a scale in accordance with site
plan general application standards found in §
152.388. The plans shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
following items:
      (1)   Location and description of existing trees to be preserved,
relocated or removed, including species and diameter at breast height. Trees to
be preserved shall be clearly labeled “to remain” and tree protection measures
shall be shown on the landscape plan;
      (2)   Location and description of trees and shrubs to be planted,
including common name, species (deciduous or evergreen), root type (shallow or
deep), height, diameter at breast height and size of root ball and/or
container;
      (3)   Location and description of ground cover and method of planting
(sod, plugs, sprigs or seeds);
      (4)   Location, dimensions and description of landscaped buffer areas,
berms and landscape parking islands;
      (5)   The location and dimensions of walls, fences and outdoor dumpster
enclosures including typical elevation and vertical sections showing height and
materials;
      (6)   The location and dimensions of common open spaces and recreational
areas, proposed improvements and maintenance provisions for the areas;
      (7)   Construction details to resolve specific site conditions, such as
drainage, culverts, soil erosion control measures, walls and/or tree wells;
      (8)   Details in either text or drawing form to ensure proper
installation and establishment of plant materials as prescribed by the American
Nurseryman Standards; and
      (9)   Detailed description of the ongoing landscape maintenance program.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 152.328 GENERAL LANDSCAPE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Existing vegetation.
      (1)   Existing vegetation shall not be removed or disturbed until the
Village of Pinckney has approved the required landscape plan, final site plan
and land use permit.
      (2)   Existing, healthy, native vegetation shall be preserved to the
maximum degree practical, especially trees eight inches or more in diameter at
breast height.
      (3)   Planting requirements may be waived if the existing vegetation to
be retained on the site meets or exceeds the standards set forth in this
subchapter.
   (B)   Quality. Plant materials shall be of generally acceptable varieties
and species, free from insects and diseases, hardy to southeast Michigan and
shall conform to the current minimum standards of the American Association of
Nurserymen.
   (C)   Composition.
      (1)   Plantings shall be clustered and staggered rather than situated in
straight rows for interest and variety unless the placement is an integral part
of a design element, such as an alley of trees.
      (2)   A mixture of plant materials is recommended as a protective measure
against insect and disease infestation. However, a limited mix of hardy species
is recommended rather than a large number of different species to produce a
more cohesive and orderly design.
   (D)   Ground cover. All landscaped areas that do not contain trees, shrubs
or planting beds shall be covered with living ground cover (including grass)
and/or organic mulch. Stone or aggregate shall not be accepted as a ground
cover. Ground cover shall be planted in sufficient quantity to present a
finished appearance within one growing season and shall not exceed 18 inches in
height at maturity.
   (E)   Berms.
      (1)   Height. Berms shall be at least two and one-half feet in height and
no more than five feet in height, as measured on the side of the proposed berm
having the highest finished grade.
      (2)   Side slopes. Side slopes shall be no steeper than one vertical foot
for every three horizontal feet, and shall be designed and planted to prevent
erosion. Side slopes shall be planted with naturalized groupings as required
for landscape buffers herein.
      (3)   Shape. Berms shall be constructed with a rounded surface at least
two feet in width at the highest point and extending the length of the berm. In
general, the shape of berms shall appear to be as natural as possible.
   (F)   Visibility at road intersections. All plant materials and structural
landscape elements within a vision clearance area shall comply with §
152.261(E).
   (G)   Curb stops. A curb or wheelstop may be required along interior parking
lot landscape islands, perimeter landscape strips and landscapes adjacent to
road rights-of-way to prevent vehicles from damaging plants and structural
landscape elements.
   (H)   Dumpsters. Dumpsters shall be located and screened in accordance with
§
152.262(M).
   (I)   Inspection. It shall be the property owner or developer's
responsibility to request a landscape inspection by the Zoning Administrator
within ten to 14 months after land use permit approval, to assure full
compliance with the approved site plan.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.329 LANDSCAPED BUFFER AREAS.
   (A)   Application. On any site in a multiple-family residential or
commercial use, a landscaped buffer area in compliance with this subchapter
shall be provided as follows. A landscaped buffer area at least six feet in
width shall be provided along all lot lines that abut a residential district or
use.
   (B)   Design standards.
      (1)   The landscaped buffer area shall provide a visual screen that is at
least six feet high and 80% opaque along its entire length. Compliance with
this standard shall be determined based upon reasonably anticipated growth
within three years of planting.
      (2)   At least 50% of the trees within the buffer area shall be
evergreen.
      (3)   The landscaped buffer area shall be planted with one of the
following:
         (a)   Existing vegetation in conformance with division (B)(1) above;
         (b)   Existing vegetation augmented with evergreen plantings;
         (c)   A solid hedge of evergreen trees and/or shrubs; and
         (d)   Naturalized groupings of plant materials, which contain a
mixture of trees and shrubs.
   (C)   Additional screening. The Planning Commission may determine that
additional screening is required to effectively buffer more intense or
conflicting land uses. To achieve this objective the Planning Commission may,
at its discretion, also require the following. A berm, wall and/or fence, in
addition to the trees and shrubs required above.
   (D)   Walls and fences.
      (1)   Landscaped buffer walls and fences. Landscaped buffer walls and
fences shall be:
         (a)   Located further from the lot line than the required landscaping,
which shall be planted between the wall or fence and lot line;
         (b)   At least three feet in height but no more than six feet in
height;
         (c)   Constructed of brick, stone, redwood, cedar, or No. 1 pressure-
treated wood, vinyl or other materials approved by the Planning Commission or
Zoning Administrator, but chain link fences shall not be permitted for
screening purposes; and
         (d)   Otherwise in compliance with §
152.263(C).
      (2)   Ornamental fences. Fences of an ornamental nature shall be a
maximum of 36 inches, provided that adequate vision clearance is provided, as
required in §
152.261(E). Ornamental fences shall be constructed of a design including post
and rail, picket, or other types, as approved by the Planning Commission or
Zoning Administrator and materials including redwood, cedar, or No.1 pressure-
treated wood, vinyl, iron, steel, brick, stone, or other materials approved by
the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator. The fences shall be in
compliance with §
152.263(C).
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 124, passed 5-12-2014) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.330 FOUNDATION PLANTINGS.
   Foundation plantings shall be provided along all sides of buildings that
face a public right-of-way or a parking lot used by the public.
   (A)   Planting areas shall extend at least six feet from the face of the
building and contain a mixture of trees and shrubs.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may reduce or waive this requirement upon
finding that full compliance is impractical due to the use, location of
delivery areas and/or site layout.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.331 LANDSCAPING ADJACENT TO ROADS.
   All non-residential developments shall include one tree and five shrubs per
30 lineal feet or road frontage. Trees are not required to be evenly spaced and
may be clustered. The required landscaping adjacent to public and private
roadways shall be located on private property within a planting strip a minimum
of ten feet adjacent to the road right-of-way.
(Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 152.332 LANDSCAPING OFF-STREET PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   Interior parking lot landscaping. Separate landscaped islands shall be
provided within off-street parking lots, so as to break up the broad expanse of
pavement, provide shade and guide vehicular and
pedestrian circulation and beautify the village. Unless modified in accordance
with §
152.334, off-street parking lots with 50 or more individual parking spaces
shall comply with the following:
      (1)   There shall be at least one tree planted within the interior of the
parking lot for every eight parking spaces, or fraction thereof;
      (2)   Landscaped islands shall be:
         (a)   At least 150 feet in area, as measured from the outside curb
edge;
         (b)   Planted with at least one large deciduous tree;
         (c)   Located so that no single parking space is more than 45 feet
from a landscaped island; and
         (d)   Completely surrounded with at least a four-inch concrete or
bituminous curb.
      (3)   A minimum distance of three feet from the backside of the curb and
the proposed landscape plantings shall be provided.
   (B)   Perimeter parking lot landscaping. Landscaped buffer areas shall
surround the perimeter of off-street parking areas in compliance with §
152.329.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 152.333 TREE AND SHRUB STANDARDS.
    (A)   Large evergreen trees. Shall be at least six feet in height.
Permitted trees include:
      (1)   Spruce;
      (2)   Fir;
      (3)   Hemlock; and
      (4)   Pine.
   (B)   Large deciduous canopy trees. Shall be at least two and one-half
inches in diameter at breast height. Permitted trees include:
      (1)   Oak;
      (2)   Maple;
      (3)   Beech;
      (4)   Linden;
      (5)   Birch;
      (6)   Honey Locust (seedless, thornless);
      (7)   Sycamore; and
      (8)   Ginko (male only).
   (C)   Small deciduous ornamental trees. Shall be at least one and three-
quarter inches in diameter at breast height. Permitted trees include:
      (1)   Dogwood;
      (2)   Cherry;
      (3)   Pear;
      (4)   Hawthorn;
      (5)   Redbud;
      (6)   Magnolia;
      (7)   Crabapple;
      (8)   Serviceberry; and
      (9)   Hornbeam.
   (D)   Narrow evergreen trees. Shall be at least three and one-half feet in
height. Permitted trees include:
      (1)   Red Cedar;
      (2)   Hinoki Cypress;
      (3)   Juniper; and
      (4)   Arborvitae.
   (E)   Shrubs. Shall be at least two feet in height at the time of planting
and at least three feet in height within three years. Permitted shrubs include:
      (1)   Yew;
      (2)   Spruce;
      (3)   Juniper;
      (4)   Mugo Pine;
      (5)   Euonymous;
      (6)   Boxwood;
      (7)   Honeysuckle;
      (8)   Lilac;
      (9)   Sumac;
      (10)   Syracantha;
      (11)   Cotoneaster;
      (12)   Flowering Quince;
      (13)   Viburnum;
      (14)   Spirea;
      (15)   Privet; and
      (16)    Potentilla.
   (F)   Plant substitutions. The Zoning Administrator may approve revisions to
proposed plant species due to lack of availability or seasonal planting
problems, provided the alternative plantings fully meet the purpose and
provisions of this subchapter.
   (G)   Prohibited plant materials. The following trees are not permitted as
new plantings for required landscaping: Box Elder, Poplar, Willow, Tree of
Heaven, Ash and Catalpa. Furthermore, the Planning Commission reserves the
right to exclude other species when their use would not contribute to the goals
of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 152.334 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Performance guarantee. To insure full compliance with this subchapter
and completion of landscape improvements, the Planning Commission or Village
Council may require that a performance guarantee be deposited with the Village
Clerk, in accordance with §
152.026.
      (1)   The amount of the performance guarantee shall be 125% of the
estimated cost of the improvements for which the guarantee is required. The
Zoning Administrator shall determine the estimated cost of the improvements
based upon a written estimate provided by the applicant from a reputable local
nursery.
      (2)   A maintenance bond for an amount not less than 10% of the total
performance guarantee may be required for a period of at least one year after
installation of landscape materials to insure proper maintenance and
replacement, if necessary. This condition may also be met with a cash deposit
of 10% of the total performance guarantee. This amount shall be released to the
applicant upon certification by the Zoning Administrator that all landscape
materials are being maintained in good condition.
   (B)   Installation. Plant installation shall comply with the standards in
the most recent edition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI
Z60.1), published by the American Nursery and Landscape Association.
   (C)   Maintenance. The property owner shall maintain all landscaping in a
healthy condition, free from refuse and debris. All landscaped areas shall be
irrigated with a readily available and acceptable water supply. Underground
sprinkler systems shall be installed, used and maintained to insure the proper
irrigation of all plant materials on the site.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 152.335 WAIVERS AND MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   To allow for design flexibility, the Planning Commission may waive or
modify the requirements of this subchapter at the time of preliminary site plan
review, upon finding that the following criteria are met:
      (1)   The modification will be consistent with the purpose of this
subchapter and will result in an equally effective or superior landscape
design;
      (2)   Due to one or more unique characteristics of the property, such as
its size, shape, topography, location, existing buildings or surroundings, the
strict application of this subchapter will deprive the property owner of its
reasonable use, as enjoyed by other property owners in the same zoning
district;
      (3)   Strict application of this subchapter will result in a loss of
existing parking spaces required by §§
152.280 et seq., where the parking does not abut a residential district or use;
and
      (4)   Existing vegetation, landscaping and structures are located in such
a way that the addition of the required landscaping would be detrimental to
plant health or otherwise create undesirable conditions.
   (B)   In granting an adjustment, the Planning Commission may attach the
conditions of approval, as it may deem reasonable.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 152.336 NONCONFORMING SITES.
   Landscape elements that are shown on site plans approved prior to the
effective date of this chapter may be maintained in accordance with §§
152.415 et seq.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
RESIDENTIAL OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT
§ 152.350 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to allow flexibility in residential lot
size, site design and housing type, in order to encourage a more creative and
efficient use of land than conventionally allowed within Low Density
Residential (R1), Medium Density Residential (R2) and High Density Residential
(R3) Districts, and to achieve the following objectives:
   (A)   Preserve village character, natural resources and open space;
   (B)   Create usable, recognizable common conservation and recreation areas;
   (C)   Provide a diversity of high quality housing types;
   (D)   Develop land and infrastructure efficiently and economically;
   (E)   Provide interconnected roads of an appropriate scale; and
   (F)   Provide interconnected pedestrian and bicycling facilities.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.351 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Special land use permit required. A residential open space development
shall require a special land use permit from the Village of Pinckney.
      (1)   The special land use permit shall be processed in compliance with §
152.241(B).
      (2)   The special land use permit shall set forth all conditions of
approval and include an approved preliminary site plan in compliance with the
following:
         (a)   The specific standards within this subchapter;
         (b)   The general standards within §§
152.240 et seq.; and
         (c)   The Village of Pinckney Subdivision Regulations or the site
condominium requirements of §
152.266.
   (B)   Application submittal. An application for a residential open space
development shall include all of the information required for a special land
use permit in §
152.241(A) including a preliminary site plan. The application shall also
include a parallel plan showing how the site would be conventionally developed
based upon the existing zoning, without a special land use permit (see §
152.353(A)).
   (C)   Unified control. The residential open space development shall be under
single ownership or control, such that there is a single person or entity
having proprietary responsibility for the full completion of the project. The
applicant shall provide sufficient documentation of single ownership or control
in the form of draft or recorded agreements, contracts, covenants and/or deed
restrictions that indicate the development will be completed in its entirety as
proposed.
   (D)   Common open space guarantee. The property owner shall guarantee, to
the satisfaction of the Planning Commission, that all common open space shall
be provided, used and maintained in the manner approved by the village.
Documents shall be submitted that bind all successors and future owners in fee
title to common open space commitments made as part of the approved special
land use permit.
   (E)   Recording of action. The applicant shall record an affidavit with the
Register of Deeds containing the full legal description of the project site,
specifying the date of final approval by the Village Council and declaring that
all improvements will be carried out in accordance with the approved site plan.
In addition, all deed restrictions and easements shall be duly filed with the
County Register of Deeds and copies of recorded documents shall be submitted to
the village.
   (F)   Land use permit. Following final site plan approval, including proof
of compliance with division (D) above, and final approval of engineering plans
by the applicable village, county and state agencies, a land use permit for the
development may be issued by the Zoning Administrator. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to obtain all other necessary development
permits.
   (G)   Initiation of construction. If construction has not commenced within
24 months of final approval, all village approvals shall become null and void.
The applicant may apply in writing to the Planning Commission for an extension,
not to exceed 12 months. A maximum of two extensions may be allowed.
   (H)   Phased development. Final approvals may be granted on each phase of a
multi-phased development, if each phase contains the necessary components to
ensure protection of natural resources and the health, safety and welfare of
the residents and users of the residential open space development and the
residents of the surrounding area.
   (I)   Continuing adherence to plan. Any property owner who fails to maintain
an approved site plan shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and shall be
subject to the penalties established in §§
152.020 et seq.
   (J)   Performance guarantee. The Village Council or Qualified Village Agent
may require that a performance guarantee, in accordance with §
152.026, be deposited with the village to insure the completion of
improvements.
   (K)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      COMMON OPEN SPACE.
         (a)   A usable and recognizable portion of a development site that is
permanently protected from any use other than the following:
            1.   Public conservation or recreation; and
            2.   Common private conservation or recreation.
         (b)   COMMON OPEN SPACE shall not include:
            1.   Required front, side or rear yards on individual residential
lots;
            2.   State regulated wetlands;
            3.   Storm water management facilities including floodways, county
drainage easements and detention and retention ponds; and
            4.   Road or utility easements.
        RESIDENTIAL OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT. One or more lots developed as a
single entity with residential uses clustered on no more than 70% of the net
site area with the remaining 30% permanently set aside as common open space.
   (L)   Review Process. The application for a residential open space
development shall require review and approval of both the applicable special
use application and site plan application and in some cases may also require a
rezoning request for some or all of the property involved. At the request of
the applicant, or at the direction of the Planning Commission or the Village
Council, these applications may be considered concurrently. Review of the
proposed residential open space development plan by the Planning Commission and
Village Council shall require the procedures for both site plan and special use
reviews and shall be acted on as follows:
      (1)   Planning Commission action. The review of the final residential
open space development plan shall be noticed for public hearing in the same
manner as a rezoning before the Planning Commission, and otherwise acted upon
by the Planning Commission, as provided by law.
         (a)   Approval. Upon finding that the final plan meets the criteria
and standards set forth in the Village Zoning Ordinance, including this
residential open space development chapter and those in §§
152.242 and
152.388 , the Planning Commission may recommend approval of the plans, with or
without conditions.
         (b)   Tabling. Upon finding that the final plan does not meet the
criteria and standards set forth in Village Zoning Ordinance, including this
residential open space development chapter and those in §§
152.242, and
152.388 , but could meet such criteria if revised, the Planning Commission may
table action until a revised final plan is resubmitted.
         (c)   Denial.
            1.   Upon finding that the final plan does not meet the criteria
and standards set forth in Village Zoning Ordinance, including this residential
open space development chapter and those in §§
152.242, and
152.388, the Planning Commission shall deny the final plans.
            2.   The Planning Commission shall, to the extent it deems
appropriate, submit detailed recommendations relative to the project,
including, without limitation, recommendations with respect to matters on which
the Village Council must exercise discretion.
      (2)   Village Council action. The final plan shall be noticed for public
hearing as a rezoning before the Village Council, and otherwise acted upon by
the Village Council, as provided by law.
         (a)   Upon receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission,
the Village Council shall review the final plan. Taking into consideration the
recommendations of the Planning Commission and the criteria and standards set
forth herein, the Village Council shall approve, approve with conditions, table
or deny the final plan.
         (b)   Within a reasonable time following the hearing, the Village
Council, or its designee, shall prepare a report stating the Village Council's
conclusions, its decision, the basis for its decision, and any conditions
imposed on an affirmative decision.
         (c)   Prior to approval of a final plan, the Village Council may
require all standards and conditions of approval to be incorporated in a
development agreement. The agreement shall be approved by the Village Attorney,
and the Village Council, and signed by both the village and the applicant.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-2017; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-
2021)
§ 152.352 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses may be permitted through the special land use permit
approval process, at the discretion of the Planning Commission:
   (A)   Any permitted use or special land use listed in the district in which
the development is located;
   (B)   Two-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings;
   (C)   Common open space in compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter; and
   (D)   Accessory structures.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.353 DENSITY.
   (A)   Base density. The number of dwelling units shall not exceed the number
allowed in the residential district in which the development will be located,
except as provided for by division (B) below. To establish the number of
dwelling units allowed, the applicant shall submit a conventional plan in
conformance with the following:
      (1)   The applicable residential district;
      (2)   All other provisions of this chapter; and
      (3)   Other applicable federal, state, county and village regulations
including, but not limited to, those governing roads, water supply, sewage
treatment, wetlands and floodplains. Detailed engineering is not required. The
Planning Commission shall review the submitted conventional plan and, based on
this plan, determine the number of dwelling units allowable for the proposed
residential open space development.
   (B)   Density bonus. The Planning Commission may recommend and the Village
Council may approve a density bonus of up to 150% of the base density allowed
under division (A) above. The total number of dwelling units may be increased
by 10% for any five of the following:
      (1)   Permanent protection of more than 30% of the net site area as
common open space;
      (2)   Significant preservation of natural resources including vegetation,
shorelines, unregulated wetlands and steep slopes;
      (3)   Dedication of usable common open space to a public or non-profit
entity;
      (4)   Significant reduction of impervious surface cover, including road
length;
      (5)   Interconnection of roads, pedestrian or bicycling paths and/or
common open space/recreational areas;
      (6)   Preservation of rural character along public road frontage; and
      (7)   Superior architectural and/or site design, including diversity or
originality in lot layout and individual building design.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.354 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Base Zoning District. Unless specifically waived or modified by the
Village Council, all requirements of this chapter and the zoning district in
which the site is located shall remain in effect, except for lot area, lot
coverage and yard regulations.
   (B)   Design flexibility. To encourage flexibility and creativity consistent
with the common open space community concept, the Village Council may grant
specific departures from the requirements of this chapter for lot area, lot
coverage and yards as part of the special land use approval process. Any
modification shall be approved through a finding by the Village Council that
the deviation will result in a higher quality of development than would be
possible based on the conventional standards. Regulatory modifications are not
subject to appeal or to variance approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals (see
§§
152.442(B),
152.444 and
152.445).
   (C)   Landscaped buffer area. The outside boundary of the development site
shall be surrounded by a landscaped buffer area in compliance with §
152.329.
   (D)   Access.
      (1)   All vehicular access to the site shall be directly from an arterial
road or collector road.
      (2)   Dedicated pedestrian and bicycle pathways shall be provided along
each interior road and throughout the site. These pathways, which may include
sidewalks, shall connect to adjacent sites to the maximum degree possible.
   (E)   Internal roads. Construction of private roads as a means of providing
interior circulation is encouraged. Private roads within a residential open
space development are exempted from the design requirements of the Village
Technical Standards, if all of the following findings are made by the Planning
Commission:
      (1)   The roads are adequate for emergency vehicle access, as verified in
writing by the Putnam Township Fire Marshal and Pinckney Police Department;
      (2)   A deed restriction is placed on the project site that perpetually
vests free simple of the land area in the parties adjoining the road and
prohibits future transfer to the public; and
      (3)   An acceptable maintenance plan is provided, including a means of
guaranteeing maintenance assessments from the affected property owners.
   (F)   Common open space.
      (1)   A minimum of 30% of the net site area shall be maintained as
dedicated common open space held in collective ownership.
      (2)   The total area of dedicated common open space shall be equal to or
exceed the total lot area by which all individual residential lots are reduced
below the district standard.
      (3)   Common open space areas shall be located on the same site as the
residential open space development and shall be readily accessible by all
residents of the development.
      (4)   Common open space areas shall be of adequate size and configuration
to accommodate the intended use, and shall not include narrow or irregular
pieces of land (for example, remnants from the layout of lots, roads and
parking areas).
      (5)   The dedicated common open space shall forever remain common open
space, subject only to uses approved by the village and shown on the approved
site plan. Further division of common open space or its use for other than
approved recreation, conservation or agricultural purposes shall be strictly
prohibited.
      (6)   The dedicated common open space shall be set aside by the developer
through an irrevocable conveyance that is found acceptable to the Planning
Commission, such as:
         (a)   Recorded deed restrictions;
         (b)   Covenants that run perpetually with the land; or
         (c)   A conservation easement established per the State of Michigan
Conservation and Historic Preservation Easement Subpart Part 21, Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 324.11501 et seq., as amended (M.C.L.A. §§ 324.2140 et seq.)
      (7)   The conveyance shall assure that the common open space will be
protected from all forms of development, except as shown on the approved site
plan and shall never be changed to another use. Furthermore, the conveyance
shall:
         (a)   Indicate the allowable use(s) of the dedicated common open
space;
         (b)   Require the dedicated common open space to be adequately
maintained by parties with an ownership interest in the common open space;
         (c)   Provide detailed standards for scheduled maintenance of the
common open space; and
         (d)   Provide for maintenance to be undertaken by the Village of
Pinckney in the event that the dedicated common open space is inadequately
maintained, or is determined by the village to be a public nuisance, with a
means of assessing all related costs upon the property owners.
      (8)   Any structure(s) accessory to an approved recreation, conservation
or agricultural use may be erected within the dedicated common open space,
subject to the approval of the Planning Commission. The accessory structures
shall not exceed, in aggregate, 10% of the required common open space.
      (9)   National Recreation and Park Association Standards, standards
established by a sports governing body or standards obtained from another
credible source shall be used to determine the exact spatial and dimensional
requirements needed for a specific type of recreation area or facility.
      (10)   The developer shall be required to improve recreation areas so
that they are usable for the intended activity, including necessary facilities
and equipment. The proposed improvements, including facilities and equipment,
shall be acceptable to the village.
   (G)   Water and sewage. The development shall be served by public or
community water and sewage treatment facilities, constructed and maintained in
accordance with all applicable state and county statutes and ordinances.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-2017) Penalty, see §
152.999
ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 152.370 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to preserve the environmental health,
safety and welfare of the Village of Pinckney, its residents and business
owners. No land use otherwise allowed by this chapter shall be permitted within
any district that does not conform to the following minimum environmental
standards.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.371 ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Compliance required. All land uses shall comply with the environmental
performance standards established herein unless any federal, state, county or
village law, ordinance or regulation establishes a more restrictive standard,
in which event the more restrictive standard shall apply.
   (B)   Glare and exterior lighting. For the purposes of this section, public
streetlights shall be considered an essential public service, as defined in §
152.267.
      (1)   Exterior lighting shall be located and maintained to prevent the
reflection or glare of light in a manner that creates a visual nuisance or
safety hazard.
      (2)   All outdoor lighting shall be fully shielded and directed away
from, and no light source shall be visible from, adjacent properties, roads and
public rights-of-way.
      (3)   Reasonable lighting for safety and security purposes shall be
encouraged, subject to the limitations set forth herein.
      (4)   Lighting shall not exceed one-half foot candles at a residential
lot line or one foot candles at a nonresidential lot line.
      (5)   Light intensity shall not exceed ten foot candles in any given area
on the site. The Planning Commission, at its discretion, may allow for an
increased level of lighting if it can be demonstrated that the lighting is
necessary for safety and security purposes.
      (6)   Pole mounted light fixtures shall not exceed 20 feet in height. On
portions of a site adjacent to a residential district or use, light fixtures
shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
      (7)   The design and/or screening of the development shall insure that
glare from vehicle headlights shall not be directed towards any adjacent
property, particularly residential property.
      (8)   No glare from any activity (such as arc welding or acetylene torch
cutting) shall be visible from any point beyond the property upon which the use
is being conducted.
      (9)   Reflective materials on building facades and/or rooftops shall not
create a nuisance or safety hazard.
      (10)   Any site plan review required by §§
152.385 et seq. shall also include submittal of the following:
         (a)   A lighting plan showing light fixture locations and types;
         (b)   Lighting equipment specifications, including construction
drawings and data sheets; and
         (c)   A photometric plan showing horizontal light levels in a point-
by-point format with contour lines.
   (C)    Noise.
      (1)   Noise levels as recorded at the lot line shall not exceed 60
decibels between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and shall not exceed 45
decibels between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
      (2)   Objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature or sounds
characterized by high frequencies, even if falling below the aforementioned
decibel readings, shall be so controlled so as not to become a nuisance to
adjacent uses. This shall particularly apply to commercial activities adjacent
to a residential district or use.
      (3)   These limits shall not apply to noise resulting from public safety
signals or warning devices.
   (D)   Vibration. No activity or use shall create ground-transmitted
vibrations that are recurring and perceptible at any property line.
   (E)   Airborne emissions.
      (1)   Air pollution.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to permit the emission of any smoke, dust or other air contaminant
in violation of applicable air quality standards adopted by the Federal Clean
Air Act and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
      (2)   Odors. Any condition or activity resulting in the emission of a
noxious odor that is perceptible at any point along the property line shall be
prohibited.
      (3)   Gases. Any condition or activity resulting in the emission of a gas
that is explosive, injurious to people or destructive to property is
prohibited.
   (F)   Electromagnetic interference. Any interference with normal radio,
telephone or television reception across property lines shall be prohibited.
   (G)   Material use, storage and disposal.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to pollute or otherwise impair the air, water,
soil or any other natural resource within the Village of Pinckney as a result
of the following activities:
         (a)   The use, storage and/or disposal of a hazardous substance; and
         (b)   The storage and/or disposal of solid, liquid, gaseous and/or
sanitary waste.
      (2)   Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity engaged in any
of the above activities shall comply with all applicable federal, state and
village regulations, including obtaining all necessary permits and/or licenses.
      (3)   No solid waste shall be stored or disposed of in such a manner as
to create a nuisance, visual eye-sore or safety or environmental hazard.
      (4)   No operation that produces hazardous waste shall commence without
prior notice to the Zoning Administrator. Notice shall be provided at least
three weeks before the operation is commenced.
   (H)   Nonresidential uses involving hazardous and polluting materials.
Nonresidential sites at which hazardous substances and polluting materials are
stored, used or generated shall be designed to prevent spills and discharges to
the air, surface of the ground, lakes, streams, rivers or wetlands. Hazardous
substances and polluting materials as used in this section shall mean hazardous
chemicals as defined by the Michigan Department of Community Health and the
Michigan Department of Labor and Economic Growth, flammable and combustible
liquids as defined by the Michigan State Police Fire Marshal Division, critical
materials, polluting materials and hazardous waste as defined by the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality, hazardous substances as defined by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency and hazardous materials as
defined by the United States Department of Transportation.
      (1)   Secondary containment for above ground areas where hazardous
substances and polluting materials are stored or used shall be provided.
Secondary containment shall be sufficient to store the substance for the
maximum anticipated period of time necessary for the recovery of any released
substance.
      (2)   General purpose floor drains shall be allowed only if they are
authorized to be connected to a public sewer system, an on-site holding tank or
a system authorized through a state groundwater discharge permit. Proof of
authorization must be provided to the Village before a general purpose floor
drain is installed.
      (3)   State and federal agency requirements for storage, spill
prevention, record keeping, emergency response, transport and disposal of
hazardous substances and polluting materials shall be met. No discharges shall
be allowed without required permits and approvals.
      (4)   File with the local Fire Department a floor plan describing, in
full detail, the location and identification of hazardous or polluting
substances within the first three months of the commencement of business. The
floor plan shall be updated with the local Fire Department on a yearly basis.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021) Penalty, see §
152.999
SITE PLAN REVIEW
§ 152.385 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate the physical layout of land
uses, structures and improvements, in order to specifically address potential
development impacts on a site and surrounding property, including impacts on:
natural resources, pedestrian and vehicular traffic, infrastructure and
services, adjacent lots, the local economy, the social and cultural
environment, public health, safety and welfare and the character of future
development.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.386 PLOT PLAN APPROVAL.
   (A)   Administrative authority. The Zoning Administrator shall:
      (1)   Have the authority to approve a plot plan for the following:
         (a)   Any change in the use of an existing lot or structure to another
permitted use that does not require site plan approval under §
152.387. The use change will be subject to all other applicable zoning
provisions, such as parking and landscaping;
         (b)   Any construction or alteration of a structure that does not
require site plan approval under §
152.387, including a single-family dwelling, addition to a single family
dwelling, or customary accessory structure, located on a single-family
residential lot; and
         (c)   Provision of additional parking, loading/unloading spaces, and
landscape improvements as required by ordinance;
      (2)   Notify the Planning Commission at the next available, regularly
scheduled Planning Commission meeting of all plot plans that have been approved
by the Zoning Administrator. When referred by the Zoning Administrator, the
Planning Commission may determine that a plot plan must be reviewed as a
regular site plan in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The
Zoning Administrator may also refer a plot plan eligible for administrative
recommendation to Village Council; and
      (3)   Be authorized to employ the Village Planner, Engineer or other
experts to assist in the review of the plot plan submitted under this section.
   (B)   Application information. All applications for plot plan review shall
include the following:
      (1)   A village application form for a land use permit;
      (2)   The established fee as determined by the Village Fee Schedule; and
      (3)   A plot plan including the information required for a preliminary
site plan in §
152.389 (D) (1) through (15). The applicant shall submit one copy of the plot
plan on either a 24-inch by 36-inch sheet, an 11-inch by 17-inch sheet, or an 8
½ -inch by 11-inch sheet as determined by the Zoning Administrator unless
referred to the Planning Commission or Village Council by the Zoning
Administrator, in which case the applicant shall submit seven copies and an
electronic copy.
   (C)   Review process.
      (1)   A complete plot plan and land use permit application shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator prior to any site preparation (including
clearing and grading) or construction and prior to application for a building
permit from the building official.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the plot plan application for
completeness and verify its compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   The site shall be staked showing the property comers (prior to
commencement of work).
      (4)   The site shall be staked for all structures to be constructed
(prior to commencement of work).
      (5)   Upon approval, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a land use
permit authorizing the commencement of work. (See also §
152.023)
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 91, passed 10-12-2009; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-
2021)
§ 152.387 SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
   (A)   Site plan review (preliminary and final site plans) by the Planning
Commission shall be required for the following:
      (1)   Site plan review and approval is required for existing uses or
structures where an alteration to the existing use or structure would result in
any of the following conditions:
         (a)   Relocation of a structure, an increase of the floor area of at
least 10% or 500 square feet, whichever is less, or a reduction in floor area;
         (b)   A use or structure is on a lot abutting a residential district
or use;
         (c)   A requirement of a variance from the provisions of this chapter;
         (d)   Resurfacing of an off-street parking lot where construction
activities would alter drainage properties, or the addition or replacement of
the base or sub-grade; and
         (e)   Any change in use, or a development that could affect compliance
with the standards set forth in this chapter.
      (2)   Site condominium projects; and
      (3)   Any use requiring a special land use permit.
   (B)   Preliminary site plans shall be approved by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Upon approval of a preliminary site plan by the Planning Commission,
the applicant may submit a final site plan in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter. Final site plans shall be approved by the Planning Commission,
except in the case of a final site plan for a residential open space
development, condominium project, or other planned development for which
Village Council shall approve or deny, following a review and recommendation by
the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 91, passed 10-12-2009; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-
2017; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 152.388 GENERAL APPLICATION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Compliance required. No grading, filling, removal of trees or other
vegetation, or construction of improvements shall commence for any development
that requires site plan approval until the final site plan and land use permit
have been approved by the village.
   (B)   Application information. All applications for site plan review shall
include the following:
      (1)   Fee. The required application and escrow fees, as established by
the Village Council in the Village Fee Schedule. No part of the application fee
shall be refundable.
      (2)   Application form. Three completed copies of the village application
form, which shall be signed by the property owner(s) and contain the following
information:
         (a)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant(s) and
property owners(s);
         (b)   If the applicant is not the property owner(s), a notarized
statement signed by the property owner(s) that the applicant is acting on the
owner's behalf; and
         (c)   The legal description, tax identification number and address of
the property.
      (3)   Site plan. A site plan in compliance with §
152.389 (preliminary) or §
152.391 (final), as applicable and conforming to Village Technical Standards.
         (a)   The applicant shall submit four individually folded copies of
the site plan on 24-inch by 36-inch sheets and one digital copy. See Village
Zoning Administrator for format details.
         (b)   The site plan shall be drawn to scale of not less than one inch
= 20 feet for property under three acres and not more than one inch= 50 feet
for sites three acres or more.
         (c)   Upon acceptance of the above referenced site plan, as complete
for review by the Zoning Administrator, Village Planner, Village Engineer,
Department of Public Works and Fire Marshal, the applicant shall submit at
least ten additional copies of the site plan on 24-inch by 36-inch sheets.
      (4)   Proposed waivers. The preliminary and final site plan shall clearly
indicate any proposed reductions in off-street parking, loading and/or
landscaping standards, to be modified by the Planning Commission during site
plan review.
      (5)   Additional information for final site plan review. Other items
required for final site plan review are as follows:
         (a)   An impact assessment report as required by §
152.392, below, including a completed environmental permit checklist and
hazardous substances reporting form, if applicable, supplied by the Zoning
Administrator.
            1.   The Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission may waive or
modify the impact assessment report requirements, or accept an impact
assessment report previously submitted relative to the site and proposed
development, at its discretion;
         (b)   Copies of any deed restrictions, easements, protective
covenants, master deed or association bylaws affecting the site: and
         (c)   Proof that the final site plan has been submitted for review to
all other agencies that regulate the proposed development including, but not
limited to: the County Road Commission, Health Department, Building Department
and Drain Commissioner and the Michigan Department of Transportation and
Department of Environmental Quality.
   (C)   Submission. A complete application must be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator at least 30 business days prior to the Planning Commission
meeting at which the proposal will first be considered.
   (D)   Application flexibility. If deemed unnecessary to determine site plan
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator and
Planning Commission may waive the submittal of information required in the
following (sections):
      (1)   Section
152.388 (B) (general site plan);
      (2)   Section
152.389 (D) (preliminary site plan);
      (3)   Section
152.391 (final site plan); and
      (4)   Section
152.392 (Impact Assessment Report).
   (E)   Concurrent preliminary and final site plan review. If requested by the
petitioner, preliminary and final site plan review may be conducted
concurrently.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 72, passed 4-24-2006; Ord. 82, passed 5-12-
2008; Ord. 139, passed 9-11- 2017; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021; Ord. 160, passed
7-25-2022)
§ 152.389 PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN APPLICATION.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of preliminary site plan review is to confirm
general compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, conformance with Village
Technical Standards, and suggest changes, if necessary, prior to final site
plan review.
   (B)   Pre-planning meeting. For all development other that an individual
single family home, the proprietor and/or his/her authorized agent may at his /
her own discretion request a planning meeting with village representatives to
discuss project details prior to submittal of a preliminary site plan. The
proprietor or his/her authorized agent assumes all costs associated with
meeting attendees in accordance with the fee schedule.
   (C)   Preliminary site plan application and submittal. Preliminary site plan
application and submittal shall be made in accordance with the general
application standards in §
152.388.
   (D)   Preliminary site plan. Preliminary site plans shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of applicant(s) and property owner
(s);
      (2)   Scale, north arrow, date of original drawing and date of each
revision;
      (3)   Address, parcel identification number(s), legal description(s), and
zoning district(s) of the site;
      (4)   Gross site area in acres and square feet;
      (5)   Location and length of all lot and/or property lines. All lot and/
or property lines are to be shown in dimension including building setback lines
(front, rear and side) and existing easements. A copy of title commitment or
policy must be included;
      (6)   Significant natural features such as steep slopes, existing trees,
floodplains, wetlands, lakes, ponds, rivers or creeks including ordinary high
water mark(s);
      (7)   Location and dimensions of the following, both existing and
proposed (clearly labeled existing or proposed):
         (a)   Structures;
         (b)   Sidewalks, curb cuts, driveways, parking areas and off-street
parking spaces;
         (c)   Landscaping, greenbelts, separation berms, fences and walls;
         (d)   Signs;
         (e)   On-site wells and septic systems or public water and sewer
hookups, as applicable;
         (f)   Outdoor waste, material and/or equipment storage areas;
         (g)   Dry wells;
         (h)   Open space recreation areas;
         (i)   Exterior lighting;
         (j)   Loading/unloading areas; and
         (k)   Curbing.
      (8)   Location and dimensions of all roads providing access and/or
adjacent to the site (clearly labeled with the road name);
      (9)   Statistical data which shall include:
         (a)   The number of structures;
         (b)   The number of sub-units per structure;
         (c)   The size of each unit;
         (d)   The total area involved;
         (e)   Percentage of lot coverage.
      (10)   Principal building height;
      (11)   Existing grades and any topographical alterations or changes in
natural terrain including drainage patterns shall also be shown;
      (12)   The vehicular and pedestrian circulation features within and
adjacent to the development site;
      (13)   A topographic survey shall be signed and sealed by a Land Surveyor
registered in the State of Michigan and be prepared in the State Plane
Coordinate System using NAVD 88 as the vertical datum. Topographic survey shall
extend 250 feet beyond the property lines locating all features. Soil boring
locations shall be collected using survey grade equipment calibrated to the
State Plane Coordinate System and shown on the survey. Elevations shall be
provided by a Land Surveyor registered in the State of Michigan and be depicted
on the soil boring logs. The soil boring logs shall show both the depth and the
elevation of soil strata and groundwater.
      (14)   An area wide plan showing the following:
         (a)   The property lines of all adjacent parcels and other affected
parcels;
         (b)   The location and height of all structures within 250 feet of the
property boundary lines of the property being developed;
         (c)   Existing sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, watercourse
centerlines, and natural features;
         (d)   Proposed utilities and their connection to existing utilities in
plain view and clearly labeled, including rim elevations, invert elevations,
pipe sizes, pipe directions and pipe lengths between structures;
         (e)   Enough information regarding existing and proposed sanitary
sewer must be supplied to show that the proposed sanitary sewer would
adequately service the required area. The sanitary sewer service area shall be
determined by the Village Engineer or Qualified Village Agent;
         (f)   Outline of proposed detention and/or retention basins and
proposed outflow location;
         (g)   Zoning, parcel identification numbers, and owner's name of each
parcel for all properties shown on the plan;
         (h)   Existing contours and off-site drainage area delineations;
      (15)   Wetland compliance. Verify wetland compliance, if applicable, with
the Village of Pinckney Wetland Ordinance.
   (E)   Additional information for special use permits. The detail of the
specific uses of the project under consideration for a special use permit must
be included and may become part of the permit. Alterations of the plans and
concepts made after approval by the Planning Commission will constitute a
change in the project and may require a complete renewal of the site plan
process. The Village Zoning Administrator shall determine whether or not a
change requires renewal of the site plan process.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 152.390 PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Review for completeness.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the preliminary site plan
application and determine if the application is complete and all of the
necessary information has been provided in accordance with §
152.388 General Application.
      (2)   Preliminary site plan revisions. Any revisions that are required
during the preliminary site plan review process will require the following:
Preliminary site plan revisions submittal.
         (a)   Four 24" x 36" hard copy revised preliminary design drawings and
one electronic copy in pdf format.
         (b)   Revised plans shall include and address all comments from the
Village Planner and other Qualified Village Agent reviews.
         (c)   Payment of the plan review fees pursuant to the Village Fee
Schedule.
   (B)   Distribution. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning
Administrator shall transmit the site plan and all accompanying materials to
the Planning Commission and any other required parties prior to its next
regular meeting. Transmittals shall not be made until all required information
is submitted and the necessary fees have been paid in full. The Zoning
Administrator shall also schedule consideration of the site plan as an item on
the agenda at the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Planning Commission action. At the first regular meeting at which a
preliminary site plan is considered, the Planning Commission shall review the
application and relevant issues. The Planning Commission shall then approve,
approve with conditions or deny the preliminary site plan. The basis for the
decision and any approval conditions shall be specified in the resolution and
the meeting minutes and communicated to the applicant in writing. If no action
is taken because more information is required from the applicant, the Planning
Commission shall table the agenda item to a date certain, which shall be
specified in the meeting minutes.
   (D)   Special land uses. In accordance with §
152.387, the Planning Commission shall approve, approve with conditions or deny
a preliminary site plan submitted for a special land use permit after the
required public hearing is conducted.
   (E)   Effect of approval. Approval of a preliminary site plan by the
Planning Commission or Village Council, as the case may be, shall indicate its
general acceptance of the proposed use, layout of buildings, roads and drives,
off-street parking areas, other facilities and the overall character of the
proposed development. Upon approval of a preliminary site plan, the applicant
may submit a final site plan to the village in accordance with the requirements
of §
152.391.
   (F)   Expiration of approval. Approval of a preliminary site plan shall be
valid for one calendar year and shall then expire and be of no effect unless an
application for final site plan approval is submitted to the Zoning
Administrator within that time period. The applicant may extend preliminary
site plan approval for one additional year upon written request to the Zoning
Administrator and approval by the Planning Commission prior to the original
expiration date. The Planning Commission may grant further extensions of
preliminary site plan approval in accordance with the procedures noted herein
upon a showing of good cause.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 83, passed 10-27-2008; Ord. 91, passed 10-12-
2009; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-2017; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 152.391 FINAL SITE PLAN APPLICATION.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of final site plan review is to confirm
compliance with all items and provisions of this chapter and conformance with
Village Technical Standards. An impact assessment report may also be required
(see §
152.392) at the discretion of the Planning Commission and/or Village Council.
   (B)   Final site plan application and submittal. Final site plan application
and submittal shall be made in accordance with the general application
standards in §
152.388, and:
      (1)   Final site plans shall be prepared by one of the following
professionals registered in the state of Michigan: architect, civil engineer,
landscape architect, or land surveyor and each set of the plans shall be signed
and sealed by the engineer who has supervised the work.
      (2)   Final engineering drawings for all site improvements such as water
and utility lines, sanitary sewer and storm sewer systems, roads, drives and
parking lots, retention ponds and other ponds or lakes, and retaining walls
shall be approved by the Village Engineer.
   (C)   Final site plan. Final site plans shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   General information:
         (a)   Name, address, phone number and seal of the professional
registered in the State of Michigan responsible for preparing the plan;
         (b)   Scale, north arrow, date the plan was prepared and the date of
each revision;
         (c)   Address, parcel identification number(s), legal description(s),
and zoning district(s) of the site;
         (d)   Gross site area and net site area in acres and square feet;
         (e)   The location and length of all lot lines. Lot line dimensions
and angles or bearings shall be based upon a boundary survey prepared by a Land
Surveyor registered in the State of Michigan and shall correlate with the legal
description;
         (f)   The relationship of the site to all surrounding lots within 250
feet, including land uses, zoning districts, lot lines, roads, driveways,
easements, structures and natural features;
         (g)   General description of deed restrictions, if any;
         (h)   Detailed development phases;
         (i)   Notation of performance guarantees to be provided including
amounts, types and terms; and
         (j)   Notation of any variances that have been or must be secured.
         (k)   All plans shall include a location map showing the surrounding
area.
         (l)   The cover sheet shall have an index of all sheets and the
individual sheets shall have proper matching lines or other key to provide
reasonable continuity and orientation.
         (m)   The drawings shall contain sufficient detail to properly show
the proposed information and the methods of construction.
      (2)   Natural features.
         (a)   Pre-development topography with contour lines at a minimum of
one-foot intervals, and ground elevations of all existing buildings, drives
and/or off-street parking lots;
         (b)   The direction of pre-development drainage flow, and the location
of existing drainage courses, including lakes, ponds, rivers and streams and
all elevations;
         (c)   Soil characteristics of the site, to at least the level of
detail provided by the USDA Soil Conservation Service, Soil Survey of
Livingston County, Michigan; and
         (d)   Existing natural features such as trees, wooded areas, wetlands,
streams, rivers, ponds, lakes and floodplains including clear indication of
natural features to remain and to be removed:
            1.   Trees measuring at least eight inches in diameter at breast
height shall be clearly labeled. Groups of trees not proposed for removal may
be shown by an approximate outline of the total canopy;
            2.   Wetland areas shall be delineated by a professional
hydrologist, geologist, biologist, landscape architect or engineer trained in
wetland delineation; and
            3.   The ordinary high water mark of a stream, river, lake or pond
shall be verified by a Land Surveyor registered in the State of Michigan or any
professional trained in wetland delineation listed above.
            4.   The property owner is responsible for clearly marking wetlands
and ordinary high water marks on the ground by flagging or other means.
      (3)   Grading plan. A grading plan shall be provided in compliance with
the Village Technical Standards.
         (a)   A grading plan showing finished contours at one-foot intervals,
correlated with existing contours so as to clearly indicate cut and fill
required.
         (b)   Location, dimensions and materials of retaining walls, fill
materials, typical vertical sections and restoration of adjacent properties,
where applicable.
         (c)   All finished contours must be connected to existing contour
lines at or before the property lines.
         (d)   The areas to be left undisturbed during construction shall be so
indicated on the site plan and shall be identified on the ground by use of snow
fencing or silt fencing so as to be obvious to construction personnel.
      (4)   Landscape plan. A landscape plan shall be provided in compliance
with §
152.327.
      (5)   Structures. The location, area, height in feet and stories and use
of all structures on the site, as well as:
         (a)   Setbacks from lot lines, existing and proposed public and
private easements and rights-of-way, wetlands and waterways;
         (b)   Typical layout, elevation and floor area for each type of
building;
         (c)   Distances between structures;
         (d)   Total percentage of lot coverage;
         (e)   Elevation drawings that illustrate building design, size,
height, facade, windows and doors, construction materials and foundation
plantings;
         (f)   For residential development, density calculations, number and
types of dwelling units and floor area per dwelling unit;
         (g)   For nonresidential development, the number of offices and
employees and typical floor plans and elevations; and
         (h)   The location, height and construction materials of all fences
and walls, including elevation drawings.
      (6)   Roads and access. The location and dimensions of: curb cuts, public
and private roads, drives, alleys, access easements, bicycle paths and
sidewalks adjacent to and/or serving the development including the following as
applicable:
         (a)   Centerline, right-of-way width and right-of-way expansion;
         (b)   Surface material and width;
         (c)   Acceleration, deceleration and passing lanes;
         (d)   Surface elevations and grades of entries and exits;
         (e)   Distance of curb cuts from intersections, angle of intersections
and vision clearance area;
         (f)   Curve radii;
         (g)   Road names;
         (h)   A description of expected traffic volumes based upon national
reference documents, such as the most recent volume of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual; and
         (i)   Proof of approval by the Village Engineer or Qualified Village
Agent, Livingston County Road Commission and/or Michigan Department of
Transportation, as applicable.
      (7)   Parking. The location and dimensions of vehicle parking lots,
individual parking spaces and loading areas adjacent to and/or serving the
development including:
         (a)   Total number of parking spaces listed in statistical data and
shown on the site plan. If existing parking spaces will serve the proposed use,
spaces must be clearly labeled "existing" and "proposed";
         (b)   Angle of parking spaces;
         (c)   Clearly marked handicap accessible parking spaces;
         (d)   Surface material;
         (e)   Landscaped islands, if any; and
         (f)   Loading spaces.
      (8)   Utilities. Existing and proposed essential public services and
utilities including:
         (a)   On-site wells, septic tanks and drain fields. If on-site water
and sewer facilities are to be used, a letter of approval of same, or a copy of
the permit from the Livingston County Health Department shall be submitted
prior to final site plan approval.
         (b)   Connections to public sewer and water supply. For sites served
by sanitary sewer, calculations for pre- and post-development flows are
required. Expected sewage rates shall be as provided in §
52.29. This should include sanitary pump stations if applicable. Connections to
the water main shall be included.
         (c)   Stormwater drainage facilities. Storm water drainage facilities
including roadside swales, retention and detention ponds clearly indicating
side slopes, culverts, catch basins, size calculations, post-development
drainage flow patterns and points of discharge. All storm sewer, detention, and
retention basin design criteria shall be in accordance with the Livingston
County Drain Commissioner's "Procedures and Design Criteria for Stormwater
Management Systems and Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Programs" latest
revisions thereof. A letter of approval of the proposed drainage system from
the Livingston County Drain Commissioner shall be submitted prior to final site
plan approval. A maintenance agreement for entire stormwater system must be
included.
         (d)   Water, sanitary, storm utility details. The following shall be
shown on sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water main plans and profiles drawings
as applicable:
            1.   Length of run, class and size of all proposed utilities, slope
of all sanitary sewer and storm sewer pipe between manholes.
            2.   Top of casting elevations of all manholes, inlets, and/or
catch basins etc. shall be shown in both plan and profile.
            3.   Porous backfill, special bedding and tunnel sections where
applicable.
            4.   Invert elevations for all sanitary and storm sewer lines, for
both existing and proposed sewers, shall be shown in both plan and profile.
            5.   Adjacent existing or proposed utilities plotted where
parallel.
            6.   Other utilities crossing under or over proposed sewers or
water mains.
            7.   Existing ground profile and proposed finished grade profile,
including stationing, over all storm sewer, sanitary sewer, water mains, and
finished grade of all proposed hydrants and valves.
            8.   Construction method (including but not limited to open cut,
bore and jack, and directional drill).
         (e)   Hookups. Utility hookups (i.e. gas and electric).
         (f)   Surface equipment. Location of hydrants, electrical and
telephone boxes, poles, towers and other surface equipment, communications
towers, above ground and underground storage tanks.
         (g)   Drywell and/or utilization of no salt generation softeners.
      (9)   Soil erosion control. All work within the village requiring soil
erosion and sedimentation control shall comply with the Livingston County
"Procedures and Design Criteria for Stormwater Management Systems and Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Programs", latest revision.
      (10)   Signs. The location, height, area, illumination and content of all
signs.
      (11)   Lighting. The location and specifications of exterior lighting
fixtures and a photometric lighting plan.
      (12)   Waste storage. The size, location and description of any interior
or exterior areas for storing, using, loading or unloading hazardous or
polluting materials. A listing of types and quantities of hazardous and
polluting materials that will be used or stored on-site.
      (13)   Proposed easements.
   (D)   Impact assessment report if required.
   (E)   The proprietor or his/her authorized agent shall prepare all
applicable regulatory permit applications and secure signatures from the
village as necessary prior to forwarding on the appropriate agencies. The
typical required permits are as follows:
      (1)   Watermains. In addition to approval by the Village Engineer or
Qualified Village Agent, watermains require the approval of the MDEQ and
issuance of a construction permit by this state agency. The proprietor or his/
her authorized agent shall secure a permit from MDEQ with plans signed and
sealed by a civil engineer registered in the State of Michigan responsible for
preparation of the plans. In addition, a tabulation of watermains by streets
and easements which include their size, location, type, and length shall be
prepared by the proprietor or his/her authorized agent. A minimum of 14 copies
of the computations shall be submitted to the village with the final site plan
submittal.
      (2)   Sanitary sewers. In addition to approval by the Village Engineer or
Qualified Village Agent, sanitary sewer plans require the approval of the MDEQ
and issuance of a construction permit by this state agency. The proprietor or
his/her agent shall secure a permit from MDEQ with plans signed and sealed by a
civil engineer registered in the State of Michigan responsible for the
preparation of said plans. In addition, a tabulation of sanitary sewers by
streets and easements which includes their size, location, type and length
along with design flow computations for the proposed sewers and a tabulation of
the capacities of the proposed sewers and the existing outfall sewer shall be
submitted by the proprietor or his/her authorized agent. Fourteen copies of the
computations shall be submitted to the village with the final site plan
submittal.
      (3)   Road plans, storm sewers, retention basins and/or detention basins,
paving, grading and soil erosion control and drywell plans. In addition to
approval by the Village Engineer or Qualified Village Agent the above plans may
require approval from Livingston County and/or MDOT. The proprietor or his/her
authorized agent shall secure required permits on plans sealed by a civil
engineer registered in the State of Michigan responsible for the preparation of
said plans. In addition, all related design computations (traffic, volumes,
storm flows, etc.) for the proposed plans and a tabulation of the capacities,
if applicable, shall be submitted by the proprietor or his/her authorized
agent.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 72, passed 4-24-2006; Ord. 82, passed 5-12-
2008; Ord. 98, passed 3-28-2011; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-2017; Ord. 154, passed
1-11-2021)
§ 152.392 IMPACT ASSESSMENT REPORT.
   (A)   At the discretion of the Planning Commission, an Impact Assessment
Report may be required to be prepared at the applicant's expense and submitted
with the application for final site plan review.
   (B)   The Impact Assessment Report shall contain a combination of text,
graphics and approval letters from regulatory agencies sufficient to
demonstrate compliance with the criteria below:
      (1)   Zoning. The final site plan shall conform to the purpose and
standards of the zoning district in which it is located.
      (2)   Surrounding uses. The proposed use and site design shall not be
injurious to the surrounding neighborhood or impede the normal and orderly
development or use of surrounding property. The site plan shall be harmonious,
efficient and coordinated in relation to topography, size and type of land use
and the character and improvement of adjacent properties.
      (3)   Phasing. Every individual development phase shall be designed to
function independently in a safe, convenient and efficient manner without being
dependent upon subsequent development phases and/or improvements.
      (4)   Natural features. The development shall protect natural features to
the maximum extent possible including woodlands, wetlands, lakes, ponds,
rivers, streams, wildlife habitat, steep slopes and groundwater recharge areas.
The development shall preserve and incorporate the features into the site
design. No grading, excavation, fill, clearing of topsoil, clearing of trees or
other disturbance of the natural environment shall occur outside of those areas
approved for the placement of physical improvements. Topography; the
development shall conform to existing topography to the degree possible. The
amount of cutting and filling shall be minimized and shall not destroy the
character of the subject property or adversely affect surrounding properties.
      (5)   Soils. The soil and subsoil conditions shall be suitable for
excavation and on-site septic systems, if any. Soils and slopes not suitable
for development will be protected. The proposed development will not cause soil
erosion or sedimentation problems. Adequate measures will be taken to control
soil erosion and sedimentation during grading and construction operations and
until permanent ground cover is established. These measures shall be based on
the latest standards published by the County Drain Commissioner and/or USDA
Soil Conservation Service.
      (6)   Drainage. The final drainage plan shall conform to the natural
drainage pattern as much as possible. The development shall not substantially
reduce the existing storm water infiltration or storage capacity, thereby
increasing the frequency or volume of flooding at other locations. The drainage
design shall not perceptively increase the pollution, volume or intensity of
runoff onto adjacent properties or receiving waterways.
      (7)   Environmental performance. The proposed development shall not
result in pollution, noise, odor, light, dust, dirt, smoke or other external
effects that adversely affect neighboring properties. Development that includes
the use and/or storage of hazardous or polluting materials shall be designed to
prevent spills and discharge of polluting materials to the ground or nearby
water bodies. A completed Environmental Checklist and Hazardous Substances
Reporting Form, supplied by the village, may be required.
      (8)   Public services, facilities and utilities. Adequate services and
utilities shall be available or provided, located and constructed with
sufficient capacity and durability to properly service the development. The
expected number of residents, employees, visitors and/or patrons shall not
strain public schools, police and fire protection, water supplies, sanitary
sewer facilities and/or other public facilities and services beyond existing
and planned capacity. Electric, telephone and cable distribution lines shall be
underground and conform to the current Standard Rules and Regulations of the
Michigan Public Service Commission.
      (9)   Structures. The layout, size, bulk, height and architectural design
of all structures shall be harmonious in relationship to other structures on
the site and in the general vicinity. The layout and design of structures shall
enhance the ease and efficiency of use, and the architectural and visual
character of the village. Signs; the size, location, design and illumination of
signs shall be harmonious with natural features, uses, structures and signs on
surrounding property and traffic safety. Signs shall be located and designed to
avoid creating distraction or visual clutter.
      (10)   Traffic. Traffic within the site, as well as to and from the site,
shall not create a safety hazard or place demands upon roads in excess of
existing or planned capacity. The site plan shall provide for the proper
expansion of public roads serving the site, where necessary, at the developer's
expense. The relationship between roads, sidewalks, service drives, driveways,
parking spaces and loading areas shall be convenient, safe and designed to
complement the arrangement of existing and planned roads, alleys, drives,
parking areas and pedestrian and bicycle pathways. All structures shall be
fully accessible to emergency vehicles.
         (a)   Pedestrian and bicycle traffic. There shall be a pedestrian
circulation system that is separate from the vehicular circulation system. Safe
and adequate pedestrian and bicycle access shall be provided between major
activity areas, employment and service centers, schools, parks and residential
areas. Sidewalks shall be provided unless determined by the Planning Commission
to be unnecessary because pedestrian circulation is otherwise provided for.
         (b)   Parking. The layout of parking and loading areas shall not
adversely affect the flow of traffic within the site or to and from the
adjacent roads and properties.
         (c)   Traffic impact study. A detailed traffic impact study shall be
required for any site over two acres or for any project expected to generate
100 or more vehicle trips on adjacent roads during the peak hour of traffic.
The traffic study shall include the following:
            1.   Description of existing daily and peak hour traffic on the
adjacent roads (based on current Livingston County Road Commission data or a
similar source) and a description of any sight distance limitations along the
site's right-of-way frontage;
            2.   Forecasted trip generation of the proposed use for the a.m.
and p.m. peak hour and average daily traffic generated (based on the current
Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual);
            3.   Description of impact on special transportation modes,
including school buses, trucks and bicycles;
            4.   Projected traffic generated shall be distributed (inbound v.
outbound, left turn v. right turn) onto the existing street network to project
turning movements at site driveways and nearby intersections. Rationale for the
distribution shall be provided;
            5.   Capacity analysis at the proposed driveway(s) using the
procedures outlined in the most recent edition of the Highway Capacity Manual
published by the Transportation Research Board. Capacity analysis shall be
provided for all road intersections where the expected traffic will comprise at
least 5% of the existing intersection capacity and/or for roadway sections and
intersections experiencing congestion or a relatively high accident rate, as
determined by the village staff, Livingston County Road Commission or Michigan
Department of Transportation;
            6.   Analysis of any mitigation measures warranted by the
anticipated traffic impacts. Where appropriate, documentation shall be provided
from the appropriate road agency regarding time schedule for improvements and
method of funding; and
            7.   A map illustrating the location and design of proposed access,
including any sight distance limitations, dimensions from adjacent driveways
and intersections within 250 feet, and other data to demonstrate that the
driveway(s) will provide safe and efficient traffic operation.
      (11)   Landscaping and screening. The pre-development landscape shall be
preserved in its natural state to the degree possible by minimizing clearing
and grading. Post development grade changes shall be in keeping with the
general appearance of neighboring developed areas. Plant materials shall be
used to enhance the appearance of the site, to screen unsightly, noisy or other
harsh elements and to provide visual relief from large monotonous features such
as parking lots and building facades. Plant species that are hardy and native
to Michigan shall be used to the maximum degree possible. Screening; waste and
material storage, mechanical, service, parking and loading areas, utility
structures and similar features shall be located, buffered and/or screened so
as to be unobtrusive and not create a nuisance, negative visual impression or
health or safety hazard on the subject property or neighboring properties.
Trash containers shall be enclosed on all sides by a structure aesthetically
compatible with the development and surrounding property.
      (12)   Additional information. The Planning Commission may require the
submittal of other data deemed reasonably necessary for adequate review, such
as an independent traffic study, market analysis, environmental inventory and
assessment, demand on public facilities and services, impact on historic or
cultural resources, displacement of people or other uses as a result of the
proposed development, effect on the village tax base and adjacent property
values.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-2017; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-
2021)
§ 152.393 FINAL SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   (1)   Review for completeness. The Zoning Administrator shall review
the final site plan application and determine if the application is complete
and all of the necessary information has been provided in accordance with §
152.388 General Application. This shall also include waiver, zoning changes
and/or ZBA requests, if any.
      (2)   Final site plan revisions submittal. Any revisions that are
required during the final site plan review process will require the following:
         (a)   Four 24"x 36" hard copy revised site plan design drawings and
one electronic copy in pdf format.
         (b)   Revised plan shall include and address all comments from the
Village Engineer or Qualified Village Agent reviews.
         (c)   Revised plans shall also address comments of all other
applicable regulatory agencies.
         (d)   Payment of associated fees pursuant to the Village Fee Schedule.
   (B)   Distribution.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator
shall transmit the site plan and all accompanying materials to the Village
Planner, Village Engineer, DPW, Fire Marshal and the Planning Commission prior
to its next regular meeting. Transmittals shall not be made until all required
information is submitted and the necessary fees have been paid in full. The
Zoning Administrator shall also schedule consideration of the site plan as an
item on the agenda at the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission.
      (2)   Applicant must provide proof that plans were submitted to all other
agencies that regulate the proposed development including, but not limited to:
County Road Commission, Health Department, Building Department, Drain
Commissioner, Michigan Department of Transportation and Department of
Environmental Quality.
   (C)   Reports from Village Planner and Village Engineer. The Village Planner
and Village Engineer shall review the application to determine compliance with
the Zoning Ordinance and Village of Pinckney Technical Standards and submit a
written report addressing all issues that must be resolved to the Planning
Commission.
   (D)   Planning Commission action. At the first regular meeting at which a
final site plan is considered, the Planning Commission shall review the issues
identified in the preliminary site plan review, if any, and reports prepared by
the Village Planner and Engineer, as well as any other relevant issues. The
Planning Commission shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the final
site plan. The basis for the approval and any approval conditions shall be
specified in the resolution and the meeting minutes, and provided in writing to
the Village Council and the applicant. If no action is taken because more
information is required from the applicant, the Planning Commission shall table
the agenda item to a date certain, which shall be specified in the meeting
minutes.
      (1)   Denial. If a final site plan is denied, written notice thereof,
together with the reason, shall be sent to the applicant.
      (2)   Approval with conditions. If a final site plan is approved with
conditions, the applicant shall submit four copies of the revised site plan
with the date of revision and/or other necessary proof of compliance with the
conditions to the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   Approval. If a final site plan is approved, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue a land use permit to the applicant.
   (E)   Effect of approval. Approval of a final site plan by the Planning
Commission shall indicate that the proposal is in compliance with the Village
Zoning Ordinance and any conditions imposed thereunder.
   (F)   Final plan distribution. After the Planning Commission has taken final
action on a site plan and all necessary steps have been completed, the Zoning
Administrator shall mark three copies of the plans approved or denied, as
appropriate, with the date that action was taken. One marked copy shall be
returned to the applicant and the other two copies shall be kept on file in the
Village Hall. Copies of the village stamped plans shall be the only plans used
during construction.
   (G)   Expiration of approval. Approval of a final site plan shall be valid
for one calendar year, and shall then expire and be of no effect unless a
building permit, when required, is applied for and granted within that time
period. Approval shall expire and be of no effect 545 days following date of
approval by the Planning Commission, unless construction has begun and is being
diligently pursued in accordance with the approved site plan. The applicant may
extend final site plan approval for one additional year upon written request to
the Zoning Administrator and approval by the Planning Commission, prior to the
original expiration date. The Planning Commission may grant further extensions
of final site plan approval in accordance with the procedures noted herein upon
a showing of good cause.
   (H)   Revocation of approval. Final site plan approval shall be revoked if
construction of the development is not in conformance with the approved plans.
The Zoning Administrator shall give the applicant written notice of intention
to revoke the land use permit at least ten business days prior to review of the
proposed revocation by the Planning Commission. After conclusion of the review,
the Planning Commission may revoke its approval of the development if it
determines that a violation in fact exists and has not been remedied prior to
the hearing. Enforcement proceedings shall also apply per §§
152.022(B) and
152.999.
   (I)   Appeals. The decision of the Planning Commission with regard to the
site plan may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals, upon written request
by the property owner or proprietor. In the absence of an appeal being filed
with the village within 20 business days after the Planning Commission renders
a decision, the decision shall become and remain final.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 83, passed 10-27-2008; Ord. 91, passed 10-12-
2009; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-2017; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 152.394 AMENDMENT TO APPROVED PLOT PLAN OR SITE PLAN.
   (A)   Approval of plans. Approved plot plans and site plans shall become
part of the record of approval, and subsequent actions relating to the
authorized activity shall be consistent with the approved plot plan or site
plan, unless a change conforming to this chapter receives the mutual agreement
of the landowner and village approval authority.
   (B)   Request. A property owner or the owner's designated agent may request
a change in an approved site plan. A change in an approved site plan that
results in a major change as defined in this section, shall require a plan
amendment. Amendments shall follow the procedures and conditions required for
original plan submittal and review. A change that results in a minor change, as
defined in this section, shall not require a revision to the plan.
   (C)   Content of request. A request to change an approved site plan shall be
made in writing to the Zoning Administrator. The request shall state clearly
the reasons for the change. The reasons may be based upon considerations such
as changing economic conditions, potential improvements in layout or design
features, unforeseen difficulties or advantages mutually affecting the
interests of the village and the applicant or developer, such as technical
difficulties, site conditions, state or federal projects and installations and
statutory revisions.
   (D)   Finding. The Zoning Administrator, upon finding the request reasonable
and valid, shall notify the applicant in writing whether the proposed change is
major or minor. If the change is deemed major, the applicant shall pay an
appropriate fee determined by the Council and the plan amendment process shall
follow the procedures and conditions required for original site plan submittal
and review. Any major amendment to an approved site plan must be approved by
the Planning Commission.
   (E)   Major changes. Changes considered major (i.e., those for which an
amendment is required) include one or more of the following:
      (1)   A change in the original concept, character or use of the
development deemed by the Zoning Administrator to have a potentially negative
impact on natural features or surrounding properties;
      (2)   Any change to a condition of approval imposed by the Planning
Commission or Village Council uses shall comply with §
152.282(E)(1);
      (3)   A change in the type, or increase in the number of dwelling units;
      (4)   An increase in nonresidential floor area of at least 10% or 500
square feet, whichever is less;
      (5)   A change in a structure location of more than 20 feet;
      (6)   A change in the character, layout, alignment or function of any
access drive or interior road;
      (7)   An increase or loss of five or more off-street parking or loading
spaces;
      (8)   A change in the provision of water, sewage disposal and/or
treatment, electricity or other essential public service;
      (9)   A reduction in the amount of land area set aside for common open
space or the relocation of the area(s);
      (10)   Changes in the final governing agreements, provisions, covenants,
master deeds or bylaws; and
      (11)   Any other change deemed a major change by the Zoning Administrator
or Planning Commission.
   (F)   Minor changes. If the Zoning Administrator rules that a proposed
change to a site plan is a minor change as defined by this section, the Zoning
Administrator may approve the change and it shall be considered approved by the
Planning Commission. If a change is approved, the Zoning Administrator shall
notify in writing the Planning Commission, Village Council and other applicable
departments. As minor changes on the site plan drawings are approved by the
Zoning Administrator, each shall be signed and dated by the applicant or
developer and the owner(s) of the subject property and the Zoning
Administrator, prior to changes being effective. Minor changes shall be defined
as any change not defined as a major change under division (E) above, and shall
include but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   A decrease in nonresidential floor area or the number of dwelling
units;
      (2)   The replacement of plant material in the landscape plan with a
comparable type and size of planting; and
      (3)   Changes required by another village, county, state or federal
regulatory agency that do not result in a major change.
   (G)   Zoning. Amended site plans shall conform to all regulations of the
zoning district in which the project is proposed.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-2017)
§ 152.395 MODIFICATION DURING CONSTRUCTION.
   All structures and improvements shall conform to the approved site plan
including engineering drawings approved by the Village Engineer. If the
applicant makes any changes to the development in relation to the approved site
plan, the applicant must cease and desist construction. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to notify the Village, through the Zoning
Administrator of the changes. Upon investigation, the applicant shall be
required to correct the changes so as to conform to the approved site plan.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 139, passed 9-11-2017)
§ 152.396 CONSTRUCTION OBSERVATION AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Inspections. The Zoning Administrator, Village Engineer and County
Building Official shall be responsible for inspecting structures and
improvements for conformance with the approved site plan. All building
construction, site and sub-grade improvements such as utilities, sub-base
installations for drives and parking lots and similar improvements shall be
inspected and approved by the County Building Department and Health Department,
in coordination with the Zoning Administrator, who shall obtain inspection
assistance from the Village Engineer, Fire Chief and/or professional
consultants where appropriate.
   (B)   Construction observation and other fees.
      (1)   Livingston County fees. In addition to the fees required by the
village, the Livingston County Building Department and Drain Commissioner's
Office are responsible for collection of fees associated with construction and
building review. This includes footings, compaction, insulation, backfill,
rough, wallboard, soil erosion and sediment control, tap fees and final
approvals.
      (2)   Water and sewer capital connection charges. Water and sewer capital
connection charges are to be paid prior to issuance of a land use permit at the
rate set by the fee schedule.
      (3)   Construction observation fees (escrow account). The proprietor
shall be responsible for construction observation fees as set forth in the fee
schedule. This includes establishing an escrow account as required.
         (a)   The proprietor shall be responsible for all costs associated
with inspection, construction engineering, and construction administration for
the project.
         (b)   The proprietor shall also be responsible for construction
observation fees for the Village Engineer or Qualified Village Agent to insure
its conformance with the site plan approval and the village's standards.
         (c)   The proprietor's engineer must provide a construction cost
estimate to the Village Engineer or Qualified Village Agent for approval. The
construction cost estimate shall be related to only sanitary sewer, water,
road, sidewalk, parking, curbing and storm system improvements. Once the cost
estimate is approved, the construction observation escrow account shall be
initially based on the construction cost estimate and the contractor's schedule
as per this §
152.396 and in §
152.025.
         (d)   The proprietor or his/her authorized agent shall deposit with
the Village Clerk and/or Treasurer at least five days prior to the pre-
construction meeting the required construction observation fee deposit based on
the approved construction cost estimate and computed in accordance with the fee
schedule.
            1.   The fee shall cover the cost of construction observation and/
or any administrative engineering time incurred by the Village Engineer or
Qualified Village Agent in association with the project.
            2.   All monies not used from the deposit shall be returned to the
proprietor at project completion.
            3.   The extent of inspection and field engineering required will
be determined by the Village Engineer or Qualified Village Agent.
            4.   The base escrow amounts are derived from typical construction
activities that demonstrate efficient construction activities, no major changes
in design during construction, and no need for re-inspection.
      (4)   Inspection fees will be invoiced monthly against the inspection
deposit based upon the established hourly rate for the Village Engineer or
Qualified Village Agent. The proprietor will be notified in the event the
deposit has been depleted and additional funds are required. Prompt attention
to re-establishing this deposit will avoid project stop work orders. Review of
material testing reports, "as-built" record drawings, and data input of
constructed utilities into the village GIS system shall also be invoiced
against the inspection account. The account balance upon completion of the
project and acceptance of the record plans will be returned to the proprietor.
      (5)   Testing, as required by the Village Technical Standards, shall be
provided by the proprietor and conform to the following:
         (a)   The testing firm must be qualified and approved by the Village
Engineer or Qualified Village Agent.
         (b)   The proprietor will pay the qualified/certified-testing firm
directly.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
§ 152.397 AS-BUILT DRAWINGS.
   (A)   The applicant shall provide as-built drawings of all utilities and all
appurtenances that were installed on a site for which a final site plan was
approved, and as provided for in the Village Technical Standards. The drawings
shall be submitted to and approved by the Village Engineer prior to the release
of any performance guarantee or part thereof covering the installation.
   (B)   The as-built drawings shall show, but shall not be limited to, such
information as the exact size, type and location of pipes, location and size of
manholes and catch basins, location and size of valves, fire hydrants, tees and
crosses, depth and slopes of retention basins and location and type of other
utility installations. The drawings shall show plan and profile views of all
sanitary and storm sewer lines and plan views of all water lines.
   (C)   The as-built drawings shall show all work as actually installed and as
field verified by a professional engineer or a representative thereof. The
drawings shall be identified as as-built drawings in the title block of each
drawing and shall be signed and dated by the owner of the development or the
owner’s legal representative and shall bear the seal of a professional
engineer.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 154, passed 1-11-2021)
NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES AND STRUCTURES
§ 152.415 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate existing lots, uses and
structures that were lawful before this chapter was adopted, but which have
become nonconforming under the terms of this chapter and its amendments. It is
the intent of this chapter to permit the legally established non-conformities
to remain until they are discontinued or removed, but not to encourage their
continuance and to bring them into conformity as circumstances allow without
unreasonably interfering with established property rights.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.416 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a nonconforming lot,
use or structure to prove to the Zoning Administrator that the lot, use or
structure was lawfully established, existed on the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this chapter and has existed continuously.
   (B)   Nonconforming uses and structures are hereby declared to be
incompatible with the uses and structures permitted within the various zoning
districts. Nonconforming uses and structures shall not be enlarged, expanded,
extended or increased, except as provided for herein and shall not be used as
grounds for adding other uses and/or structures that are prohibited.
   (C)   Nonconforming uses shall comply with current Zoning Ordinance
requirements (such as landscaping, screening, parking, environmental
performance and general standards) to the maximum extent possible.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.417 NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   A legal nonconforming lot, as defined herein, which does not meet the
minimum standards of the zoning district in which it is located for lot area or
lot width may be developed, provided that the use, access, height, yard,
setback, landscaped buffer, off-street parking and other requirements of the
district are met and, provided further, that the lot meets all of the current
requirements of the Livingston County Health Department.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.418 NONCONFORMING USES.
   Any lawful nonconforming use may be continued, subject to the following
provisions:
   (A)   Expansion.  A nonconforming use shall not be expanded, enlarged,
extended or increased, so as to occupy a greater area of land or more floor
area within a structure than was occupied by the use on the effective date of
this chapter or its amendment.
   (B)   Relocation. A nonconforming use shall not be moved, in whole or in
part, to any other structure, or to any other portion of the lot or site upon
which it was located on the effective date of this chapter or its amendment.
   (C)   Discontinuance. If a nonconforming use is discontinued, it shall not
thereafter be reestablished, and any subsequent use of the land shall comply
with the allowable uses in the district in which it is located. A nonconforming
use shall be considered discontinued if the customary use ceases for any reason
for a period of 12 months or more.
   (D)   Change of use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any other
use except to a use permitted in the district in which the subject property is
located.
   (E)   Accessory structures. New accessory structures associated with a
nonconforming use shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission at
a regular public meeting.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.419 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Any lawful nonconforming structure may be continued subject to the following
provisions:
   (A)   Alteration. A nonconforming structure may not be enlarged or altered
in any way that increases its nonconformity, except porches, decks, patios,
fire escapes and similar minor appurtenances may be attached to existing
structures.
   (B)   Relocation. If a nonconforming structure is moved, in whole or in
part, any distance for any reason it shall thereafter conform to the
regulations of the district in which it is located after it is moved.
   (C)   Maintenance. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the repair or
routine maintenance of a lawful nonconforming structure to correct
deterioration, obsolescence, depreciation and/or wear.
   (D)   Replacement. A nonconforming structure that has been partially
destroyed may be rebuilt provided:
      (1)   The building footprint and height of the replacement structure do
not increase the level of nonconformity;
      (2)   The cost of restoration does not exceed the state equalized value
of the structure at the time of damage; and
      (3)   The reconstruction is completed within one year of the time of
damage.
   (E)   Signs. Every permanent sign that lawfully existed at the time of the
enactment of this chapter, but which does not conform to a height, size, area,
location or other requirement of this chapter, is hereby deemed to be legally
nonconforming. This status shall not be granted to any temporary sign.
      (1)   Nonconforming signs may not be altered, enlarged or replaced;
however, nonconforming signs may be reduced in size and/or maintained and
repaired so as to continue the useful life of the sign.
      (2)   The copy of the sign may not be amended or changed, unless
specifically designed to be changed periodically as in reader board signs,
without bringing the use into compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   Any nonconforming sign destroyed by fire or other casualty loss
shall not be restored or rebuilt.
      (4)   Any sign advertising a business that is no longer conducted for a
period of one year or more shall be removed by the owner of the building,
structure or lot upon which the sign is located within 30 days of receipt of
written notice by the Zoning Administrator.
      (5)   A sign accessory to a nonconforming use may be erected in the
village in accordance with the current sign requirements of §§
152.300 et seq.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.420 CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIP.
   There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of a nonconforming
use and/or nonconforming structure, provided that there is no change in the use
and/or structure.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.421 SPECIAL LAND USES.
   Any use for which a special land use permit is required, as provided in this
chapter, shall not be deemed a nonconforming use but shall, without further
action, be deemed a conforming use in the district.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.422 PURCHASE OR CONDEMNATION.
   In order to eliminate nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures that
constitute a nuisance or are detrimental to the public health, safety and/or
welfare, the village may acquire private property by purchase, condemnation or
otherwise for the purpose of discontinuing the use and/or removing the
structure.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.423 PRIOR CONSTRUCTION APPROVAL.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the completion of
construction and use of a nonconforming structure for which, prior to the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, a building permit was
obtained and actual construction was lawfully commenced on the site. Further,
actual construction must have commenced within three months after the issuance
of the permit and must thereafter be diligently carried on to completion
according to the approved plans, without any period of suspension or
abandonment of work in excess of three months, and the entire structure shall
have been completed according to the approved plans within two years after the
issuance of the building permit.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the commencement of actual
construction means work of a substantial nature by way of site preparation. The
actual use must be apparent and manifested by a tangible change in the land, as
opposed to merely intended or contemplated work by the property owner. In this
regard, preliminary operations, such as the ordering of plans, surveying,
grading, clearing of trees and debris and the removal of old structures are
insufficient. The test in each case is not how much money may have been spent
in reliance upon prior zoning regulations but, whether there has been any
tangible change in the land itself by excavation and construction, such as
placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a
permanent manner.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 152.440 AUTHORITY.
   There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals, the membership,
powers and duties of which are prescribed in Act 110 of the Public Acts of
2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 et seq., as amended. The Board shall have the
power to interpret, vary and determine the application of the Zoning Ordinance
so that the purposes and intent of the chapter are met and substantial justice
is maintained.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.441 MEMBERSHIP, REMOVAL, TERMS.
   (A)   The Village Council shall act as the Zoning Board of Appeals in
accordance with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, as
amended (M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 et seq.).
   (B)   The Village President shall serve as the Chairperson of the Zoning
Board of Appeals and the President Pro Tem shall serve as the Zoning Board of
Appeal’s Vice-Chairperson.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 87 ZBA, passed 3-23-2009)
§ 152.442 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals, in addition to the general powers and duties
conferred upon it by Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 et
seq., as amended, in specific cases and subject to appropriate conditions and
safeguards, shall have the following duties:
   (A)   Appeals.  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide questions
that arise in the administration of the Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from and review any administrative order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator or
other official or body duly charged with the enforcement of the Zoning
Ordinance. This shall include appeals of decisions related to a site plan or
special land use, but excluding for a residential open space development,
condominium project, or other planned development.
   (B)   Variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide requests
for variances from the requirements of this chapter where there is practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship imposed on the applicant in carrying out the
strict letter of this chapter, in accordance with §
152.444. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant non-use variances relating to
the construction, structural changes or alteration of buildings or structures
related to dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance or to any other
non-use-related standard in the Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Board of Appeals
may grant variances from uses of land subject to a vote of two-thirds of the
members of the Zoning Board of Appeals to approve a use variance.
   (C)   Interpretation and other duties. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
also have the power to act on any other matters where this chapter provides for
administrative review, interpretation, variance or exception, including the
following.
      (1)   Land uses. Interpretation of permitted uses and special land uses
in a zoning district, to determine if a specific use is included within a more
general land use category. In making this determination, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall consider the following:
         (a)   The similarity and compatibility of the use in question to those
uses listed in the zoning district;
         (b)   The conformance of the use in question to the stated goals of
the district, the larger Zoning Ordinance and the Village Master Plan; and
         (c)   Whether or not the use in question is specifically listed in any
other zoning district.
      (2)   Zoning map. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide
questions regarding the interpretation of the village zoning map.
      (3)   Records. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep a record of all
decisions interpreting this chapter, including zoning map and land use
interpretations listed above. The Zoning Ordinance shall be amended to
incorporate these decisions as appropriate.
   (D)   Limitations. The Zoning Board of Appeals, notwithstanding any terms
herein to the contrary, shall not have the power to change the zoning district
classification of any property, to review a proposed zoning or re-zoning of any
property, review decisions related to approval or denial of a for a residential
open space development, condominium project, or other planned development, to
make any change in the terms or intent of this chapter, prohibit a use that is
permitted in this chapter or determine the validity of this chapter. The ZBA
shall not have the power to reverse or modify the Village Council decision to
approve or deny a for a residential open space development, condominium
project, or other planned development; to grant variances to any a for a
residential open space development, condominium project, or other planned
development standards or as to any conditions established by the Village
Council in its approval for a residential open space development, condominium
project, or other planned development; or any conditional re-zoning under §
152.262(N).
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 87 ZBA, passed 3-23-2009; Ord. 139, passed 9-
11-2017)
§ 152.443 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application. Any request for action by the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be submitted in writing to the Zoning Administrator on a standard village
form. The applications shall be accompanied by the necessary review fee and all
relevant plans, studies and other information, which shall be made a part of
the public record.
   (B)   Appeals. An appeal may be taken by a person aggrieved, or by an
officer, department, board or bureau of the village.
      (1)   An appeal of a determination by the Zoning Administrator or other
duly authorized enforcing agent or body shall be made within 30 days of the
date of permit approval or denial.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the Zoning Board of
Appeals all documents, or direct copies thereof, constituting the record from
which the appealed action was taken.
      (3)   An appeal stays all proceedings, and thereupon all changes in the
status quo of the property concerned shall constitute a violation of this
chapter; except that the Zoning Administrator may certify to the Zoning Board
of Appeals, after the notice of the appeal has been filed, that for reason of
facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. If such a certification is filed, the
proceedings shall only be stayed by a restraining order, which may be granted
by the Zoning Board of Appeals or on application to the Circuit Court when due
cause can be shown.
      (4)   If an appeal or variance request to the Zoning Board of Appeals
involves a lot, structure or a use for which site plan approval is required by
this Code, the applicant or appellant shall first apply for preliminary site
plan approval as set forth in §
152.389 herein. The Planning Commission shall review the site plan and shall
determine the layout and other features required to obtain approval of the site
plan. The Planning Commission shall then transmit a copy of the site plan and
the Commission's findings thereon to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Board
shall, upon deciding on the appeal or variance request, return the plan and its
decision to the Planning Commission for Commission action on the site plan.
   (C)   Meetings. All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be open to
the public and shall fully comply with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of
1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275, as amended. Meetings shall be
held at the call of the Chairperson and at the other times as the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall specify in its rules and procedures. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall not conduct business unless a majority of the Zoning Board of
Appeals is present. The business of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
conducted in accordance with its adopted by-laws. The Village Attorney shall
act as legal counsel for the Zoning Board of Appeals and shall be present at
all meetings upon request of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (D)   Public notice. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time
for a public hearing of an appeal or variance and shall notify the applicant of
the time and place of the hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be given
in accordance with the provisions of §
152.022. Upon the hearing, a party may appear in person, by agent or by
attorney.
   (E)   Minutes.  Minutes of all proceedings shall be recorded, which shall be
filed in the office of the Clerk of the Village Council. The minutes shall
contain evidence and data relevant to each case considered, together with the
separate votes of the members and the final disposition of each case.
   (F)   Action. A concurring vote of the majority of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative official or
body, to decide in favor of an applicant on any matter upon which the Zoning
Board of Appeals is required to pass under this chapter, or to grant a variance
from the Zoning Ordinance, except a concurring vote of two-thirds of the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be required to grant a use variance as provided for
under §
152.444. A member of the Village Council who is also a member of the Planning
Commission shall not participate in a public hearing on or vote on the same
matter that the member voted on as a member of the Planning Commission or
Village Council. However, the member may consider and vote on other unrelated
matters involving the same property, including any variance requests which are
solely within the Zoning Board of Appeals jurisdiction.
   (G)   Decision. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall return a decision upon
each case within 60 days of application, unless additional time is agreed to by
the applicant.
      (1)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose reasonable conditions upon
an affirmative decision. The conditions may include those necessary to prevent
negative impacts on public infrastructure, natural resources, adjacent
properties, social and economic well-being and public health, safety and
welfare.
      (2)   A decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not become final
until ten days from the date of the decision. Any appeal from a decision of the
Zoning Board of Appeals to the circuit court shall be filed within 30 days
after the Zoning Board of Appeals issues its decision in writing signed by the
Chairperson, or within 21 days after the Zoning Board of Appeals approves the
minutes of its decision.
      (3)   If no decision is made regarding an appeal at the advertised public
hearing, disposition of the case must be set to a certain date at that time,
and this date must be clearly stated in the meeting minutes. If no certain date
is set and duly noted in the public record, notice of the next meeting at which
the case will be considered shall be provided as required under division (D)
above.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 87 ZBA, passed 3-23-2009; Ord. 139, passed 9-
11-2017)
§ 152.444 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance would involve practical difficulties or
cause unnecessary hardship within the meaning of this chapter, the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall have the power upon appeal in specific cases to authorize such
variation or modification of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance with such
conditions and safeguards as it may determine as may be in harmony with the
spirit of this chapter and so that public safety and welfare be secured and
substantial justice done.
   (B)   No such variance or modification of the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be granted unless it appears that all of the following facts
and conditions exist:
      (1)   The alleged practical difficulties, hardships or both, are
exceptional and peculiar to the subject property or intended use of the
property, that do not apply generally to other properties or class of uses in
the same district;
      (2)   Failure to grant the variance will deprive the property owner of
his or her reasonable use as enjoyed by other property owners in the same
district and vicinity. This shall include substantially more than mere
inconvenience and/or inability to attain a higher financial return;
      (3)   Allowing the variance will result in substantial justice being
done, considering the public benefits intended to be secured by this chapter,
the individual hardships that will be suffered by failure to grant the variance
and the rights of others whose property would be affected by approval of the
variance;
      (4)   The variance will be consistent with the purpose and intent of this
chapter, will not adversely affect the purpose or objectives of the master plan
of the village, will not be contrary to the public interest, will not injure
the public or private rights of others and will not diminish the value of
surrounding properties;
      (5)   The conditions and circumstances on which the variance request is
based have not been self-created by the applicant or predecessors in title; and
      (6)   The variance will not constitute a special privilege inconsistent
with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and the same zoning
district, and shall be the minimum variance that will make possible a
reasonable use of the land or structure.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 87 ZBA, passed 3-23-2009)
§ 152.445 RULES FOR GRANTING VARIANCES.
   The following rules shall be applied in the granting of variances.
   (A)   In granting a variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall specify, in
writing, to the applicant the conditions of approval that will, in its
judgment, ensure the purpose and intent of this chapter are met. The breach of
any conditions shall automatically invalidate the permit granted.
   (B)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may, upon review and public hearing, and
unless good cause can be shown, declare a variance null and void if
construction authorized by the variance has not commenced within one year after
the date of approval and been pursued diligently to completion.
   (C)   No application for a variance that has been denied wholly or in part
by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be resubmitted for a period of one year
from the date of last denial, except on the grounds of newly discovered
evidence or proof of changed conditions found upon inspection by the Zoning
Board of Appeals to be valid.
   (D)   In authorizing any variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals may require
that a performance bond be furnished to insure compliance with the
requirements, specifications and conditions imposed (see §
152.026).
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 87 ZBA, passed 3-23-2009)
AMENDMENT
§ 152.460 AMENDMENT PROCEDURE.
   The Village Council may, from time to time on its own motion, on
recommendation of the Planning Commission or on petition, after public notice,
hearing and report by the Planning Commission as provided by law, amend,
supplement or change the boundaries or regulations herein, or subsequently
established herein, pursuant to the authority and procedure established in
Public Act 110 of 2006, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.3101 et seq., as amended.
   (A)   Before the Village Council shall adopt any amendment to this chapter
or the maps adopted hereunder, the Planning Commission shall hold at least one
public hearing.
   (B)   Not less than 15-days’ notice of the time and place of the public
hearing shall first be published in a paper of general circulation in the
village. Not less than 15-days’ notice of the time and place of the public
hearing shall first be given by mail to each public utility company and to each
railroad company owning or operating any public utility or railroad within the
affected area that registers its name and mailing address with the Village
Clerk for the purpose of receiving the notice. An affidavit of mailing shall be
maintained. A hearing shall be granted to an interested person at the time and
place specified in the notice.
   (C)   If an individual property, or several adjacent properties are proposed
for re-zoning, notice of the proposed re-zoning and hearing shall be given by
mail to the owners of the property in question and to all persons to whom real
property is assessed and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of
the boundary of the property in question, at least 15 days before the hearing.
   (D)   A summary of the comments submitted at the public hearing shall be
transmitted with the report of the Planning Commission to the Village Council.
The Village Council may hold additional public hearings if it considers it
necessary. After receipt of the Planning Commission's report, the Village
Council may adopt the proposed amendment, with or without modification or refer
the proposed amendment again to the Planning Commission for further
consideration.
   (E)   Upon presentation of a protest petition meeting the requirements
hereinafter set forth, an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance that is the object
of the petition shall be passed only by a two-thirds vote of the Village
Council. The protest petition shall be presented to the Village Council before
final legislative action on the amendment and shall be signed by one of the
following:
      (1)   The owners of at least 20% of the area of land included in the
proposed change; and
      (2)   The owners of at least 20% of the area of land included within an
area extending outward 100 feet from any point on the boundary of the land
included in the proposed change. Publicly owned land shall be excluded in
calculating this 20% land area requirement.
   (F)   Following adoption of this Zoning Ordinance and subsequent amendments
by the Village Council, one notice of adoption shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village within 15 days after adoption.
The notice of adoption shall contain the following information:
      (1)   In the case of a newly adopted Zoning Ordinance, the following
statement: “A zoning ordinance regulating the development and use of land has
been adopted by the Village Council of the Village of Pinckney;”
      (2)   In the case of an amendment to an existing Zoning Ordinance, either
a summary of the regulatory effect of the amendment, including the geographic
area affected or the text of the amendment;
      (3)   The effective date of the ordinance; and
      (4)   The place and time where a copy of the ordinance may be purchased
or inspected.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.461 MAP AMENDMENT CRITERIA.
   In considering any petition for an amendment to the official zoning map, the
Planning Commission and Village Council shall consider the following criteria
in making its findings, recommendations and decision:
   (A)   Consistency with the goals, policies and future land use map of the
Village of Pinckney Comprehensive Plan, including any subarea or corridor
studies. If conditions have significantly changed since the Comprehensive Plan
was adopted, the consistency with recent development trends in the area;
   (B)   Compatibility of the site's physical, geological, hydrological and
other environmental features with the host of uses permitted in the proposed
zoning district;
   (C)   The ability of the site to be reasonably developed with one of the
uses permitted under the current zoning;
   (D)   The compatibility of all the potential uses allowed in the proposed
zoning district with surrounding uses and zoning in terms of land suitability,
impacts on the environment, density, nature or use, traffic impacts,
aesthetics, infrastructure and potential influence on property values and local
economy;
   (E)   The capacity of village infrastructure and services to accommodate the
uses permitted in the requested district without compromising public health,
safety or welfare;
   (F)   The apparent demand for the types of uses permitted in the requested
zoning district in the village in relation to the amount of land in the village
currently zoned to accommodate the demand;
   (G)   Where a re-zoning is reasonable given the above criteria, a
determination the requested zoning district is more appropriate than another
district or amending the list of permitted or special land uses within a
district; and
   (H)   The request has not previously been submitted within the past one
year, unless conditions have changed or new information has been provided.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any structure erected, altered, razed or converted or any land use
carried out in violation of this Zoning Ordinance is hereby declared to be a
nuisance per se.
   (B)   Any owner and/or agent in charge of a structure or land use that
violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction set forth in
Chapter 131 of this code, subject to payment of a civil fine as specified in
village’s Municipal Civil Infraction Ordinance, plus costs and other sanctions
for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines. Each
act of violation and every day upon which the violation occurs shall constitute
a separate offense.
   (C)   The owner or occupant of any structure or premises, or part thereof,
where any condition in violation of this chapter shall exist, and any person
who has assisted knowingly in the commission of the violation shall each be
guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be liable for
the fines set forth in this section.
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating a provision
of this chapter shall become liable to the village for any expense, loss or
damage incurred by the village as a result of the violation including, but not
limited to, actual attorney, filing and witness fees.
   (E)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of Pinckney from
taking the other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
   (F)   The penalties provided for herein are cumulative and in addition to
any other remedies provided by law.
(Ord. 37, passed 8-28-2005; Ord. 117, passed 3-11-2013)
CHAPTER 153: DDA DEVELOPMENT PLAN
Section
   
153.01   DDA Development Plan; adopted by reference
§ 153.01 DDA DEVELOPMENT PLAN; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Village of Pinckney’s DDA Development Plan is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. 63, passed 4-26-2004)
CHAPTER 154: UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Section
   
154.01   Prohibited
   
154.02   Definition
   
154.03   Notice; contents; hearing officer; filing of notice with officer;
service
   
154.04   Hearing; testimony; decision; order; nonappearance or noncompliance;
review; order to show cause; costs
   
154.05   Judicial review
 
   
154.99   Penalty
§ 154.01 PROHIBITED.
   Pursuant to the authority granted in Public Act 61 of 1969, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 125.538 et seq., as amended, it is unlawful for any owner or agent thereof
to keep or maintain any dwelling or part thereof which is a dangerous building
as defined in §
154.02
(Ord. 101, passed 4-11-2011) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 154.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING. Any building or structure which has any of the following
defects or is in any of the following conditions.
      (1)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of
exit does not conform to the approved fire code of the village wherein the
property lies, it shall be considered that such dwelling does not meet the
requirements of this subchapter.
      (2)   Whenever any portion has been damaged by fire, wind, flood, or by
any other cause in such a manner that the structural strength or stability is
appreciably less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the
minimum requirements of any building code of the village wherein the building
is located for a new building or similar structure, purpose or location.
      (3)   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance is likely to fall or
to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or
damage property.
      (4)   Whenever any portion has settled to such an extent that walls or
other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds than is
required in the case of new construction by the building code of the village
where the building is located.
      (5)   Whenever the building or structure or any part, because of
dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or because of the
removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of
supporting such building or portion thereof, or for other reason, is likely to
partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or
underpinning is likely to fall or give way.
      (6)   Whenever for any reason whatsoever the building or structure or any
portion is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used.
      (7)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire,
wind or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated, as to become an
attractive nuisance to children who might play therein to their danger, or as
to afford a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or as to enable
persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful
or immoral acts.
      (8)   Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage or faulty
construction or arrangement or otherwise, is insanitary or unfit for human
habitation or is in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease
when so determined by the health officer or is likely to work injury to the
health, safety or general welfare of those living within.
      (9)   Whenever any building becomes vacant, dilapidated and open at door
or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or
accessible to entrance by trespassers.
(Ord. 101, passed 4-11-2011)
§ 154.03 NOTICE; CONTENTS; HEARING OFFICER; FILING OF NOTICE WITH OFFICER;
SERVICE.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, when the whole
or any part of any building or structure is found to be in a dangerous or
unsafe condition, the Building Department shall issue a notice of the dangerous
and unsafe condition.
      (1)   Such notice shall be directed to each owner of or party in interest
in the building in whose name the property appears on the last local tax
assessment records.
      (2)   The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing on the
condition of the building or structure, at which time and place the person to
whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause why the
building or structure should not be ordered to be demolished or otherwise made
safe.
   (B)   The Hearing Officer shall be appointed by the Village President to
serve at their pleasure. The Livingston County Building Department shall file a
copy of the notice of the dangerous and unsafe condition with the Hearing
Officer.
   (C)   All notices provided for in this subchapter shall be in writing and
shall be served upon the person to whom they are directed personally, or in
lieu of personal service may be mailed by certified mail, return receipt
requested, addressed to such owner or party in interest at the address shown on
the tax records, at least ten days before the date of the hearing described in
the notice. If any person to whom a notice is directed is not personally
served, in addition to mailing the notice, a copy thereof shall be posted upon
a conspicuous part of the building or structure.
(Ord. 101, passed 4-11-2011)
§ 154.04 HEARING; TESTIMONY; DECISION; ORDER; NONAPPEARANCE OR NONCOMPLIANCE;
REVIEW; ORDER TO SHOW CAUSE; COSTS.
   (A)   The Hearing Officer shall take testimony of the Building Department,
the owner of the property and any interested party. The Hearing Officer shall
render his or her decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the
building to be demolished or otherwise made safe.
   (B)   If it is determined by the Hearing Officer that the building or
structure should be demolished or otherwise made safe, he or she shall so
order, fixing a time in the order for the owner, agent or lessee to comply
therewith.
   (C)   If the owner, agent or lessee fails to appear or neglects or refuses
to comply with the order, the Hearing Officer shall file a report of his or her
findings and copy of his or her order with the Village Council and request that
the necessary action be taken to demolish or otherwise make safe the building
or structure. A copy of the findings and order of the Hearing Officer shall be
served on the owner, agent or lessee in the manner prescribed in §
154.03.
   (D)   The village Council shall fix a date for hearing, reviewing the
findings and order of the Hearing Officer and shall give notice to the owner,
agent or lessee in the manner prescribed in §
154.03 of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing the owner, agent or
lessee shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the building should not
be demolished or otherwise made safe and the Village Council shall either
approve, disapprove or modify the order for the demolition or making safe of
the building or structure.
   (E)   The cost of the demolition or making the building safe shall be a lien
against the real property and shall be reported to the assessing officer of the
village who shall assess the cost against the property on which the building or
structure is located.
   (F)   The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon
the last local tax assessment records shall be notified of the amount of cost
assessed under this section by first class mail at the address shown on such
records. If he or she fails to pay such costs within 30 days after mailing by
the assessor of the notice of the amount thereof, the assessor shall add such
costs to the next tax roll of the village and such costs shall be collected in
the same manner in all respects as provided by law for the collection of taxes
by the village.
(Ord. 101, passed 4-11-2011)
§ 154.05 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   An owner aggrieved by any final decision or order of the Village Council
under §
154.04 may appeal the decision or order to the circuit court by filing a
petition for an order of superintending control within 20 days from the date of
such decision or order.
(Ord. 101, passed 4-11-2011)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, owner, corporation, landlord, tenant or individual who
violates any provision of this chapter is deemed responsible for committing a
municipal civil infraction. The imposition of a penalty for any violation of
this chapter shall not excuse the violation nor shall the violation be
permitted to continue. Every day upon which such violation occurs shall be
deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 101, passed 4-11-2011)
CHAPTER 155: REGISTRATION OF RESIDENTIAL RENTAL DWELLING UNITS
Section
   
155.001   Definitions
   
155.002   Initial registration of residential rental dwelling units
   
155.003   Registration information to be contained in registration form
   
155.004   Issuance of certificate of registration
   
155.005   Follow-up registration
   
155.006   Changes in registration information
   
155.007   Fees; late fees
   
155.008   Maintenance of records
   
155.009   Penalty for failure to comply
§ 155.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LOCAL AGENT. An individual or company representing the owner. The local
agent is responsible for the operation of the owner’s residential rental
dwelling unit(s) located within the Village of Pinckney.
   OWNER. The individual(s), company, corporation, governmental or private
agency, or any other entity listed on the recorded deed, or the purchaser under
a recorded land contract, and shown as the owner of real property containing
one or more residential rental dwelling unit(s).
   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL DWELLING UNIT. A distinct individual living quarters
within a building intended for occupancy by a person or persons other than the
owner and the family of the owner, and for which rent or a remunerations of any
kind is paid to the owner. Single-family residences, condominiums, duplex,
apartments and rooming houses, may all contain and be classified as RESIDENTIAL
RENTAL DWELLING UNITS.
(Ord. 110, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 155.002 INITIAL REGISTRATION OF RESIDENTIAL RENTAL DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   Within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter, the village
shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation, a notice summarizing the
registration requirements of this section. The village shall also mail a copy
of said notice by first class mail to the owner of record of each property
listed in the assessment rolls of the village on the effective date of this
chapter as residential property which does not qualify for a 100% homestead
property tax exemption.
   (B)   Within 90 days after the effective date of this chapter, the owner of
every building containing a residential rental dwelling unit within the village
shall register each such building with the Office of the Clerk by filing a
registration form provided by the village. If the owner owns more than one
building containing one or more residential dwelling unit, a separate
registration form shall be filed for each separate building.
(Ord. 110, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 155.003 REGISTRATION INFORMATION TO BE CONTAINED IN REGISTRATION FORM.
   The following information shall be provided on the registration form by the
owner:
   (A)   Owner’s name, home address, day and evening telephone numbers and fax
numbers and email address;
   (B)   Local agent’s name, home address, day and evening telephone numbers
and fax numbers and email address;
   (C)   Address of the building owned (fee simple or land contract) by the
owner containing one or more residential rental dwelling unit(s) including
multi-unit buildings in which the owner resides;
   (D)   The number of identifying address of each residential rental dwelling
unit in a building containing more than one dwelling unit;
   (E)   Signature of owner attesting to the truthfulness of the information
provided. If the owner is a company, corporation, governmental or private
agency, or any other entity, only a duly authorized officer or administrator
may sign the registration form.
(Ord. 110, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 155.004 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   The village shall examine each registration form for completeness and,
if complete, shall issue a certificate of registration for each residential
rental dwelling unit in the building identified in the registration form. The
certificate of registration shall be mailed to the owner by the Clerk’s Office
or their designee. If the registration form is incomplete, the village will
make not more than two attempts to contact the owner (by telephone, mail or in
person) to have the property complete the registration form.
   (B)   Failure of the owner to file a complete registration form with the
village within the time limits prescribed in this chapter shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 110, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 155.005 FOLLOW-UP REGISTRATION.
   After the initial 90 day registration period set forth in §
155.002(B) of this chapter, residential rental dwelling units shall be
registered as follows:
   (A)   Newly constructed residential dwelling buildings or units shall be
registered prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy.
   (B)   A residential rental dwelling/building/units sold, transferred or
conveyed shall be registered by the new owner within 30 days of the date of the
deed, land contract, or other instrument of conveyance. At that time, the units
shall be removed from the previous owner’s registration.
   (C)   Any non-rental residential dwelling unit converted to a residential
rental dwelling unit shall be registered prior to the date it is occupied for
rental purposes.
(Ord. 110, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 155.006 CHANGES IN REGISTRATION INFORMATION.
   If any information on a registration form changes after issuance of a
certificate of registration, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or the
owner’s local agent to notify the village within ten days of the date of the
change and to provide correct or updated information in writing within said ten
day period.
(Ord. 110, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 155.007 FEES; LATE FEES.
   There shall be no fee for the registration, re-registration, or updating of
registration information within the allotted time periods. If a residential
rental dwelling unit is not registered within the allotted time periods
specified herein, then a late fee of $50 per rental dwelling unit shall be paid
by the owner. The late registration fee, however, shall not become effective
until 90 days after the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 110, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 155.008 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   The Clerk’s Office shall be responsible for maintaining and updating all
residential rental dwelling unit registration forms and certificates of
registration, and for providing a semi-annual report to the Village Zoning
Administrator, Director of Public Works, and the Police Chief of the number of
residential rental dwelling units in the village. The semi-annual report shall
also identify the residential rental dwelling units by the type (single family,
duplex, multi-unit, apartment houses, rooming houses, etc.) and the number and
type of units added to or deleted from the registration roster since the last
semi-annual report.
(Ord. 110, passed 6-25-2012)
§ 155.009 PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   A person who violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to payment of a civil fine as
specified in §
131.57, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. Repeat offenses
shall be subject to increased fines as provided by
Chapter 131 herein. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
remedies available to the village in the event of a violation by a person of
this chapter.
(Ord. 110, passed 6-25-2012)
CHAPTER 156: COLLECTION BINS
Section
   
156.01   Purpose and intent
   
156.02   Definitions
   
156.03   Regulations
   
156.04   Permit required
 
   
156.99   Penalty
§ 156.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   This chapter is intended to create regulations to promote and protect the
public's health, safety and welfare of all citizens who use collection boxes.
The intent of this collection boxes chapter is to impose restrictions and
conditions on all collection boxes in the village so that they are and remain
clean and safe and do not create hazards to pedestrians and to vehicular
traffic by providing minimum standards for the placement, operation and
maintenance of collection bins within the village. The purpose of these
regulations is to provide a clear understanding of the expectations for
collection bin operators, property owners, local residents, other businesses,
and local officials.
(Ord. 159, passed 3-14-2022)
§ 156.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COLLECTION BIN. Any metal container, receptacle, or similar object that is
located on any parcel or lot of record within the village and that is used for
soliciting and/or collecting the receipt of clothing, household items or other
personal property. This term applies to all such containers regardless of
whether the solicitation of property is made by a for-profit or non-profit
entity. This term does not include recycle bins for the collection of
recyclable material, any rubbish or garbage receptacle or any collection box
located within an enclosed building.
   LOCAL AGENT. An individual or company representing the owner. The local
agent is responsible for the operation of the owner's property located within
the Village of Pinckney.
   OWNER. The individual(s), company, corporation, governmental or private
agency, or any other entity listed on the recorded deed, or the purchaser under
a recorded land contract, and shown as the owner of real property within the
Village of Pinckney.
   PERSON. Shall have the meaning as defined in §
10.02.
(Ord. 159, passed 3-14-2022)
§ 156.03 REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply to all collection bins within the
village:
   (A)   Collection bins are allowed with an approved permit only in the ROB,
SBD, RTO and O Zoning Districts under the Village of Pinckney Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   Collection bins shall be fabricated of durable and waterproof
materials.
   (C)   Collection bins are required to be placed on a paved or concrete
surface.
   (D)   Collection bins must be level and stable.
   (E)   Collection bins shall be locked with a tamper resistant locking
mechanism so contents cannot be accessed by anyone other than those responsible
for retrieval of the contents. Collection bins shall be tightly covered at all
times to prevent the harboring of rodents and the scattering of debris.
   (F)   Collection bins shall be maintained in good condition and appearance
with no structural damage, holes, visible rust, or graffiti. The area
surrounding the bin shall be maintained free from any overflow items,
furniture, rubbish, debris, hazardous materials, and noxious odors.
   (G)   Collection boxes shall be serviced and emptied as needed, but at least
every 30 days.
   (H)   Collection bins shall be no larger than 84 inches high, 60 inches wide
and 60 inches deep.
   (I)   Collection bins shall have in, at minimum, one-half inch lettering
visible from the front of each collection box the name, address, email, website
and phone number of the operator, as well as whether the collection box is
owned and operated by a for-profit company or a not-for-profit company. Notice
should also include the type of material that may be deposited, frequency of
pickup and notice that no materials shall be left outside the collection bin.
The signage must be flat, either painted directly on the bin or affixed flat to
the bin and projecting no more than two inches from the side of the bin. The
collection box shall not have information, advertising or logos other than
those relating to the operator.
   (J)   No more than two collection bins shall be allowed per property.
   (K)   Collection bins shall not be permitted:
      (1)   On any unimproved lot or parcel that is not currently used or
occupied or where the principal building or structure has been closed or
unoccupied for more than 30 days;
      (2)   Within a landscaped area;
      (3)   Within the required main building setbacks for the zoning district;
      (4)   Within a parking space required as a part of the approved site plan
or required to meet the parking requirements for the principal building or
structure;
      (5)   Within 500 feet from the property line of any lot used or zoned for
residential purposes or within 50 feet of any entrance driveway; or
      (6)   Within a designated fire lane or adjacent to a handicap parking
space.
   (L)   Collection bins shall not cause a visual obstruction to vehicular or
pedestrian or block access to required parking, emergency vehicle routes,
building entrances or exits, easements, pedestrian walkways and dumpsters or
trash enclosure areas.
(Ord. 159, passed 3-14-2022)
§ 156.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Any person desiring to secure a permit for a collection bin in the Village
of Pinckney shall make an application to the Village Zoning Department. No
person to whom a permit has been issued shall transfer, assign, or convey such
permit to another person or legal entity. The following procedures shall apply
to the permitting process.
   (A)   A permit shall be obtained for each collection bin proposed. A
separate fee shall be paid for each collection bin.
   (B)   The application for a permit shall be upon a form provided by the
Zoning Department and shall require the following information.
      (1)   The signature of an individual who is an officer, director,
manager, or member of the applicant entity;
      (2)   The name, address, and email address of all partners of a
partnership or all members of an LLC;
      (3)   Name, address, email, and telephone number of a contact person for
all matters related to the collection bin during the application and once
licensed;
      (4)   The physical address of the real property where the collection bin
is proposed to be located;
      (5)   A scaled drawing sufficient to illustrate the proposed location of
the collection bin on the property and the dimensions of the proposed
collection bin;
      (6)   A picture of rendering of the proposed collection bin;
      (7)   An affidavit, signed by the property owner providing written
permission for the collection bin on the property; and
      (8)   A nonrefundable fee in an amount established by resolution of the
Village Council shall accompany all applications for collection bins.
   (C)   The Village Zoning Administrator shall approve or deny the application
within ten days of the submittal of a complete application.
(Ord. 159, passed 3-14-2022)
§ 156.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, owner, corporation, local agent, or individual who
violates any provision of this chapter is deemed responsible for committing a
municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to payment of a civil fine as
specified in §
131.57, plus costs and other sanctions for each infraction. Repeat offenses
shall be subject to increased fines as provided by
Chapter 131. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
   (B)   The real property owner, local agent, and permittee shall be jointly
and severally liable for each violation and for payment of any fine and costs
of abatement.
   (C)   The imposition of a penalty for any violation of this chapter shall
not excuse the violation nor shall the violation be permitted to continue.
   (D)   A violation of this chapter is also declared to be a public nuisance
and the village may enforce same by injunction or other remedy, including the
right to correct the violation and recover the cost of obtaining the necessary
correction from the owner or person in charge of the premises.
   (E)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the village from pursuing any
other remedy provided by law in conjunction with or in lieu of prosecuting
persons under this section for violation of this chapter.
   (F)   No fines shall be imposed for a violation of this chapter until 90
days after its effective date. All collection bins existing at the effective
date of this chapter shall apply for a permit as required herein within 30 days
of the effective date. Any collection bins not in compliance with this chapter
after 90 days of the effective date shall be subject to all remedies for
violation as provided herein.
(Ord. 159, passed 3-14-2022)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   CABLE TELEVISION
      
II.   FRANCHISE
      
III.   TAXATION
      
IV.   ZONING
TABLE I: CABLE TELEVISION
 
Ord./Res. No Date Passed Description
30           10-25-1999  Granting a consent to the transfer of control
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISE
Ord./Res. No Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No Date Passed Description
30           - -         Granting a non-exclusive franchise to Com-Star Cable
                         Television Inc.
42           8-12-1991   Granting a franchise to Detroit Edison Company
45           10-21-1993  Consumers Power Company Gas Franchise Ordinance
53           5-8-2000    Granting a limited non-exclusive revocable electrical
                         franchise to Nordic Electric L.L.C.
–          4-9-2001    Amends Ord. 53
170          5-8-2023    Consumers Energy Company Gas Franchise Ordinance
                        
 
TABLE III: TAXATION
 
Ord./Res. No Date Passed Description
Res. –     - -         Board approving Tax Increment Plan
54           4-26-2004   Tax Increment Financing Plan
 
TABLE IV: ZONING
Ord./Res. No Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No Date Passed Description
74           9-25-2006   Amending the zoning map
                         Amending the zoning map; rezoning from high density
81           4-28-2008   residential district (R-3) to multiple family
                         residential district (R-4)
                         Amending the zoning map; rezoning property commonly
                         known as 224 and 250 East Main Street, is rezoned from
85           2-23-2009   Central Business District, CBD (north half of site)
                         and High Density Residential, R3 (south half of site)
                         to Secondary Business District, SBD
                         Amending the zoning map; rezoning property commonly
123          4-14-2014   known as 644 S. Howell Street from Low Density
                         Residential (R-1) to Multiple Family Residential (R-4)
                         Amending the zoning map; rezoning properties commonly
                         known as 550 and 551 E. Hamburg from Secondary
127          12-14-2015  Business (SBD) to Multiple Family Residential (R-4),
                         and rezoning property commonly known as Stuart Street,
                         north of Hamburg Street, from Secondary Business
                         District (SBD) to Public Land (PL).
                         Amending the zoning map; rezoning property commonly
128          12-14-2015  known as 475 Webster/450 N. Howell from Secondary
                         Business (SBD) to Multiple Family Residential (R-4).
                         Amending the zoning map; rezoning property located on
133          11-14-2016  Dexter Pinckney Road from High Density Residential
                         District (R3) to Secondary Business District (SBD).
                         Amending the zoning map; rezoning property located
136          5-8-2017    south of M-36 and north of Mill Pond, commonly known
                         as 935 West Main Street from Public Lands Office (PL)
                         to High Density Residential District (R3).
                         Amending the zoning map; rezoning property located on
141          2-12-2018   Dexter-Pinckney Road identified as Taxation Parcel No.
                         4714-26-100-016 from High Density Residential District
                         (R3) to Office District (O).
                         Amending the zoning map; rezoning property located on
148          8-10-2020   120 Livingston Street identified as Taxation Parcel
                         No. 4714-23-303-022 from High Density Residential
                         District (R3) to Central Business District (CBD).
                         Amending the zoning map; rezoning property commonly
156          2-8-2021    known as 935 W. Main from High Density Residential
                         District (R3) to Research- Technology-Office District
                         (RTO).
                         Amending the zoning map; rezoning property commonly
168          2-13-2023   known as 350 Mower Road from Public Lands District
                         (PL) to Office District (O).
                         Amending the zoning map; zoning property commonly
172          10-23-2023  known as 183 E. Hamburg St. to Secondary Business
                         District (SBD).
                        
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References To Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS ANNOTATED
M.C.L.A. Cite Code Section
M.C.L.A. Cite       Code Section
15.231–15.246     114.20;
                    114.73
15.261 et seq.      152.022
15.261–15.275     152.443
24                  72.02
24.201–24.328     70.15
28.451 et seq.      91.10
28.601 et seq.      31.03
                    30.02;
                    30.16;
61.1–75.12        30.35;
                    51.03;
                    52.20
62.5                30.01
64.1-64.3           30.36
65.1–65.8         10.02
67.55 et seq.       93.08
67.57               93.02
67.61               93.06
70.1–70.11        91.01
123.161-123.67      51.11,
                    52.35
125.1651-125.1681   31.46
125.1654(8)         31.32
125.538 et seq.     154.01
125.581 et seq.     152.001
125.1501 et seq.    151.45
125.1508b(6)        151.45,
                    151.46
125.1651–125.1680 31.26
                    152.001;
                    152.022;
125.3101 et seq.    152.440–
                    152.442;
                    152.460
125.3101-125.3702   31.46
125.3801-125.3885   31.46
141.101-141.138     51.03;
                    52.20
                    51.03;
141.121             51.11;
                    52.20;
                    52.35
141.421–141.440a  30.39
153.385 et seq.     152.266
168.644g            30.01
247.651–247.675   114.53
257.1 et seq.       70.01;
                    91.03
257.1d              91.10
257.5b              91.10
257.1–257.923     72.03
257.75              92.03;
                    92.26
257.77              92.03;
                    92.26
257.707a–257.707e 96.04
286.472             91.04
286.472(a)          91.04
286.472(b)          91.04
324.2140 et seq.    152.354
324.11501 et seq.   52.01;
                    152.354
324.82101–324.821672.03
333.1101 et seq.    152.267
333.2451            91.10
333.26423           152.243
333.27951 et seq.   113.30,
                    152.243
333.27953           113.31
333.27959 4.     113.34
400.701–400.737   152.267
418.101–418.941   31.06
436.1 et seq.       132.094
436.1101–436.2303 132.094
460.701–460.718   92.35
484.2101–484.2701 114.03;
                    114.20
484.3101–484.3120 114.01;
                    114.03
                    152.243;
559.101–559.272   152.266;
                    152.267
559.166             152.266
559.167             152.266
559.171             152.266
560.101 et seq.     150.01;
                    152.267
560.101–560.293   152.243
560.226             150.01
560.263             150.01
600.101 et seq.     91.99
600.101–600.9911  10.99
600.101–600.9948  131.02
600.8701–600.8735 10.02
600.8709            131.25
701.1–713.6       132.095
712A                132.095
722.111–722.128   152.267
764.9a-764.9e       10.10
                    
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        - -         TSO III
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
        - -         30.02
                     150.20 
6        - -         150.26;
                     150.99
30       - -         TSO II
7        9-8-1966    130.01
9        6-15-1967   72.02;
                     72.99
13       5-1-1969    90.01;
                     90.99
16       2-4-1971    72.03;
                     72.99
19       9-2-1971    31.45
23       11-13-1974  50.01 
                     50.07
                     111.30 
26       8-11-1980   111.33;
                     111.99
                     132.001 
                     132.003;
                     132.020 
                     132.047;
                     132.065 
                     132.074;
                     132.090 
                     132.099;
                     132.115 
27       12-14-1981  132.120;
                     132.140 
                     132.144;
                     132.160 
                     132.162 
                     132.180 
                     132.182;
                     132.195 
                     132.196;
                     132.999
                     111.01 
28       10-11-1982  111.16;
                     111.99
        5-9-1983    31.45
                     150.01-
31       11-11-1985  150.03;
                     150.99
32       4-14-1986   32.01 
                     32.22
        2-13-1989   72.02
35       7-17-1989   30.35-
                     30.41
                     151.01 
                     151.03;
34       7-24-1989   151.20 
                     151.32;
                     151.99
4.1      8-13-1990   72.01;
                     72.99
41       4-22-1991   31.25 
                     31.33
42       8-12-1991   TSO II
45       10-21-1993  TSO II
                     112.01 
46       11-8-1993   112.04;
                     112.20 
                     112.35
47       11-8-1993   31.45
51       2-12-1996   113.01
52       11-9-1998   30.15-
                     30.19
30       10-25-1999  TSO I
53       5-8-2000    TSO II
        5-22-2000   72.99;
                     111.99
                     131.01 
                     131.10;
                     131.25;
                     131.26;
54       5-22-2000   131.40;
                     131.41;
                     131.55 
                     131.57;
                     131.99
                     92.55 
33       7-10-2000   92.64;
                     92.99
                     92.25 
56       11-27-2000  92.40;
                     92.99
        4-9-2001    TSO II
59       7-23-2001   30.02
65       2-14-2002   30.01
                     92.25;
                     92.26;
        9-9-2002    92.28 
                     92.30;
                     92.32;
                     92.37
                     92.01 
57       9-9-2002    92.09;
                     92.99
        10-2-2002   92.03;
                     92.04
        10-7-2002   92.03;
                     92.04
                     114.01 
                     114.03;
                     114.20 
                     114.22;
                     114.35 
60       2-24-2003   114.37;
                     114.50 
                     114.53;
                     114.70 
                     114.75;
                     114.99
54       4-26-2004   TSO III
63       4-26-2004   153.01
                     152.001 
                     152.005;
                     152.020 
                     152.026;
                     152.040 
                     152.045;
                     152.060 
                     152.063;
                     152.080 
                     152.083;
                     152.100 
                     152.103;
                     152.120 
                     152.123;
                     152.140 
                     152.143;
                     152.160 
                     152.163;
                     152.180 
                     152.183;
                     152.200 
                     152.203;
                     152.220 
                     152.223;
                     152.240 
37       8-28-2005   152.243;
                     152.260 
                     152.267;
                     152.280 
                     152.285;
                     152.300 
                     152.304;
                     152.308;
                     152.311;
                     152.312;
                     152.325 
                     152.330;
                     152.332 
                     152.335;
                     152.350 
                     152.354;
                     152.370 
                     152.371;
                     152.385 
                     152.397;
                     152.415 
                     152.423;
                     152.440 
                     152.445;
                     152.460 
                     152.461;
                     152.999
67       10-10-2005  31.01 
                     31.10
                     52.01 
                     52.03;
68       10-24-2005  52.20 
                     52.35;
                     52.37;
                     52.99
                     51.01 
69       10-24-2005  51.12;
                     51.99
                     152.302;
72       4-24-2006   152.388;
                     152.391
                     94.01 
73       7-10-2006   94.12;
                     94.99
74       9-25-2006   TSO IV
                     152.302;
75       11-13-2006  152.303;
                     152.308
76       1-1-2007    31.45
77       2-12-2007   92.64
                     93.01 
78       6-25-2007   93.09;
                     93.99
                     51.06;
79       2-25-2008   51.07;
                     51.10
80       4-14-2008   30.55
81       4-28-2008   TSO IV
                     152.023;
                     152.044;
                     152.063;
                     152.083;
                     152.103;
                     152.123;
82       5-12-2008   152.143;
                     152.262;
                     152.267;
                     152.301;
                     152.302;
                     152.388;
                     152.391
                     152.241;
83       10-27-2008  152.390;
                     152.393
84       1-26-2009   Adopting Ordinance
86       2-9-2009    31.32
85       2-23-2009   TSO IV
                     152.001;
87 ZBA   3-23-2009   152.022;
                     152.440 
                     152.445
                     152.161 
88       7-13-2009   152.163;
                     152.243
                     95.01 
90       9-9-2009    95.08;
                     95.99
                     152.240;
                     152.241;
                     152.243;
91       10-12-2009  152.386;
                     152.387;
                     152.390;
                     152.393
92       10-26-2009  92.63;
                     92.64
93       2-8-2010    31.46
                     51.11,
94       5-10-2010   52.35,
                     52.99
95       6-28-2010   152.304; 
                     152.308
                     152.040;
                     152.044;
                     152.045;
98       3-28-2011   152.210 
                     152.213;
                     152.267;
                     152.391
100      4-11-2011   151.45 
                     151.47
                     154.01 
101      4-11-2011   154.05;
                     154.99
102      4-11-2011   32.23
103      4-11-2011   51.11;
                     52.35
104      5-9-2011    152.243
105      6-13-2011   151.45 
                     151.47
106      6-13-2011   Adopting Ordinance
                     152.267;
107      12-12-2011  152.300 
                     152.312
108      3-12-2012   50.04;
                     50.08
109      6-29-2012   30.03
110      6-25-2012   155.001 
                     155.009
111      7-23-2012   51.09
                     96.01 
113      8-13-2012   96.07;
                     132.024
114      8-27-2012   Adopting Ordinance
                     10.99;
115      1-14-2013   131.57;
                     131.99
                     70.01;
                     70.02;
                     70.04 
                     70.07;
                     70.15 
116      3-11-2013   70.18;
                     70.25;
                     71.01 
                     71.07;
                     72.95 
                     72.99
117      3-11-2013   152.999
118      6-10-2013   152.221;
                     152.268
119      6-24-2013   96.04
120      7-8-2013    94.03
                     53.01 
121      8-26-2013   53.12 ,
                     53.99
122      10-14-2013  Adopting Ordinance
123      4-14-2014   TSO IV
124      5-12-2014   152.263 ,
                     152.329
                     92.62,
125      2-23-2015   92.63,
                     92.99
127      12-14-2015  TSO IV
128      12-14-2015  TSO IV
129      4-11-2016   31.32,
                     31.46
                     70.07,
131      8-8-2016    70.18,
                     71.99,
                     131.57
132      8-8-2016    110.13,
                     110.99
133      11-14-2016  TSO IV
                     152.182,
134      11-14-2016  152.240,
                     152.243
135      4-10-2017   95.02
136      5-8-2017    TSO IV
137      5-22-2017   52.35
138      7-10-2017   51.10
                     152.032,
                     152.162,
                     152.163,
                     152.213,
                     152.240,
                     152.241,
                     152.242,
                     152.265,
                     152.281,
                     152.282,
139      9-11-2017   152.351,
                     152.354,
                     152.387,
                     152.388,
                     152.390,
                     152.391,
                     152.392,
                     152.393,
                     152.394,
                     152.395,
                     152.442,
                     152.443
140      10-9-2017   132.197
141      2-12-2018   TSO IV
142      2-12-2018   150.01-
                     150.06
143      2-12-2018   50.05
146      - -2020     152.163,
                     152.266
147      8-26-2019   53.06
148      8-10-2020   TSO IV
150      10-12-2020  152.230 -
                     152.239
151      11-23-2020  113.30 -
                     113.40
152      11-23-2020  113.30 -
                     113.40
                     152.045,
                     152.182,
153      12-14-2020  152.202,
                     152.241,
                     152.243,
                     152.267
                     152.022,
                     152.023,
                     152.025,
                     152.026,
                     152.045,
                     152.142,
                     152.161,
                     152.162,
                     152.243,
                     152.261,
                     152.262,
                     152.265 -
154      1-11-2021   152.267,
                     152.281,
                     152.282,
                     152.285,
                     152.305,
                     152.327,
                     152.331 -
                     152.336,
                     152.351,
                     152.371,
                     152.386 -
                     152.393,
                     152.396,
                     152.397
                     51.05 -
                     51.07,
                     51.09,
                     52.01,
                     52.22,
                     52.24,
                     52.25,
                     53.05,
                     53.06,
                     53.13,
                     92.03 -
                     92.10,
                     92.26 -
155      1-11-2021   92.30,
                     92.32 -
                     92.40,
                     92.41,
                     92.42,
                     92.55 -
                     92.59,
                     92.61,
                     92.64,
                     151.03,
                     151.20 -
                     151.22,
                     151.27,
                     151.28
156      2-8-2021    TSO IV
157      5-10-2021   113.33
                     51.05,
158      10-25-2021  51.06,
                     52.24
                     156.01 -
159      3-14-2022   156.04,
                     156.99
160      7-25-2022   152.388
                     152.061,
                     152.081,
161      8-8-2022    152.101,
                     152.121,
                     152.267,
                     152.269
162      9-12-2022   113.34
163      9-26-2022   152.270
                     51.01,
                     51.02,
164      10-24-2022  51.06,
                     51.07,
                     51.09 -
                     51.11
                     52.01,
                     52.03,
165      10-24-2022  52.28,
                     52.29,
                     52.35
166      12-12-2022  52.35
167      1-9-2023    152.267,
                     152.271
168      2-13-2023   TSO IV
                     91.01 -
169      2-13-2023   91.12,
                     91.99
170      5-8-2023    TSO II
171      9-25-2023   113.33
172      10-23-2023  TSO IV
173      12-11-2023  152.300 -
                     152.313
174      4-22-2024   31.46
175      1-13-2025   30.03
                     30.35 -
176      1-13-2025   30.37,
                     30.39,
                     30.40
177      8-11-2025   152.262
178      9-8-2025    90.01,
                     90.02
                    
 
 
